A TREATISE OF Original Sin.

The First Part.

PROVING That it is, by pregnant Texts of Scripture vindicated from false
Glosses.

By Anthony Burgess.

ANCHORA SPEI.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
READER,
THe Doctrine of Original Corruption is as extensive in the usefulnes^^ of it,
^as the sin it self is diffusive in the contagion thereof; so that as there
is none born in a natural way, who can plead an immaculate conception, either
is there any who does not need profita^^e information herein, for the deep and
radical Humiliation of himself before God. As for the Doctrine of it, it is
easy and difficult; easy, because we palpably and eviden^ly find the effects
thereof* Difficult, because the exact knowledge of it being chiefly be divine
Revelation; No^onder if those, who attend to Aristole more than Paul, and
des^^^ be ^ationales, rather than fideles, have gro^^ely (...) in the dark
they walk in. It is the old known saying of Austin, Antiquo peccato nihil ad
praedicandum notius, nihil ad intelligendum secr^^^. Hence it is that as a
Popish Writer well observes (Elisim piorum Clyp. Quest. 12. Artic. 1.) When we
have heard what any learned men can say, yet still we desire to know more about
it, Nil de eo legitur, quin amplius de eo legi desideratur. By enquiring, our
appetites are not so much satisfied, as provoked, ^et the light of the
Scripture is sufficient; as to all necessary saving Knowledge about it; And as
for Curiosities and needless Subtilties, which are a shell in the
Controversy, we may throw them them away, and eat the Kernel. It is
acknowledged both by Papists and Protestants, that the Controversies about
Original Sin, are of very great importance. Stapleton charge us ( Proleg.
Disput. de peccat. Originali) with two capital maternal Errors, the one about
the Scriptures; the other about Original Sin, as if these two were the
Joachin and B^^z our Temple is built upon, as if these were the two breasts
from which all other erroneous Doctrines suck their pestiferous nature. We
again on the other side, do propugn these two Principles (the former whereof we
may call Principium cognoscendi, and the later principium essendi) as the two
fountains of Doctrinal and Practical Piety, so that to destroy any of these,
is to lay the ax to the root of the tree, that so no more fruit in Religion may
grow thereupon. The Pontificians and Protestants are generally agreed in this
(for some Papists, but few dissent from their own Party herein) that there is
such a thing as Original Sin; and that it is truly, properly and univocally a
Sin; only they complain of us, as too direfully and tragically amplifying the
nature of it. Hence Hoffmeister, Eccius and Cassander grant a consent in this;
only they think the Protestants words and expressions are capable of a
perfective alteration The express Adversaries therefore to this Doctrine were
the Pelagians of old, the Socinians and some Anabaptists of late; and more
particularly a late English Writer Dr. Tailor ( Unum Necessarium, and in other
little Pieces) (Proh nefas!) like a second Julian in triumphing language, has
with much boldness and audacity decried it, as if it were but a non ens, and
the Disputes needless about it. For although sometimes he would make the world
believe he holds Original Sin, yet these are but words, ad frangendam
invidiam, as Pelagius of old would use the word Grace, for when it comes to
the explication, he means no more than an Original Curse, or else the mere
Naturals (that he speaks of, complying with Pelagius and some Jesuits in
that notion) whereby having lost the gratuitals our nature was at first crowned
with, it is cast into an unfitness for the Kingdom of Heaven. What learning and
abilities the Author may have, I do not detract from, only it is greatly to be
lamented, that he should contrary to Cyprian, and others, take the Gold he had
in Jerusalem, and carry it into Egypt to build an Idol there. He has fully
improved his liberty of Prophesying, and waving reverence to the Scriptures,
Councils and Fathers, yea, and the Church of England, in whose Obedience he
does so glory in (as appears by the 9th Article, and the Order of
Administration of Baptism) by a skeptical and academical disposition, he is
fallen into this Heresy: for so the denial of Original sin has always been
accounted. Neither let this Writer think that his industrious affectation of
words and language, will make falsehood to be truth. There is great difference
between skin and bone, words and arguments in any Theological Discourse.
Neither are Tractates veriores quia disertiores, there is ambitiosum
eloquentiae mendacium. And as Austin expressed it, arma non vulnerant quia
fulgentia, ^ed quia fortia. It is true, if this Writer has no Original sin
in him, and his Adversaries have, then he must needs dispute with great
advantage; for ignorance and imperfection does not adhere to his intellectuals,
as we acknowledge does to ours, and that by Original sin. But it must be
confessed he betrayeth much of Original sin, even while he writes against
it, and his Arguments (as I may so say) materialiter prove it, while formaliter
against it. His greatest honor is, that a Papist has written against him.
Ford.
One might doubt, whether really or by collusion, it is done so slightly, and
calculated wholly according to the Popish Meridian; and yet in some respects it
is his great disparagement, that one of Babylon should appear at least in some
measure for an ancient Truth, while at the same time one pretending to be of
Sion should oppose it. But enough of this troublesome matter.

I now come to acquaint the Reader with the Method I propound in this Book,
which is first to handle the An sit of Original Sin; Secondly, The Quid sit;
which done, I proceed to the twofold Subject of it, mentioned by the Learned;
The Subject of Inhesion; And herein, I show particularly and largely, how every
power of the Soul is infected by this Leprosy; which accomplished, I pass to
the Subject of Predication, showing, That it is in every one naturally born of
a woman, That omnis homo, and totus homo is thus corrupted; and then close with
the consideration of the Properties and Effects of it. All which I have
endeavored to manage practically, as well as doctrinally, knowing the great
and excellent improvement in a spiritual way, that may be made of this truth,
as I experimentally found by the attestation of godly hearers in the preaching
thereof; and I doubt not but if the Ministers of Christ did more largely insist
on this Point, they would find very good success thereby, for the through
Humiliation of their people, the information about Regeneration, and the Nature
of it; it would awaken not only the profane, but the civil and externally
moralized persons. This would keep a man serious in the ways of God, attending
to the treacherous enemy within, and thereby avoid the temptation, to be
transported by curious and unnecessary Questions; but above all, this will
prepare to exalt Christ in his Mediatory Office. This will be the foundation to
build the free and unsearchable riches of Gods grace upon. Insomuch that the
whole sum of Religion does consist in the cause of the first and second Adam.

I shall trouble thee no further; only my desire is, That the Reader would pass
by heartily the Errata, he will often meet with in the printing, by reason of
my distance from the Press; as also the mispointings, which many times obscure
the sense. Now the Father of Spirits mould and fashion our hearts according as
every divine Truth requires, and make us to gather and hive up Honey from
every Flower in his Garden, that so our Christianity may not be speculative,
and from Books only, but experimental, and savourily affecting the heart, which
only brings hope of eternal life, is the prayer of

Thine in Christ Jesus ANTHONY BURGESS.
Sutton Coldfield Aug. 19. 1658.
To the Reader.
AS for making the Table, and prefixing the Contents before the Chapters,
Sections, and Paragraphs of this Book, the Reverend Author committed that task
to a Friend, who desires the Reader to pardon any failings that he shall
discover in them.

ERRATA.
Page 62. l. 24. for Gnanon r Gnavon. p. 68. l. 36. for strictly for r.
strictly^ largely for. p. 69. l. 26. for quantum libet praeferimus r.
quantumlibet profecimus. and l. 27. for cogitate r. cogitata. p. 71. l. 40. for
because r. ^e because. p. 72. l. 18. for are r. were. p. 73. l. 14. for
reservantur r. reservatur. p. 80. l. 13. for ad r. and. p. 82. l. 31. for vorti
cordis r. vorticordis. p. 85. for coactivum r. coactivam. p. 88. l. 27. for
Echineips r* Echineis. p. 92. l. 30. for balbutiri r. balbutire. and l. 34. for
(...) r. (...) p. 94. l. 41. for (...) r. (...). and l. 45. dele to. p. 95. l.
16. for is r. it is. p. 97. l. 10. for (...) r. (...). p. 107. l. 10. for
outward r. outwardly. p. 121. l. 28. for (...) r. ne. p. 122. l. 6. for fabula
r. tabula. and l. 8. for imitation r. mutation. p. 219. l. 32. for Monasterii
Anabaptis r. ^unster Anabaptists. p. 221. l. 26. (...). p. 225. l. 12. for
(...) r. (...). p. 286. l. 27. for rei r. (...). p. 307. l. 34. for thereby r.
there.

The Analysis of this Book,
This Treatise of Original Sin, shows 1. That it is, by pregnant Texts
vindicated from false Glosses. 2. What it is, both Name, especially the
Scripture names. Thing, Privative and Positive.
3. How it comes to be communicated, with a consideration of the original of
the Soul. 4. Its Subject of Inhesion General, the whole man. In particular The
Mind. Conscience. Memory. Will. Affections. Imagination. Body.

Predication Every one. Christ excepted.

5. Its Qualities or Adjuncts, The greatness Of Adam's Actual transgression,
which is our original imputed sin. Of our Original Sin inherent in us.

The Propriety in every one. The Activity. The Equality in all. A Justification
of Gods shutting up all under sin for the sin of Adam.
6. The Immediate Effects of it Propensity to Sin. The Cause of all Actual
sins. The Combat between the flesh and Spirit in the godly. Death. Eternal
Damnation.


THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
PART I.
PRoving the total and universal Pollution of all Mankind inherently through
Sin.
CHAP. I.
The first Text to prove Original Sin, improved and vindicated, viz. Ephesians.
2. 3. And were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others.
CHAP. II.
Of the Name Original Sin, and of the Utility and Necessity of being clearly
and powerfully informed about this Subject.
CHAP. III.
Demonstrations of the Naturality of this sin, that we have it by Natural
Propagation.
CHAP. IV.
Objections against the Naturality of Original Sin, answered.
CHAP. V.
A second Text to prove Original Sin, opened and vindicated, viz. Romans 5. 19.
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, etc.
CHAP. VI.
Whether we are sinners by Natural Propagation, or by Imitation.
CHAP. VII.
Of the Souls inward filth, and defilement by Original Sin.
CHAP. VIII.
That the inward Contagion that we have from Adam's Disobedience, is truly and
properly a sin.
CHAP. IX.
Objections Answered.
CHAP. X.
A third Text to make good this Fundamental Point, improved and vindicated,
viz. Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
SECT. II.
A threefold Uncleanness.
SECT. III.
A Comparison between man's moral Uncleanness, and Levitical Uncleanness.
SECT. IV.
What is comprehended in this expression Uncleanness.
SECT. V.
Objections against man's Natural Uncleanness, answered.
CHAP. XI.
A fourth Text to prove Original Sin, opened and vindicated, viz. Psalm. 51.
5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
SECT. II.
Objections answered.
SECT. III.
More Advantages accruing from the Belief and Meditation of this Truth.
SECT. IV.
That we are to bewail this Original Sin all our days.
SECT. V.
Which needed not to have been, if Adam had stood.
SECT. VI.
We must be humbled for a twofold Original Sin, and seek from Christ a
twofold Righteousness.
SECT. VII.
The different opinions of men about humiliation for Original Sin.
SECT. VIII.
Repentance may be taken either largely or strictly.
SECT. IX.
The Difference between godly Sorrow for Original Sin, and for Actual.
SECT. X.
Reasons why we must be humbled for Original Sin.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Showing that Original Sin is, and how it is communicated.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name Old Man, [given to Original Sin.] Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that if
our old man be crucified with Christ, etc.
SECT. IV.
Why it is called [Man.]
SECT. V.
Why it is called [Old-Man.]
CHAP. II.
Of the Name [Law of Sin,] given to Original Sin. Romans 7. 25. But with the
flesh the Law of sin.
SECT. III.
Original Sin compared to a Law in five Respects.
CHAP. III.
Of the Name, [The Sin that dwells in us,] given to Original Sin. Romans 7.
17. It is no more I, but sin that dwells in me.
CHAP. IV.
Of the Epithete, [Evil is present with us,] given to Original Sin. Romans 7.
21. That when I would do good, evil is present with me.
CHAP. V.
Of that Name, [The Sin that does so easily beset us,] given to Original Sin.
Hebr. 12. 1. And the sin that does so easily beset us.
SECT. II.
What is implied in that expression.
SECT. III.
How many ways Original Sin is a Burden, and an Hinderance unto us.
CHAP. VI.
Of the Name, [Evil Treasure of the Heart,] given to Original Sin. Matthew. 12.
35. And an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things.
SECT. II.
How Original Sin resembles a Treasure.
CHAP. VII.
Of the Name [Body,] given to Original Sin. Romans 8. 13. But if you through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
SECT. II.
What is implied by the word Mortify.
SECT. V.
Why Original Sin is called a Body.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Privative Part of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
Of Adam's begetting Seth in his own likeness. Genesis 5. 3. And Adam -- begat a
son in his own likeness after his Image, and called his name Seth.
SECT. II.
What Original Sin is as to the Privative Part of it.
CHAP. IX.
Wherein the making man after Gods Image did consist.
CHAP. X.
Corollaries informing us of the Nature and Aggravations of our loss by sin;
and showing what were the most excellent and choice parts of that Original
Righteousness that we are deprived of.
CHAP. XI.
A further Consideration, of Original Righteousness, proving the thing, and
answering Objections against it.
CHAP. XII.
More Propositions about the Nature of the Image of God, which man was created
in; Showing what particular graces Adam's soul was adorned with.
CHAP. XIII.
Reasons to prove, That the Privation of Original Righteousness is truly and
properly a sin in us.
CHAP. XIV.
The Aggravations of the loss of Gods Image.
SECT. II.
By the loss of Original Righteousness Gods end in making man was lost.
SECT. III.
The Harmony and Subordination in man's Nature dissolved.
SECT. IV.
The Properties of this loss.
CHAP. XV.
Of the Positive Part of original Corruption. John 3. 6. That which is born of
the flesh is flesh.
SECT. II.
Of the use of the word Flesh in Scripture, and why original Corruption is
called by that Name.
SECT. III.
How carnal the Soul is in its actings about spiritual objects.
CHAP. XVI.
Reasons demonstrating the Positive Part of Original Sin, and why Divines
make Original Sin to have (...) Positive as well as Privative Part.
CHAP. XVII.
Objections against the Positive Part of O^^^al Sin, answered.
CHAP. XVIII.
A Second Text to prove Original Sin to be Positive, opened and vindicated.
Romans 7. 7. For I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet.
SECT. II.
The word Lust expounded.
SECT. VI.
A Threefold Appetite in man.
SECT. VIII.
A Consideration of this Concupiscence in reference to the fourfold estate of
man.
SECT. X.
Why Original Sin is called Concupiscence or Lust.
CHAP. XIX.
The Description of Original Sin.
CHAP. XX.
A clear and full knowledge of Original Sin can be obtained only by
Scripture Light.
SECT. II.
Whether the wisest Heathens had any knowledge of this Pollution.
CHAP. XXI.
That Reason, when once enlightened by the Scriptures, may be very powerful to
convince us of this Natural Pollution.
CHAP. XXII.
A Comparison and Opposition between the first and second Adam, as introductory
to this Question, How this corruption is propagated. 1 Cor. 15. 49. As we have
borne the Image of the earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly.
CHAP. XXIII.
The various Opinions, Objections and Doubts about the manner how the Soul
comes to be polluted.
CHAP. XXIV.
That the Soul is neither by Eduction or Traduction, but by Introduction or
Immediate Infusion, proved by Texts of Scripture, and Arguments from Scripture.
SECT. V.
The Authors Apology for handling this great Question.
SECT. VI.
Propositions to clear the Doctrine of the Propagation of Original Sin,
notwithstanding the Souls Creation.
The Contents of the Third Part.
HAndling the Subject of Inhesion.
CHAP. I.
Of the Pollution of the Mind with Original Sin. Ephesians. 4. 23. And be ye
renewed in the Spirit of your Mind.
CHAP. II.
Of Original Sin polluting the Conscience: Setting forth the Defilement of
Conscience, as it is Quiet, Stupid and Senseless; and also when it is troublea
and awakened. Tit. 1. 15. But even their mind and Conscience is defiled.
CHAP. III.
Of the Pollution of the Memory. 2 Pet. 1. 12. I will not be negligent to put
you always in Remembrance of these things, etc.
SECT. II.
What we mean by Memory.
SECT. III.
A Twofold weakness of the Memory.
SECT. V.
Its great Usefulness.
SECT. VI.
Of the Nature of it.
SECT. VII.
Demonstrations of the Pollution of it.
SECT. VIII.
Instances of the Pollution of the Memory. 1. In forgetting the Objects that we
should have in our Memory, both Superior and Inferior.
SECT. X.
2. In respect of its inward vitiosity adhering to it. 3. In not attaining its
End. 4. In that it is made subservient to the corrupt frame and inclination of
our hearts. 5. It is not subject to our will and power. Hence 6. We remember
things that we would not.
CHAP. IV.
Of the Pollution of the Will of Man by Original Sin. John 1. 13. Which were
born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God.
SECT. II.
Propositions concerning the Nature of the Will.
SECT. III.
. 1. The Corruption of the Will in all its several operations.. 2. Its
Corruption in its General Act, which is called Volition.. 3. In its absolute
and efficacious willing of a thing.. 4. In its Act of Fruition.. 5. In its Act
of Intention.. 6. In its Act of Election or Choosing.. 7. In its loss of that
Aptitude and readiness it should have to follow the Deliberation and Advice of
the Understanding.. 8. In its Act of Consent.
SECT. IV.
The Desilement of the Will, in its Affections and Properties, or the sinful
Adjuncts inseparably cleaving unto it. Romans 9. 16. So then it is not of him
that wills, or of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.. 1. This
Scripture opened, vindicated and improved.. 2. The Will is so fallen from its
primitive honor, that its not worthy to be called Will but Lust.. 3. Its
wholly perverted about the Ultimate End.. 4. Its Privacy and Propriety.. 5. Its
Pride and Haughtiness.. 6. Its Contumacy and Refractoriness.. 7. Its Enmity and
Contrariety to Gods will.. 8. Its Rebellion against the light of the Mind, and
slavery to the sensitive part in a man.. 9. Its Mutability and Inconstancy.
SECT. V.
Of the Natural Servitude and Bondage of the Will, with a brief Discussion of
the Point of Free Will. John 8. 35. If the Son therefore shall make you free,
ye shall be free indeed.. 2. The Text opened.. 3. Of the several kinds of
Freedom which the Scripture speaks of.. 4. The Names the Scripture expresses
that by, which we call Free Will.. 5. Some observations concerning the
Promoters of the Doctrine of Free Will; How unpleasing the contrary Doctrine is
to flesh and blood, with some advice about it.. 6. The first Demonstration of
the slavery of the Will, is from the Necessity of sinning, that every man is
plunged into.. 7. That a Necessary Determination may arise several ways, some
whereof are very consistent with liberty, yea the more necessary the more
free.. 8. The second Argument of its Bondage is, Its being carried out unto
sin voluntarily, and with delight.. 9. Thirdly, It is evident by its utter
impotency to any thing that is spiritual. Here is showed, wherein that
inability consists.. 10. That man naturally loves his thraldom to sin, and
contradicts the means of Deliverance.. 11. Its Bondage is seen in its
Concupiscential Affection to some creature or other, never being able to lift
it self up to God.. 12. That when it does endeavor to overcome any sin, it
is by falling into another.. 13. The more means of grace to free us, the more
our slavery appears.. 14. The Necessity of a Redeemer demonstrates our
thraldom to sin.. 15. An Examination of the Descriptions and Definitions of
Freedom or Liberty of Will, which many Writers give it: Showing, That none of
them are any ways agreeing to the Will unsanctified.
CHAP. V.
Of the Pollution of the Affections. Col. 3. 2. Set your Affections upon things
above, not on things on the earth.
SECT. I.
The Text opened.
SECT. II.
Of the Nature of the Affections.
SECT. III.
How the Affections are treated of severally, by the Philosopher, the
Physician, the Orator, and the Divine.
SECT. IV.
The Natural Pollution of the Affections is manifested, 1. In the Dominion and
Tyranny they have over the Understanding and Will.. 2. Secondly, In regard of
the first motions and risings of them.. 3. Thirdly, In respect of their
Progress and Degrees.. 4. Fourthly, In respect of the Continuance or Duration
of them.
SECT. V.
They are wholly displaced from their right Object.
SECT. VI.
Their sinfulness is discovered in respect of the End and Use for which God
ingraffed them in our Natures.
SECT. VII.
And in their Motion and Tendency thereunto.
SECT. VIII.
In respect of the Contrariety and Opposition of them, one to another.
SECT. IX.
The Pollution of the Affections in respect of the Conflict between the natural
Conscience and them.
SECT. X.
In respect of the great Distractions they fill us with in holy Duties.
SECT. XI.
Their Deformity and Contrariety to the Rule and Exemplary Pattern.
SECT. XII.
Their Dullness and senslesness, though the Understanding declare the good to be
embraced.
SECT. XIII.
The Affections being drawn out in holy Duties from corrupt Motive^, shows the
Pollution of them.
SECT. XIV.
That they are more zealously carried out to any false way than to the Truths
of God.
SECT. XV.
They are for the most part in-lets to all sin in the Soul.
SECT. XVI.
The Privacy of them.
SECT. XVII.
Their hurtful Effects upon a man's Body.
SECT. XVIII.
The sad Effects they have upon others.
SECT. XIX.
And how readily they receive the Devils Temptations.
CHAP. VI.
The Sinfulness of the Imaginative Power of the Soul. Genesis 6. 5. And God saw
that every Imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was only evil, and that
continually.
SECT. 1.
The Text explained and vindicated against D. J. Tailor, Grotius, the Papists
and Socinians.
SECT. II.
Of the Nature of the Imagination in a man.
SECT. III.
1. The Natural Sinfulness of the Imagination appears, in its making Idols,
Supports and vain Conceits, whereby it pleases it self.
SECT. IV.
2. In respect of its Defect from that end and use which God did intend in the
Creation of man with such a power.
SECT. V.
3. Restlesnesse.
SECT. VI.
4. Universality, Multitude, and Disorder of the Imaginations.
SECT. VII.
5. Their Roving and Wandering up and down without any fixed way.
SECT. VIII.
6. Their Impertinency and Unreasonableness.
SECT. IX.
7. The Imagination eclypseth, and for the most part keeps out the
Understanding.
SECT. IX.
In the Imaginations for the most part are conceived all actual impieties.
SECT. X.
That many times Sin is acted by the Imagination with Delight and Content,
without any relation at all to the external actings of Sin.
SECT. XI.
Its Propensity to all evil, both toward God and man.
SECT. XII.
It continually invents new sins, or occasions of sins.
SECT. XIII.
The Sinfulness of the Imagination manifests it self in reference to the Word
of God, and the ministerial preaching thereof.
SECT. XIV.
It is more affected with Appearances then Realities.
SECT. XV.
Its Sinfulness in respect of fear, and the workings of Conscience.
SECT. XVI.
Of the Actings of the Imagination in Dreams.
SECT. XVII.
The Imagination is not in that orderly Subordination to the rational part of
man, as it was in the Primitive Condition.
SECT. XVIII.
It is according to Austin's Judgment the great instrument of conveying
Original Sin to the Child.
SECT. XIX.
How prone it is to receive the Devils Impressions and Suggestions.
SECT. XX.
Some Corollaries from the Premises
CHAP. VII.
Of the last Subject of Inhesion, or seat of Original Sin, viz. the Body of a
man. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray
God your whole spirit, and soul, and Body be preserved blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
SECT. II.
The Text explained.
SECT. III.
Scripture-proofs of the sinful Pollution of the Body.
SECT. IV.
The sinfulness of the Body discovered in particulars.. 1. It is not now
instrumental and serviceable to the Soul in holy Approaches to God, but on the
contrary a clog and burden.. 2. It does positively affect and defile the Soul..
3. A man acts more according to the Body, and the Inclinations thereof, then
the mind, with the Dictates thereof.. 4. The Body by Original Sin is made a
Tempter and a Seducer.. 5. It does objectively occasion much sin to the
Soul.. 6. Its indisposition to any service of God.. 7. How easily the Body is
moved and stirred by the passions and affections thereof.. 8. The Body when
sanctified is become no less glorious then the Temple of the holy Ghost.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Subject of Predication; Showing that every one of mankind (Christ only
excepted) is involved in this sin and misery. Luke 1. 35, Therefore also that
holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.
SECT. I.
The Text explained.
SECT. II.
The Aggravations of Original Sin.. 1. The Aggravation of Adam's Actual
Transgression.. 2. The Aggravation of Original Sin inherent.. 3. An Objection
Answered.
SECT. III.
That every one by Nature has his peculiar Original Sin.
SECT. IV.
That Original Sin in every one does vent it self betimes*
SECT. V.
How soon a Child may commit Actual Sin.
SECT. VI.
Whether Original Sin be alike in all.
CHAP. X.
A Justification of Gods shutting up all under Sin for the Sin of Adam, in
the sense of the Reformed Churches, against the Exceptions of D. J. Tailor, and
others. Gal. 3. 24. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
SECT. I.
The Text explained.
SECT. II.
Pr^positions to direct us in this great Point of Gods Proceedings, as to the
matter of Original Sin.
SECT. III.
Objections Answered.
The Contents of the Fourth Part.
TReating of the Effects of Original Sin.
CHAP. I.
Of that Propensity that is in every one by Nature to sin. Job 15. 16. How
much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water?
SECT. I.
The Text explained and vindicated from Socinian Exceptions.
SECT. II.
How much is implied in this Metaphor, Man drinks iniquity like water.
SECT. III.
Some Demonstrations to prove, that there is such an impetuous Inclination in
man to sin.
SECT. IV.
The true Causes of this Proneness, and the false ones assigned by the
Adversaries, examined.
CHAP. II.
The second immediate Effect of Original Sin is, the Causality which it has
in respect of all other sins. Jam. 1. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
SECT. I.
The Text explained, setting forth the generation of Sin.
SECT. II.
That Original Sin is the Cause of all Actual Evil, cleared by several
Propositions, which may serve for Antidotes against many Errors.. 2. Of the
Motions of the heart to sin not consented unto, as an immediate Effect of
Original Sin.. 3. How many ways the Soul may become guilty of sin, in
respect of the Thoughts and motions of the heart.
CHAP. III.
Of the Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, as the Effect of Original
Sin, so that the Godliest man cannot do any holy Duty perfectly in this life.
Gal. 5. 17. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other; so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would.
SECT. I.
The Text explained and vindicated from corrupt Interpretations.
SECT. II.
Several Propositions clearing the truth about the Combat between the Flesh
and Spirit in a Godly man.
SECT. III.
A Consideration of that part of the seventh Chapter to the Romans, which
treats of the Conflict within a man; Showing (against Amyraldus and others)
that it must be a regenerate person only, of whom those things are spoken.. 4.
The several ways whereby Original Sin does hinder the Godly in their
Religious Progress, whereby they are sinful and imperfect.. 5. Objections
against the Relics of Sin in a regenerate man, answered.. 8. The several
Conflicts that may be in a man.. 10. How the Combat in a Godly man between the
Flesh and Spirit, may be discerned from other Conflicts.. 10. Of the
Regenerates freedom from the Dominion of sin; and whether it be by the
Suppression of it, or by the Abolishing part of it.
CHAP. IV.
Of Death coming upon all men, as another Effect of Original Sin. 1 Cor. 15.
22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
SECT. II.
Death an Effect of Original Sin, explained in diverse Propositions.. 2. How
many ways a thing may be said to be Immortal, and in which of them man is so..
4. Distinctions about Mortality, and that in several respects Adam may be said
to be created Mortal and Immortal.. 7. The several Grounds assigned by
Schoolmen of Adam's Immortality rejected; and some Causes held forth by the
Orthodox.
SECT. III.
Arguments to prove, That through Adam's sin we are made sinners, and so
Mortal.
SECT. IV.
Arguments brought to prove, That Adam was made Mortal, answered.
SECT. V.
Whether Adam's sin was only an occasion of Gods punishing all mankind,
resolved against D. J. Tailor.
SECT. VI.
Whether Death may be attributed to man's constitution, considered in his mere
Naturals, against D. J. Tailor, and the Socinians.
CHAP. V.
Eternal Damnation another Effect of Original Sin. Ephesians. 2. 3. And were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others.
SECT. I.
What is meant by Wrath in this Text.
SECT. II.
What is meant by Nature.
SECT. III.
That by nature through the original sin we are born in, all are heirs of
Gods wrath, all are obnoxious to eternal damnation.
SECT. IV.
What is comprehended in this Expression, Children of wrath.
SECT. V.
Some Propositions in order to the proving, That the wrath of God is due to all
mankind because of Original Sin.
SECT. VI.
Arguments to prove it.
SECT. VII.
Some Conclusions deduceable from the Doctrine of the damnableness of Original
Sin.
SECT. VIII.
A Consideration of their Opinion that hold, an Universal Removal of the Guilt
of Original Sin from all mankind by Christ's Death: Answering their Arguments;
among which, that from the Antithesis or Opposition which the Apostle makes
Romans 5. between the first Adam and the second Adam.
SECT. IX.
Of the state of Infants that die in their Infancy, before they are capable of
any Actual Transgressions, and that die before Baptism.
A TREATISE OF Original Sin. PART. I.
CHAP. I.
The first Text to prove Original Sin, improved and vindicated.
SECT. I.
EPHESIANS. 2. 3. And were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others.
THE true Doctrine of Original Corruption is of so great concernment, that
Austin thought, De Peccato Orig. contra Pelag. and Celest. 2. cap. 24. the
Sum of Religion to consist in knowing of this, as the effect of the first
Adam, and also of Christ the second Adam with all his glorious benefits. Though
therefore Coelestius of old thought it to be but Recquaestionis, not fides,
Ibidem cap. 4. And others of late have wholly rejected it, as Austin's figment,
yet certainly the true way of Humiliation for sin, or Justification by
Christ, cannot be firmly established, unless the true Doctrine of this be laid
as a Foundation-stone in the building.

Now because original sin is used ambiguously by Divines, sometimes for
Adam's first sin imputed unto us, (for, Omnes homines fuerunt ille unus homo)
he was the common Person representing all mankind, as is in time to be showed;
And this for distinction sake, is called, Originale originans, or Originale
imputatum; And sometimes it is taken passively for the effect of that first
sin of Adam, viz. The total and universal pollution of all mankind inherently
through sin, which is called Originale originatum, or inherens.

I shall treat of it in this later acception, as being of great practical
improvement many ways.

SECT. II.
ANd because in Theological Debates two Questions are necessary, The An sit,
and the Quid sit, Whether there be such a thing, and, What it is; and in both
these the truth of God meets with many adversaries.

I shall first insist on the Quod sit, That there is such a natural and cursed
pollution upon every one that is born in an ordinary way. The first Text I
shall fasten this Truth upon, is this I have mentioned, which deservedly, both
by Ancient and Modern Writers is thought to have a pregnant and evident
demonstration, That there is such a natural contagion upon all.

To understand this the better, take notice of the Coherence briefly. The
Apostles scope is, to incite the Ephesians to Thankfulness, by the
consideration of that great love and infinite mercy vouchsafed to them by God;
and because the Sun is most welcome out of a dark gloomy cloud, one contrary
does more illustrate another. He compares their present state of Grace, with
their pristine condition of misery and wretchedness, which is summarily
expressed, That they were dead in sins and trespasses, a far more dreadful
estate, than if they had been dead and rotting in their graves. This internal
corruption is amplified from a twofold external cause,

1. The course and custom of the world.

2. The power and efficacy of the Devil, the Prince of the power of the Air
working in them.

Now lest this should be thought true only of the Ephesians, because Gentiles,
he brings in himself also, and the Jews equal with them both in actual sins.

1. We all had our conversation in times past in lusts of the flesh, etc.

2. For original sin, both Jew and Gentile were all plunged in the same
original gulf of misery: And this Proposition is asserted in the words read.

SECT. III.
IN which words are considerable, the Subject, and the Predicate, with the
Manner of its attribution.

The Subject is [We] that is, we all, as in the beginning of this verse: For
seeing the Jews were Abraham's children, in which they so much boasted, and
therefore are called Jews by nature, Gal. 2. 15. and the natural branches, Romans
11. 21. They might easily think, others indeed were by nature sinful, yet for
themselves, they would think that glorious descent they had from Abraham might
be a privilege to them, but here it is true, though Jews by nature, yet
sinners by nature, as the Gentiles were.

2. There is the Predicate, Children of wrath, (...), which is an Hebraism, and
signifies one wholly exposed to wrath, as if wrath were the mother, and gave
them their whole being. Thus the children of Belial, and the sons of death are
often in Scripture. By wrath is meant Gods wrath; Now because Gods wrath is
just, and does always presuppose sin; Hence is inevitably deducted, That we
are also by Nature full of sin: So that though wrath be immediately the misery
here spoken of, yet sin is supposed as the necessary antecedent.

3. There is the Manner how, (...), by nature; We have it by our birth, it is
not by imitation, and action, or custom, but by Nature. This word does clearly
pass a sentence of condemnation upon every one, while in the swadling-cloaths,
though as yet guilty of no actual transgression.

But because the strength of our Argument for Original sin lies on this
word, and the Adversaries to it, especially the Socinians, would weaken this
Testimony: Let us remove their exceptions.

SECT. IV.
ANd first, Gretius rejects this Interpretation of Original, sin, as nothing
to the Apostles meaning, and therefore says the word (...), is as much as
(...), truly and indeed, opposite to what is in opinion, and esteem, comparing
this place with Gal. 4. 8. Which by nature are no gods. In this, following
Pelagius his Exposition of old, as if he would take his error by imitation, as
Pelagius said, we did sin from Adam. This interpretation of Pelagius taking
prorsus for the same with nature. Austin refuses for the novelty of it, Lib.
6. contra Julia, cap. 4. and indeed nothing now is more ordinary, then such an
Exposition with the Adversaries to original sin, as Castellio and others.

But this Exposition is not opposite, it is only subordinate, we will grant,
that the word will bear this sense, That we are truly and wholly the children
of wrath; but this is not all, we are so, because we have this misery by
nature, and the parallel instanced in, will abundantly convince it, for
therefore they were not truly, and indeed Gods, because they were not so by
nature. So that the Text makes against him, and not for him.

Besides the word (...) being used about twelve times in the New Testament,
does always signify that which is nature, or according to natural
inclination, or what we have by natural birth; For nature, so 1 Cor. 11. 14.
Does not nature teach you? And Jam. 3. 7. Romans 1. 26. For natural principles
and inclinations, so the Gentiles, Romans 2. 14. are said (...), To do the things
of the Law, or by natural descent, Romans 2. 27. Uncircumcision is said to be
(...), so Romans 11 21, 24. The natural branches are called the Jews descending
of Abraham, and thereby enjoying Church Priviledges, and Gal. 2. 15. Jews by
Nature; Insomuch that it is a manifest falsehood to say, the word never
signifies that which we have by birth. And indeed, as is well observed by
Zanchy, The phrase, Children by Nature must necessarily imply by descent, as
the son of a man supposes descent from him: Adam was a man, but not the son
of a man, he had it not originally from another, whereas we are by nature
children of wrath, and so have it from our parents. Hence it is (...), not
(...), which does relate to our nativity, and in the original it is more
emphatical than in our Translations, for there it is, not by nature children of
wrath, but (...), Children by nature of wrath; So that children by nature is
opposite to children by Custom, Imitation, Adoption, or any other way. Thus the
first exception is removed.

Object. In the next place, The Socinian puts in his Caveat, after this manner,
That must be understood by the phrase [Children of wrath by nature] which the
Ephesians were now by the grace of God freed from; for the Apostle speaks in
the time past, You were by nature children of wrath, but now are quickened by
the grace of God, therefore the Ephesians were now freed from that estate: But
according to the Doctrine of those who maintain Original sin, that abides in
every man, though regenerated, and is not abolished but by death.

Answ. But this stone is easily removed: For although original sin abide in
the godly, yet the guilt of it is not imputed; So that though by nature we were
obnoxious to the wrath of God through its guilt, yet when grace comes, this
guilt is taken away, so that though it be in us, yet it is not imputed to us.

Object. Lastly, They object, It must be understood of actual sins, for the
Apostle spoke of such before, and to be a son of a thing denotes the quality
inherent in a man, as given to such a way; so in the former verse the Children
of disobedience, that is, those who voluntarily give themselves to such
rebellion.

Answ. But to this it is answered, That in the former expression is not the
word (...): So that the Apostle does here lay the Ax to the root of the Tree;
and because the Jews might be thought by the privileges they enjoyed as soon
as born to excel the Gentiles; Therefore he demonstrateth the Fountain and
Wellhead of their iniquity, though secret and underground, as springs are
usually very difficultly discovered.

Besides, We will readily grant, That this expression does denote an habitual
inclination to all actual evil, and that the Apostle mentions it as the curse
and bitter root of all the actual impieties that are committed in the world; so
that there is a reference to actual sins, but in the cause of them, which is
this original pollution.

And thus much for vindication of this noble Text, we have endeavored to throw
out all that earth, which the Philistims had cast into this fountain, what else
may be objected, will in time be taken notice of. And from hence observe,

That all men by nature are born full of sin, and so exposed to Gods infinite
wrath and vengeance. Every Infant coming into the world is destitute of the
Image of God, and in a more dreadful condition than the young ones of the
brutish creatures, that are not exposed to eternal torments; so that although
there may be joy that a man-child is born, yet much humiliation, because a
child of wrath is born.

I shall not so much insist on the Predicate, as the Subject, with the Manner
how.

This original sin is a natural sin, not indeed as we had our nature at
first pure out of Gods hands, therefore here is no Manicheism affirmed, as
Pelagians of old did calumniate, but as vitiated and defiled through Adam's
transgression.

CHAP. II.
Of the Name Original Sin, and of the Vtility and Necessity of being clearly
and powerfully informed about this Subject.
SECT. I.
LEt us consider the Doctrine more largely: And

First, You must know that although Original sin be not a Scripture-name, but
called so first by Austin, forced thereunto by the Pelagians, yet the truth of
it is in the Scripture; And it is lawful to use new words though not in
Scripture, when the matter is contained therein, to discover and distinguish
Heretics. Now we call it original sin in a threefold respect:

First, Because we have it from our first parents fallen, who were the original
and fountain of all mankind. It Is not an actual voluntary sin, immediately and
personally committed by us, but it is in us antecedently to our own personal
will, both our mind and will comes into the world habitually darkened and
obstinate against what is good.

Secondly, Its original, Because we have it as soon as we have our being. It Is
bred in us, and can no more be taken from our natures in an ordinary way, than
mortality from our bodies: For although it be not the substance and essence of
a man, yet the Scripture calling it the old man, and our members, not in
Illyricus his sense, does thereby signify the intimate inhesion of it in us,
that it is in us, as it were, leven in the whole lump, which soureth all; we
have it in our being, which made Ambrose say, Cujus ortus in vitio est, which
Austin often mentions; yea, we were conceived in it, as Psalm. 51. And
therefore another was not afraid to say, we were damnati priusquam nati, with
Austin often it is called Damnata radix, damnata massa.

Lastly, It Is called Original, Because from this flows all the actual evil in
the world; From this corrupt tree grows all the corrupt fruit that is, as is
to be showed; therefore the Scripture describes original sin, though not as
peccatum actuale, yet actuosum, not as an actual, but an active sin. Thus Genesis
6. 5. it is made to be a forge, or shop from whence sparks of lusts do
continually rise. The heart of man is even like hell it self, whose fire of
lust is unquenchable: So our Savior speaks of a hard heart which is as an evil
treasure. Mat. 12. 35. There is an evil treasure in every man's heart, you may
see all sorts of wickedness come from it, old and new sins, and though he sin
never so much, yet still he can sin more. This sea of corruption will never
be dried up in this life. Paul also Romans 7. complains of the activity and
vigor of this sin in him, that it is always seducing, yea, captivating of
him, although sanctified in part; Insomuch that although a man be loathsome in
respect of his actual impieties, yet much more because of the original fountain
of evil within him; The greatest part of our wickedness is in our natural
inclination and propensity of spirit: Oh how deep and piercing should the
thoughts of this depravation be within us, as we are all over full of sin, so
we should be filled up with shame and confusion of face, we never go deep
enough in our Humiliation and Confession, till we come to this.

SECT. II.
IN the second place, It Is good to take notice of the evident utility, and
necessity of being clearly and powerfully informed about this Subject. This
truth is constantly and frequently to be pressed, we are not to give it over,
although it may seem burdensome and tedious unto you; The reasons of the
necessary discovery of this are diverse, some Doctrinal, and some Practical. As

1. If a man be erroneous or heretical in this, he cannot be orthodox, or sound
in many other substantial parts of Religion; What Austin said concerning the
Trinity, is true also in some measure concerning this; We may err easily here,
and dangerously also: easily, for such is the self-fulness, the self-flattery
that is in every one, that he is difficultly persuaded that he is thus undone
and miserable; The light must shine as clear as at noonday, yea the Spirit of
God must convince and set this home, else a man will never believe it, and then
the error herein is dangerous, because if this Pillar fall to the ground,
almost the whole edifice of Religion does tumble down with it: As for instance,
If a man err about original sin, denying it either in part or in whole, he
must necessarily hold Free Will, for this is the Cockatrice his egg, and the
other is the Cockatrice it self; from a venomous womb must come a venomous
brood; Take away original sin, and then you establish Free Will, then man
has the same power to do good he had in Creation; There may be indeed some
wounds and debilitations upon him, but not a spiritual death; Then if Free Will
be established, the grace of God, that is also evacuated, there is no absolute
necessity of it, its only ad facilius operandum, as the Pelagians of old, to
make us work more easily and readily. Thus the very Sun of Righteousness is
presently taken out of our Heavens. Furthermore, If we do not believe aright
about original sin, we must also mis-believe about Justification, that cannot
be made such a glorious act of Gods grace, because of Christ's Righteousness
imputed unto us, as indeed it is; Then we shall set up our Dagon against Gods
Ark; neither will the work of conversion be solely ascribed to the power of
Gods grace, as it ought to be, for at the best they will make grace but an
adjuvant cause, or a partial one with our Free Will, and so the praise shall be
given partly to our selves, and partly to God. But above all, he that does
either deny, or diminish the guilt and contagion of this sin can never exalt
Christ in all his Offices as he ought to do: He that denies the disease must
needs derogate from the Physician, The whole need not the Physician, says our
Savior, Matthew. 9. 12. And therefore it is of great consequence to be fully
persuaded about the depth, breadth and length of this sin, that thereby we
may be able to comprehend the dimensions of Christ's love to us; Not that Christ
came only to take away the guilt of original sin, as some Papists affirm, but
because this is the womb wherein all other sins are conceived. This is the
wound of the whole nature, actual sins only infect the person of a man; We may
then easily see the necessity of being truly informed about this Subject; for
this is like miscarriage in the first concoction, which cannot be amended by
that which follows; And therefore this consideration should quicken you up in
a diligent attention to the whole Doctrine, which shall be delivered about it.

SECT. III.
IN the next place we are to show you, of what practical advantage it is, for
all to be fully informed about this native contagion and leprosy we bring with
us into the world: And

First, He that does truly believe in this point, will quickly silence all
those impatient, if not blasphemous complaints that are uttered by many against
nature, because (as they say) it is such an hard stepmother to mankind, Non
tam editi quum ejecti, said the Heathen. I call them blasphemous complaints,
because what is spoken against Nature, redounds upon God the Author of Nature.
Hence in the Scripture, what Nature does, God is said to do. Now then, if we
consider, what impatient expostulations the Heathens have made, why man of all
creatures should be by Nature most miserable? No true answer could ever be
given to satisfy, but this, because man comes sinful into the world: The
young ones of beasts and birds, are not so miserable as our Infants, because
not corrupted with evil in their Natures, as they are; So that if we see our
very Infants, which yet (as the Scripture says) cannot discern between the
right hand and left, and have not done actual good or evil, subject to grievous
diseases, and death it self: Wonder not at this, for they have in themselves
through their native sinfulness, a desert not only of this pain, but eternal
torments in hell. Hence it is that the Scripture instructs us in that which all
Philosophy could never inform us, viz. the cause and original of all those
diseases and pains, yea of death it self, which reigns over all mankind:
Insomuch that thereby we see, though there were not one actual sin in the
world, though all men had no more sin upon them, then what they had in the
womb, and in the cradle, yet there was demerit enough of that vengeance of God,
which upon man's transgression was threatened in the Word, Genesis 6. 5. The main
cause, why God brought that universal deluge upon the whole world, was not so
much their actual wickedness, as such, but because it came from a polluted
fountain, which would never be wholly cleansed. Their hearts were so many
shops, wherein were constantly formed all manner of impieties; yea by this we
see not only the miseries upon man, but all the bondage an vanity that is upon
the whole world: That there are any barrenness, any famines, that the ground
brings forth thorns and thistles, that the woman brings forth with so much
labor and forrow; all these things come by original sin; God did not at
first create things in such disorder and confusion: If therefore thou would
quiet thy heart under all tumults and vexing thoughts, to see the manifold
mischiefs and miseries mankind is subject unto; This Grave jugum super filios
Adam, as Austin often out of Ecclesiasticus, this heavy yoke upon the sons of
Adam, have recourse to a serious meditation about original sin.

Secondly, The true knowledge of this natural defilement, will also satisfy us
in those doubtful Questions, which some have greatly tormented themselves
with, viz. How sin comes to be in the world? And whence it is Austin (in his
seventh Book of his Confessions, and fifth Chapter) does there bewail before
God the great agonies and troubles of mind he was in about the beginning of
sin, whence it did arise? For seeing every thing that God made was exceeding
good, this exceedingly puzzled him to know how evil should be. Yea, this knot
was so hard to unty in some men's judgments, that it made many, of the
Marcionites heresy, who because they saw men commit evil, as soon as they were
born, and yet withal being convinced, That God was good, and could not be the
beginning of evil; They therefore maintained two principles of all things, the
one good, of all good things; The other evil, of evil things. Thus men have
wonderfully plunged themselves into boggs and quagmires of danger and
destruction, because not acquainted with this main Truth of Original sin.

Thirdly, For want of knowledge herein, that main duty so much commended both
by Scripture, and the Heathens, viz. To know our selves, can never be put in
practice. The Heathen said, e Coelo descendit, (...). And as for the Scripture,
How often is it required, That we should search and try our hearts; That we
should examine our selves, and commune with our own hearts, and be still, Psalm.
4. Now these duties can never be effectually done, without a firm belief of
that desperate pollution which is in our heart; And till we acknowledge with
Jerem. 17. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
Who can know it? Yea, we see David, Psalm. 19. 13. though a godly man, and much
enlightened thereby, being enabled to make deep search into his soul, and having
the Sun beams, could discern those atoms and motes of sin, which man in the
dark could not do, yet he cries out, Who can understand his errors? Cleanse me
from secret sins, that is, such sins that lie latent and lurking in my heart,
that never yet I could find out. If then this duty be so great of knowing our
selves, that some make all Religion to be in these two things, The knowledge of
our selves, and of God; then how necessary is it, that we should be thoroughly
acquainted with this heart, and nature-sinfulness, for without this we can
never know how vile and loathsome we are? Our actual impieties, though never so
gross and numerous, do not demonstrate our loathsomness so much as this bitter
and sour leven within; These are the stream, that is the fountain; These are
the effects, that is the cause; Therefore the greatest strength of our
wickedness lies in a defiled Nature, as you see in a Serpent or Toad, that
venom it sends forth at any time, is nothing to the venom in its nature; If you
look upon a Cain, a Judas, though his outside be so detestable, yet his inwards
are much more abominable, so that a man's heart is like Peter's great sheet,
which he saw in a vision, Acts 11. 6. which was full of four-footed beasts, and
wild beasts, and creeping things, all unclean; such a receptacle is man's soul
of all impiety: A man cannot tell what is in the sea, what monsters are in the
bottom of it, by looking upon the superficies of the water which covers it, so
neither can thou tell all that horrid deformity and wretchedness which is in
thy heart, by beholding thine outward impieties. Oh then that you would turn
your eyes inward, as it were, an introversion is necessary: Then you will say,
O Lord, before I knew the Nature of original sin, I was not persuaded of my
vileness, of my foulness! Oh now I see that I am beyond all expression sinful,
now I see every day I am more and more abominable! O Lord, formerly I thought
all my sin was in some words, in some actions, or in some vile thoughts, but
now I see, this was the least part of all that evil that was in me; Now I am
amazed, astonished to see what a sea of corruption is within me, now I can
never go to the bottom, now I find something like hell within me, sparks of
lust that are unquenchable.

Fourthly, Where there is not a true knowledge of this native corruption, there
our Humiliation, and Repentance can never be deep enough; for it is not enough
to be humbled for our actual sins, unless also we go to the cause and root of
all. When a godly man would repent of his lusts, of his unbelief, or any other
actual transgression, he stays not in the confession of, and bewailing those
particular sins, but he goes to the polluted fountain, to the bitter spring,
from whence those bitter streams flow, and commonly this is a difference
between an Ahabs Humiliation, and a David's; Ahab humbles himself only for his
actual impieties, and that because of judgments threatened and impending over
him; but David, even when he hears God had forgiven his iniquity, yet has
great humiliation for his sins; and Psalm. 51. thinks it not enough to
bewail his adultery and murder, but to confess, That in iniquity he was
conceived; his actual sins carried him to the original. Thus Paul also, Romans
7, when he miserably complains of that impotency in him to do good, that he
could never do any good as perfectly, fully, purely and cheerfully, as he ought
to do, presently he goes to the cause of all this deordination, the Law of
sin within him, that original sin which was like a Law within him,
commanding him to think, to desire, to do sinfully, and obeyed it in all,
though against his will, insomuch that he says, He was carnal, and sold under
sin. This the Apostle does complain of, as the heaviest burden of all; So
that an unregenerate man may by the light of nature, bewail and complain of his
actual impieties, he may cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, for being such a
beast, such a devil, so exorbitant and excessive, but whether he can do this
for the body of sin within him, as Paul did, that may justly be questioned;
And therefore you see then the troubles and workings of conscience in some men
to miscarry greatly; They seem to be in pain and travails of soul, but all
comes to nothing: Oh how many in times of danger, and under fear of death, do
sadly cry out of such sins they have committed! Oh the promises and resolutions
they make, if ever God give them recovery again! But all this passes away,
even as man's life it self, like a vapor, like a tale, that is told: And one
cause of the rottenness and defect of this humiliation is, because it did not
go to the bottom of the soar; there was the inward and deep corruption of
original sin that such never took any notice of, and so in all his sorrow did
omit that which is the most aggravating cause of all grief and trembling: O
Lord, I have not only done this wicked thing, but I had an heart, an
inclination of soul to carry me to it, and therefore actual sins, though ten
thousands of them, they pass away, the guilt only remaining; but this original
pravity continues in the pollution of it.

Fifthly, Ignorance of original sin makes us also mistake in the crucifying
and mortifying of sin; No man can truly and spiritually leave a sin, unless
he does conquer it and subdue it in some measure in the original and root of
it; and this is a sure difference between a regenerate and unregenerate man
about leaving or forsaking of sin; They both may give over their wonted
actual impieties; They both may have escaped the pollution of the world, and
that through the knowledge of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 2. 20. but the one leaves
only the acts of sin, the other mortifieth it gradually, though not totally
in the cause and inclination of the soul. Thus Paul. Romans 7. though he complain
of those actual stirrings, and impetuous motions of sin, yet withal he can
truly say, I delight in the Law of God, in the inner man. Now no hypocrite, or
unregenerate man can say so; Though he be outwardly washed, yet he has a
swinish nature still, his inward parts are as loathsome, as noisome as ever
before: Though there be a fair skin drawn over the wound, yet in the bottom
there is as much corruption, and putrefaction, as ever before: Samson's hair is
only cut, it is not plucked up by the root, so that it is not enough to have
given over thy former profaneness; Thou thankest God thou art not the man once
thou were: Oh but consider whether sin in the root of it, as well as in the
branches of it, does wither and die daily. A disease is not cured, till the
cause of it be in some measure at least removed. As long as original sin is
not in some degree mortified, thy old sins, or some other will break out as
violently as ever, here is the fountain and root of all within thee.

Sixthly, He that is ignorant of the nature, and extent of this natural
defilement, he must needs grossly mistake about the nature of conversion, and be
wholly ignorant of what regeneration is; As you see in Nicodemus, John. 3. 6.
though a master in Israel, yet grossly mistaking about a new birth, and what was
the reason of it? That appears by our Saviors argument to prove the
necessity of it, Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh, implying by this,
That if Nicodemus had known, that by natural generation he was nothing but
flesh, that is, sin and evil, his soul, his mind, his conscience, all was
flesh in this sense, as well as his body, then he would quickly have discerned
the necessity of being born again, then he would not have continued a day, an
hour, a moment in such a dangerous condition. And what is the cause that most
people are still such sots and senseless men about regeneration? Yea, learned
and knowing men are as blind and brutish in this, as the simple and poor
people are, does not all arise from this? That they feel not, neither do
perceive that original sin like a leprosy has run over the whole man, both
soul and body, especially there would not be these three mistakes about the
work of grace, which are very common; As

1. A Philosophical Reformation, Three common mistakes about the work of Grace.
by the Dictates and Principles of Moralists, such as Plutarch, and Seneca
give, would not be taken for Regeneration: For although their sayings and
directions are admired, and there may be some good use of them, yet they do not
go to the root of the matter, they are not an antidote against original sin
that defiles the nature, and therefore cannot promote Regeneration, which does
properly cure that in some degree. Aristotle's way to make a man a virtuous man,
viz. by frequent and constant actions, at lest to acquire an habit is absurd
and repugnant to Scripture, for by that, the tree must be made good, and a man
must be born again, ere he can do any thing holily. Hence God promises to give
a new heart, to take away the heart of stone, and then to cause us to walk in
all holiness, Ezekiel. 11. 19. These divine principles must be infused before
there can be holy actions. So

2. Civility and an ingenuous temperate disposition, will be but a glistering
dunghill, a painted sepulcher, when original sin is known: He will presently
see, for all his civil and inoffensive life, his heart is full of all
noisomness; Therefore civil men of all men do most need this light to shine
into their breasts; we are ready to think of our selves, because so harmless and
innocent, as was said of Bonaventure, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam. such
were born without sin, and brought better natures into the world than others;
but if you search into the Scriptures, it will appear that all are born
children of wrath, and are equally destitute of that image of God, and then, as
when the pillars of an house are removed, the house it self must fall into its
own rubbidge. Thus when that primitive righteousness was lost, man is prone to
run into all evil, and every man would be like a Judas, or a Cain, even the
most civil man that is, did not God restrain original sin.

3. Gifts and abilities which many have in religious exercises, will presently
be seen not to be Regeneration. Though we should preach with the tongue of
Angels, though admirable in prayer, and other holy duties, yet these and
original sin in the power of it may stand together, and so many looking to the
flowers, but not the dead corpse they are upon, conclude themselves to be
alive, when indeed they are dead.

SECT. IV.
I Shall mention some few more spiritual Advantages, that come by the full and
undoubted persuasion of this original corruption; for so of old we are advised,
Firmissime texe, and nullatenus dubita, etc. Believe most firmly, and doubt not
in the least manner, but that by Adam's sin, all his posterity becomes
sinful and obnoxious to Gods wrath. And

First, upon the Knowledge of original sin we evidently see, our
impossibility to keep the Law of God. That when the Law requires a love of
God, with all our heart, mind and strength; and also does prohibit all kind of
lust, and sinful concupiscence, even in the very first motions and stirrings
of it. The Law (I say) requiring such universal perfection, and we being wholly
dead in sin, upon the comparing of the Law, with our condition, we cannot but
conclude, That we fail in all things, That the Law is spiritual, but we are
carnal; And if he be cursed that does not continue in all things the Law
requires, how accursed must he be that is not able to perform any one thing?
All those opinions that diminish original sin, do also plead for a
possibility of keeping Gods Commandments: Now this self-flattery is imbred in
all. Do not most of our common people think they keep the Commandments of God?
Do they believe that the curses of the Law do belong to them every hour? Oh if
such convictions were upon them, how greatly would it humble them, and make
them debased before God, but they trust in this, they readily and confidently
say with that young man. All these have I kept from my youth up, Mat. 9 20. Oh
then inform thy self more about this natural defilement and loathsomness that
is upon thee, and then thou will find the Law to accuse and condemn thee in all
things.

Secondly, The right knowledge of this will make even the godly and regenerate,
though in some measure delivered from the power and dominion of it, yet to see,
that because of its stirrings and actings in them, there is imperfection, in
every thing they do. And truly, this is one of the most profitable effects of
true knowledge herein, for hereby a godly man is made to go out of all his
graces, and his duties, hereby he is afraid of the iniquity of his holy things,
and calls his very righteousness a menstruous ragge. This is clear in Paul, Romans
7. How sadly does he complain of the vigorous actings of this original sin in
him; For the present I take it as granted, that that part of the Chapter must
be understood of a regenerate person (though vehemently denied by some) as is
in time to be showed. That Law of sin was always moving, when he set himself
to any thing that was holy, he desired to obey the Law perfectly, to love God
completely, but this Law of sin would not let him: So that, because of this
natural defilement, evil is mixed with all the good we do, insomuch that there
would be a woe, and a curse to all our gracious acts, if strictly examined.
Thus it is with a godly man in this life, as those Hetruscan-robbers reported
of by Aristotle, and mentioned by Austin, who would take some live men, and
bind them to the dead men, which was a miserable way of perishing: Even thus it
is here, original corruption is constantly adhering, and inseparably to him,
who is alive in holiness, and by this means, there is unbelief in his faith,
coldness in his zeal, dullness in his fervency; Insomuch that the Apostle cries
out of himself, Oh wretched man that I am! And that because of this very thing,
the Papists, though they hold original sin, yet maintaining, That after
Baptism it is quite taken away, and that though there be some languor and
difficulty in a man, in respect of what is good, yet if we do not consent to
these motions of lusts within us, they are not truly and properly sins, do
consequentially conclude, that there is not necessarily dross and sin in
every holy duty we do, but the evidence of Romans 7. is too great to be
contradicted. So that preaching of original sin is not only necessary to the
unregenerate, but even to the most holy and godliest man that lives; Let him
desire to know more of it, for it may do him also much good, and this is the
reason, why the more godly any are, the more they are displeased with
themselves, and do the more highly esteem of Christ, not but that they grow in
grace, only they grow also in the discoveries of more filth and unworthiness in
themselves.

Thirdly, By the true knowledge of this we come to be acquainted with that
combat and conflict, that is between the flesh and the spirit, so much spoken
of by Divines, who usually say, In every godly man there are two men, two I's,
as the Apostle ( Romans 7.) distinguishes, I Paul carnal, sold under sin,
doing the things, I would not, and I Paul spiritual, delighting in the Law of
God in the inwardman, and thanking God the Father through Christ, because freed
from condemnation; That Paul did not speak of this combat, while unregenerate,
as a Legalist, as some say, but as truly converted, will appear, if we
consider, that in another place, Gal. 5. 17. the Apostle speaks of all the
godly, as thus exercised, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; So that whatsoever is done holily and godlily, it is always
cum lucta carnis, and therefore grace is the mortifying of the flesh: Now our
sins will not be put to death, without some pain and reluctance to the carnal
part. Therefore this is a perpetual concomitant of every godly man, he has a
combat and spiritual conflicting within him, and this makes him often in so
many agonies, this makes him so earnestly watching and praying against all
temptations; now come we to natural people, they feel not the least struggling
within them, all is quiet, and at ease, because they are wholly in their
original sin, they were born in; And this makes it plain likewise, that all
their praying, hearing, all the religious duties they ever performed, were
never done in an holy and godly manner, because there was no reluctance, or
inward combat, but they did them in a customary, formal way, without any
spiritual life or motion, for flesh will not fight against flesh. Indeed there
is a combat between conscience in its conviction and corruption, even in some
unregenerate men, as in Aristotle's incontinent man, as distinguished from his
intemperate, and that is known, of Medea, video meliora, proboque, deteriora
sequor, I see and approve better things, but follow the worse: And some would
have Paul's combat to be no other, because he calls it, The Law of his mind,
fighting with the Law in his members, but that is not cogent, as is more
largely to be showed in its time. Though therefore there be a reluctance in
some unregenerate men, yet that is not like the conflict in the godly, because
amongst other differences, this is one principal. The godly man being
regenerated in every part of the soul, though not perfectly, his will is
sanctified as well as his mind: Hence the combat and opposition in a godly
man, is between the same faculty sanctified, and the flesh still abiding in
that part, his holy will against his corrupt will; so that not only his mind
and conscience is against sin, but his will also, so far as sanctified:
Hence the same Apostle makes the opposition between will and will, What I would
not, that I do, and though captivated by lust, yet at that very time,
delighting in the Law of God, in the inward man; whereas in unregenerate men,
they have only an opposition between their conscience, and their heart. The
mind suggests one thing, but the will and affections wholly incline another
way; Therefore that light in their consciences is a trouble and vexation to
them, they do all they can to extinguish it.

The Doctrine then of original corruption, informing us. That it abides still
in a man, while he lives upon the earth, does inform the truly godly, that
they must always expect agonies and conflicts within, like fire and water met
together, so will grace and corruption be; Therefore by this very combat, we
may discern true grace, and it is counterfeit; for presumption, which would be
thought faith, is easy, we find no opposition to it, but faith is put forth
with much difficulty; so godly sorrow put forth upon pure and spiritual
motives, is greatly assaulted by the flesh within us, but worldly sorrow or
mourning, though for sin, because of temporal judgments only that is easy,
we are carried to it from a propensity within, from a love to our selves.

Hence lastly, The main and principal effect of the true knowledge of our
original defilement, is to bring the soul humbled and burdened under it, to a
true and real esteem of Christ, and his Grace. So much as we take off from
original sin, making it either no sin, or the least sin, or quite
abolished after Baptism, so much do we take off from the grace of God in
Christ. Hence the Apostle, Romans 5. when he makes that famous opposition
between the first Adam and the second, the gift of grace by one, and the
condemnation by the other, he pitcheth upon that first disobedience, by which
we are made sinners, as the original of all that calamity we are plunged into;
and therefore the same Paul, when he poured out a large complaint about this
Law of sin working in him, at the close of all he runs to Jesus Christ,
Romans 7. 35. It is the true knowledge of this only, that will make us see the
necessity of Christ all the day long, and in every duty, in every performance;
As we have none speak so much of Grace and Christ, as Paul, so none speaks so
largely and fully about original sin. In the fifth Chapter of the Romans, he
asserts the Doctrine of it; and in the seventh Chapter, he declares the power
of it, which he felt experimentally in himself, though regenerated: Do not then
think this is a Philosophical dispute, or that to err in this is like erring
in those points, wherein one Christian is to bear with another; but with Austin
account it a fundamental, and that to deny it, is to overthrow that Law whereby
we are Christians.

CHAP. III.
Demonstrations of the Naturality of this Sin, That we have it by Natural
Propagation.
SECT. I.
BEing then thus informed of the Usefulness and Necessity of true Knowledge in
this matter: Let us have your ready and diligent attention in prosecuting that
matter, which relates to it; And so I come to that notion which this Text
fastens upon it, that it is a Natural sin, that we have it by natural
Propagation.

In the Scripture, and by the Ancients before Austin's time, it had many names,
The Law of sin, The Old man, The Flesh, The old stroke of the Serpent, an
hereditary evil, The tradux mali; But in his time for better obviating the
Heretics, who would allow the former names, it was by him called Original
sin, and ever since made an Ecclesiastical word, only to call it a natural
evil, they did not presume for fear of the Marcionites, who held, That there
was an evil Nature, as well as the good: And the Pelagians accused the Orthodox
for Manicheism in this point, because they held the propagation of this
corruption by Nature; Therefore they avoided the term of a Natural evil; yet
Austin at last did use it, and indeed it is a very proper and fit name for it,
hereby differencing it from all actual, voluntary and personal sins; as also
from sin by imitation and custom; for Aristotle makes a distinction of things
that are (...) and (...), Lib Ethic. 2. cap. 1. where he shows what is (...),
by nature, as the stone to descend, and the fire to ascend, is not (...), but
(...), so according to him, who knew nothing of original sin, we are neither
good or evil, (...), by nature. And withal this Text does fully warrant the
expression, If we are by Nature sinful, then there is a natural evil; Not
that God put it at first into our Natures, or that it is our substantial
Nature, but we have it by Natural Propagation.

Let us therefore consider, How much is implied in this expression.

SECT. II.
Natural, because it does infect the whole Nature of Mankind. It Is a defilement
that follows our specifical, not individual being: Even as we call death
natural, because it follows all mankind; Rich men die, and poor men die;
learned men die, and foolish; None are exempted from it: Thus also it is with
this sin, All that are born in a natural way of mankind have this contagion.
The sons of Noblemen and Princes, though they glory in their blood and their
descent, yet they are as full of sin, and the children of wrath, as well as the
children of the basest; so that though in civil respects they boast of their
birth, and are above others, yet in a theological and divine respect, all are
alike; yea the children of godly parents, though they have a promise to their
seed, and in that respect their children are said to be holy, 1 Cor. 7. yet
they come into the world with inherent corruption in them; They do not generate
their children, as godly men, but corrupt men, as Austin of old expressed it, A
circumcised man begat a child uncircumcised, and the Husbandman, though he
sows his seed out of the chaff and husk, yet that brings up others with chaff
and husk upon it. Well therefore may we call it a natural sin, because it
does extend to the whole humane Nature, as it is in every one that partaketh of
it in a natural way. So that as Divines do distinguish of infirmities and
evils; There are some that are specifical, which follow the Species, as death;
and some are accidental, which follow the individual nature: Thus there are
some sins, which follow the particular nature of a man, and these are actual
sins. Every man is not a drunkard, an adulterer, but some are defiled one
way, some another; but then there is a sin, which follows the whole and
universal nature of man, and this is original sin, though every man be not
guilty of such or such a particular sin, yet all are, of original sin; And
therefore the Schoolmen say, Actual sin does corrumpere personam, but
original Naturam, actual sins corrupt the person, original the nature.

SECT. III.
WE are declaring the Naturality of this Original sin, not as if it were
ingredient into, or constitutive of our nature, but an universal and
inseparable pollution adhering to it, as they say of death, as though it be
praeter Naturam, or contra; yet if we do regard the principles of mortality,
which are in every man, so death is natural.

In that it is the inward principle of all the sinful motions of the soul, and
that per^se, not per accidens. This is a great part of that definition, which
Aristotle gives of Nature, now we may in a moral sense apply it to our purpose.

First, I say, It Is the inward principle of all the sinful motions, and
workings of the Soul. For as the nature of the stone is the cause of its motion
downward, as the nature of the fire is the cause of the fires motions and
operations: Thus is original sin the intrinsecal cause, and root of all the
actual evil we are guilty of. It is far from me to justify Flacius his
discourse or opinion of original sin, making it the natural substance of a man,
and not an accident, though he so expresses himself, that some think its his
Logical and Metaphysical error, rather than Theological: Only that which I aim
at, is to show, That this birthsinne, is naturally ours, because from it does
flow all the sinful and evil operations of the whole man; So that we may
say, as it is natural to the stone to descend, to the sparks to fly upwards,
so it is natural to man to think evil, to speak evil, and to do evil. Aristotle
observes ( Lib. 2. Ethic. cap. 1.) this, as one property of things by nature,
that there the principles are before the actions; A man has the power to see,
or hear before he can actually do either, but in moral things, the actions are
before the habits. As it is natural to the Toad to vent poison, and not honey;
so when a man sins, it is from his own, it is natural to him, but when enabled
to do any thing that is good, this is wholly of grace: Now, I say, It Is an
inward principle of all sin within us, to distinguish it from external cause,
viz. the devil or wicked men, who sometimes may tempt and cause to sin;
Therefore the devil is called The tempter, Mat. 4. 3. Insomuch that it is made
a Question, Whether there be any sin a man commits, that the Devil has not
tempted unto, but that I attend not to at this time: This is enough, that the
Devil is but an outward cause of sin, and therefore were there not that
original filth in us, his sparks could never kindle a fire, he cannot compel
or force to sin; In so much that whatsoever sin we do commit, we are not to
lay the fault principally upon the Devil, but our own corrupt hearts: Though
Ananias lied against the holy Ghost, because the Devil had filled his heart;
And Judas betrayed Christ, because Satan had entered into his heart, yet the
devil could not have come into their hearts, had they not been of unclean and
corrupt Constitutions: before it was an evil heart, and therefore the devil
took possession of it. The Apostle James, cap. 1. 14. does notably discover the
true cause, and natural fountain of all the evil committed by us, and that is,
The lust and concupiscence, that is within us, he says, We must not charge God
with our sins, as if he were to be blamed, because we are not kept from
wickedness; neither does he bid us, Charge it upon the Devil, though he does
tempt us, but upon our own corrupt lust within. Thus then you see, that as Paul
says of those, who are in Christ, They no longer live, but Christ within them,
Gal. 2. 20. So we may on the contrary affirm of every man by nature, that he
does not so much live, as sin within him; for when our physical nature
causes us to think, or speak, or do, then also sin like our moral nature,
does make us think, and speak sinfully: Even as the lame horse can never move
himself to go, but he halteth in that motion. Surely, this consideration should
make all mankind mourn in sackcloth, and roll it self in ashes: What should a
man do in his whole life, but as Anselm said, to deplore his whole life, in
tota vita totam vitam deplorare, for he cannot move, or stir, or do any
thing, but he sins; If he cateth, if he drinks, if he works, yea, if he
prays, in all these he sins, as is more to be showed. We see then, that
because this original sin is by way of a principle within us of all our
irregular motions; Therefore though there were no Devil to tempt, no examples
for men to imitate, yet their corrupt nature within would carry them to it; Did
not Cain murder Abel, when there had been no such sin in the world before? We
many times wonder how children, yea and sometimes grown men should commit such
sins, that they could not see practiced before their eyes; but we need not
wonder, when we consider what a shop of all impieties every man's heart by
nature is. Hence Solomon speaking of the uprightness God made man in, Eccles.
7. 29. he instanceth in the effects of original sin, as opposite to that
uprightness, that it makes a man seek out many sinful inventions, he does not
only sin by imitation, but invention.

Secondly, It is added in the definition, That nature is the principle of
motion perse, and not per accidens: If a man move a Bowl, and make it run,
it is not a natural motion, because the principle is from without, and it is by
accident; yea those automata, those artificial instruments, which some have
made, that move themselves, yet that is not a natural motion, because the
principle is not in them perse, but by accident. Now this property is very
applicable to man; for when he sins, it is not by accident, or from
unexpected occasion, but of himself, and from himself; Therefore to do as a
man, to walk as a man, denotes sinfulness, in the Scripture phrase, 1 Cor. 3.
1. When there are envyings, strifes amongst you, Do ye not walk as men? Observe
that, To walk as a man, is to do a thing sinfully, so Romans 3. 5. when the
Apostle in his reasoning made a supposition of God being unrighteous, if he
took vengeance, adds [I speak as a man] These instances declare, that to do a
thing as a man, is to do it sinfully, as he said, Humanum est errare. Thus when
Christ would express the naturality of the Devils wickedness, he says, He
sins of his own (John 8. 44) when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own:
So when thou art proud, worldly, unbelieving, thou do this of thy own; You
wonder that some have lies so ready at hand to excuse iniquity, even young
children, they are like the Devil in this, they do it of their own, so that
sin only we can call our own; our wealth is not our own, our lives are not
our own, these we have from God, but that propensity to sin is our own, it
arises from our selves, as from the rotten tree come those worms that consume
it: Oh what deep humiliation should this cause in thee! Thou have nothing thou
can call thy own but sin; That which God only hates and loatheth, that is
only thine; he looks on thee, and sees thy soul, that he gave thee; he sees
thy body, that is his workmanship also, but then he beholds the pravity and
sinful disposition in thee, and this is none of his. It was not of God, but it
came through Adam's disobedience; so that when we sin, we then doing it of
our own, it is no wonder that when there is no Devil to tempt, no example to
imitate, yet men can readily commit any sin.

SECT. IV.
This sin is Natural, because it does always and constantly put it self
forth: For this is one way of discovering the naturality of a thing, viz. if it
be always and constantly so. The Poets saying, Naturam expellas, etc. Though
you use all art, or violence, to bar out nature, yet that will recurre, it
will recurre again; Though you violently smother, and keep down the flames, yet
no sooner have they passage, but they will ascend, because what Nature does,
it is constant and invariable in, and this is too true in respect of this
original sin, it does constantly and certainly work in us, even as often as
our soul does put forth any vital actings at all. Those things that are by
accident, they seldom fall out, but what is by nature is frequent, you may know
the Sun will rise again, though it be night, till God put a period to the
course of nature: And thus it is concerning man, as soon as ever he is born,
you may conclude this child, as soon as ever he can think, he can understand,
or will, as soon as he can love, or be angry, he will do them all sinfully;
Even as when ye see a young Serpent, you may certainly conclude, this will
poison as soon as ever it can sting, and the reason is, because it is a constant
pollution of the soul, and therefore it is in every thing the unregenerate man
does, Genesis 6. 5. The imagination of the thoughts of a man's heart is only evil,
and that continually; it is continually, because naturally so: May not this
respect also make thee with Jeremiah wish, That thy head were a fountain of
tears to weep day and night? For can any thing be more dreadful than to have
this fountain of poison within, running out all the day long; To have this flux
of blood, that no act or humane skill can stop? Aristotle says, That every
time a man breaths, there comes out some kind of fire with it. Certainly, every
time thou think and movest thy soul any way, there comes out hell fire with
those motions, by this means the seashore is not fuller of sand, or the air of
atoms, than thou art of constant sinful emanations from thy soul.

SECT. V.
FOurthly, This sin is Natural, Because it would carry a man out to the As
they say, Nature does act always to the highest it can. Thus it is true in
respect of this natural corruption, it does incline every man to be as vile,
and as enormous as any are; For although this original corruption does not
deprive him of his understanding and will, making of him an irrational beast,
yet it does so captivate and inthrall the whole man; That though to understand
and to will be of nature, yet this understanding and willing in a sinful
manner will always be, because it is corrupted nature; and therefore it would
hurry every man even as the Devil did the Swine into the sea of perdition:
Every one would be a Cain, a Judas, if his corrupt nature were left to it self,
and if you ask, Why then are not all men turned into so many beasts and Devils?
Why is not the whole world in consusion? How comes there to be any civility or
morality? Why is not every place like an hell, if all men are thus vile by
nature? It Is answered, God has a reforming and restraining grace; If this
later may be called Grace: Now those that God reformeth, and inwardly
sanctifies; They are made to delight in the Law of God; They have the fear of
God put into their hearts, and so they keep from sin out of love to God; but
then there are others, and God lays a restraint upon them, he puts a bridle
in their mouths: So that although they have an insatiable appetite to sin,
and do not put forth the whole abundance of that evil, which is within them,
yet they have a principle inclining thereunto, only God stops them; as he did
Balaam, whose heart was desirous to curse the people of Israel, though he was
restrained from it; As it is with the sea, by its own natural motion, it would
overthrow the whole world, but that God has put his bounds to it, saying,
Hitherto shall thou go and no further. Thus God has a supreme dominion even
over the sinful heart of man, so that it cannot sin, when and how, and as
much as it lists, but it is under the providence of God, Cui nihil est malum,
as Austin said, because he can turn it unto good. But all this is no thanks or
praise to man; Say then with thy self, If I run not into the same excess of
riot with others; If I be not so abominable and loathsome, as many others are;
It Is not because I have a better nature, or come less polluted with original
sin into the world, but because God puts limits to me, for as you see in the
little Acorn is contained all the huge branches and boughs, which by length of
time, it grows up into. Thus let man alone, let him have opportunities to
sin, let not God restrain him, and you will quickly see him to be an
incarnated Devil, and the reason is, because this evil being natural, and
withal the seed of all evil, therefore he would be hurried on to the
committing of it: Even as Adam had in the image of God, the seminals of every
godly action, so that none could say, Adam had not a power to do such and such
a gracious work. Thus it is with original corruption succeeding in the room
thereof, it naturally defiles all over, and so has a womb, as the Apostle
James, chap. 1. 14. alludeth thereunto, wherein any monstrous and deformed sin
may be conceived.

SECT. VI.
It Is Natural, Because it is necessarily in every one; we are necessarily thus
defiled and stained; And in this respect chiefly, we call it Natural, because
it is not voluntary, it is not subject to the exercise of free will: For
although, as was said, the heart of man inclines to the highest impieties, yet
the exercise of some gross impieties are subject to our power in some measure,
a man is not in this sense necessarily a drunkard, or an adulterer; but when we
speak of this inward filthiness, it is so natural, that it is necessary: Neither
the being of it, or the immediate motions of it are subject to our reason and
will, but they are in us antecedently to our own consent; and this
consideration does greatly aggravate our guilt, for we are not only habitually
and actually, or voluntarily sinful, but naturally and necessarily so. Now as
it is the great aggravation of Gods holiness, that he is not only actually
holy, but naturally, yet voluntarily: So it must be our great condemnation,
that we are not only actually and voluntarily sinful, but even naturally and
necessarily, yet this necessity takes not off from voluntariness, and delight
in sin.

It Is Ivy twisted about, and eaten into our Nature, whether we will or no; So
that it is ours, not because we will it, and make it ours by consent, but
because it is inherently in us before the least deliberate actings of the soul:
Insomuch that as Suarez well observes, If a man grown up in years should by a
personal, formal, and explicit consent agree to Adam's sin, yet that would
only be a personal sin in him, it would not make Adam's sin his; And the
reason is, because this sin does now descend upon us by natural propagation,
not by voluntary agreement, yet this necessity of it does not at all abate from
the delight and pleasure that we find in the actings thereof: Neither is it
such a natural necessity, as hunger or thirst, which are not culpable, because
they are not contrary to the Law of God, neither were at first contracted by
Adam's free choice, but are a necessary concomitant of man's constitution in an
animal life, whereas this necessity is the issue of Adam's free will, and is
subjectively in our will, whereby a man is carried out at the same time to
sin, both necessarily and yet voluntarily, and so agrees rather with those
who have contracted an habit of sin, who sin in some respect necessarily,
as the Prophet expresses it, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin?
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil.

SECT. VII.
WE proceed to further discoveries of this Truth, viz. The Naturality of this
evil: And that

In the sixth place will further appear, In that it is more near to us, than
any actual or habitual sin; That it is nearer than any actual sin, is
plain, Because that is transient, and abides not in us. But for habitual
sin, that is constantly fixed in us, when once settled there. Now it may be
thought, that original sin cannot stick closer than that, an habit being a
kind of second nature: Insomuch that Aristotle makes such who have acquired
habits of sin, to sin necessarily, and that there is not so much
voluntariness in their offenses, as in other faults. But now original sin is
more naturally and intimately in us, than these acquired habits of sin, for
we are not made thus originally filthy by frequent actings of sin, but we are
born and bred so, so that whereas habits of sin, as drunkenness, uncleanness,
etc. These are the product of many actions; Frequent and often sinning begets
such an habit that cannot be left off. This original sin is the cause of
sinful actions, not the effect of it: Because we are thus sinful and polluted
by nature, therefore all our actions are likewise so polluted. Now then if the
Scripture make it such an impossible thing for a man accustomed only to evil to
become a changed man, that impossibility lies upon a man, who is naturally so;
For though custom be called a second Nature, yet certainly the first Nature is
more implanted, and so more active in a man. This particular therefore may
greatly humble a man, in that sin is so deeply rooted in him, it is worse than
an habit or custom of sinning; It goes as near to thy very essence and
substance, as it can do, and yet not be thy substance; Therefore the Scripture
calls it, Flesh and blood, The members of a man, The Law of sin in his flesh.
If a man has a thorn in his flesh, how restless and pained is he? Paul
compared that heavy temptation, he grapled with, to a Thorn in the flesh; but
although by nature, we have this thorn, not only in our sides, but even all
over the whole man, yet we can lie down in ease, and live in pleasure, as if
nothing ailed us; but this is one deadly effect of original sin, that it
takes away all sense and feeling, whether there be any such thing or no. Oh
then, let the thoughts of this sin go as deep into thee, as the sin it
self! Sin is got into thy heart, let sorrow get thither; Sin has entered
into thy bowels, and filled the whole man brimme full (as we say;) Oh let shame
and holy confusion be as deep, and as complete in thee!

SECT. VIII.
SEventhly, This naturality will appear, If we consider that original
righteousness, For our original sin comes in the place thereof, and such a
perfection as that was to the soul, such a defect is this to us. Now the
Orthodox do maintain against Papists, That that original righteousness was not
a supernatural perfection superadded to man's nature, but a due and natural
perfection concreated with him; For as Adam being made to glorify God, was
thereby to have a rational soul, so also such perfection in that soul, which
might make him capable of his end, otherwise man would have been created in a
more imperfect and ignoble condition than any creature. It is true indeed, That
Righteousness and Holiness Adam had, which the Scripture calls Gods Image, did
not flow from the principles of nature, neither was it a natural consequent
thereof; but yet it was a moral condition or perfection due to Adam, supposing
God created him to such an end; and therefore we are not to conceive of that
Image of God, as an infused habit or habits which were to rectify and guide
the natural faculties and affections of the soul, which otherwise would move in
repugnancy and contrariety to one another, but as a natural rectitude, and
innate ability of those powers and affections of the soul to move regularly and
subordinately to Gods will: Though therefore in respect of God, that
Righteousness Adam had might be called supernatural, because it was his gift,
yet in respect of man, the subject, so it was connatural, and a suitable
perfection to his nature. This being taken for a sure Truth, then it will
exceedingly help us to the true understanding of the naturality of this evil,
for original sin succeeding in the stead thereof, is not (as some Papists
affirm) like the taking of clothes from a man, and so leaving him naked; or
like the taking away of a bridle from an horse, all which are superadded, and
external helps, as it were; but it is like death that takes away the life of a
man, in respect of what is holy and godly, and like an heavy disease that does
much hinder and debilitate even the natural operations. This original sin
then is like the spoiling of an instrument of Music, or the deordination of a
Clock or Watch, when not able to perform their proper service they were made
for: So that original sin is partly the want of this original Righteousness
that was so connatural, and partly thereby a propensity and inclination to all
evil; For as when the harmony of the humors is dissolved, presently diseases
arise in the body: Thus when that admirable rectitude, which was at first in
the whole man, was broken, then all inordinacy, all perverseness and crookedness
presently began to possess the whole man: As then original Righteousness was
not as an infused habit, but the faculties of the soul duly constituted,
whereby they did regularly move in their several ways; so original sin is not
to be conceived, like some acquired habit, polluting the powers of the soul,
but as the internal defect and imperfection that is cleaving to them; Even as
the paralitical hand whenever it moves, does it with feebleness and
trembling, wanting some strength within: If therefore we would truly judge of
the horrible nature of this sin, we must thoroughly understand the excellency
and wonderful nature of that original Righteousness which is now lost, then all
things in the soul were in an admirable subordination to that which is holy;
and although the sensitive appetite, was then carried out to some sensible
object, yet it was with a subordination to the understanding; so that in that
state of integrity there did not need, as the Papists say, Righteousness as a
bridle to curb in the passions and affections, which otherwise would be
inordinate, for this were to attribute a proneness to sin in us to God
himself, for he is the author of every thing, which is natural in us, but all
the affections and sensitive motions, were then subjected to the command of
reason, so that Adam had power to love when, and as long, and in what measure
he pleased; All the affections of his soul were both quoad originem, gradum and
progressum under his dominion; Even as the Artificer can make his Clock strike,
when, and as many times as he pleases. But woe be unto us, all this excellent
harmony and subordination is now lost, and our affections they captivate and
rule over our judgments, and all this is because (...), there wants something
within, as he said of his Image that he could not make stand, because it wanted
life within.

SECT. IX.
From the work of grace sanctifying, which is the proper remedy to cure this
imbred defilement: For the grace of Regeneration is chiefly and principally
intended to subdue sin, as it did corrupt the nature, and so by consequence,
as we were personally corrupted; Therefore the tree must first be made good;
ere the fruit can be good, as the tree is in its nature evil, and then it
brings forth evil fruit: So that God in vouchsafing of this grace of
Regeneration, does not principally intend to make thee leave thy actual sins
(for that is by consequence only) but to make thy nature better to repair his
Image in thee: Even as when the Prophet Elisha would make the waters sweet, he
threw salt into the spring and fountain of them: Thus because it is from a
polluted nature that all our actual sins flow, therefore grace regenerating
is principally ordered to take away or conquer that by degrees, which is the
cause of all: If this be so, then let us consider, What this grace is, which
does enable us to do any thing after a godly and holy manner? This is a
supernatural gift of God, and an insused quality into the soul, whereby it is
enabled to work above its own proper and natural operations: If then to do any
thing that is good be wholly of grace, it is Gods gift, then to sin is natural
and proper to thee. The Scripture is copious and plentiful in affirming this,
That Christ as our head is the cause of all our supernatural actings, We
receive of his fullness, and so are enabled by him. Grace then being
supernatural, to love God, to repent of sin, to do any thing spiritually, being
thus wholly above nature, it necessarily follows, that when we sin, and do
evil, that we do it naturally.

SECT. X.
NInthly, The Nature of a thing, if compounded, and not simple, is the The
nature of a man is not his hands, or his eyes only, but his soul, and his whole
body. Thus the nature of original Righteousness was not the perfection of one
single faculty, the understanding only, the will only, but it was the complete
harmonical rectitude of the whole man, called therefore the Image of God; Now
as the Image of a man is not one limb or member, but the pourtraiture of the
whole: So neither was the Image of God in Adam; one grace, or some few graces,
but the perfection of every part; Light in the mind, holiness in the will,
order and regularity in the affections: Thus it is on the contrary with
original sin, it is called, The old man, and it is said to have m^mbers, by
which is implied, that it is not any single sin, or a defect and pollution in
one faculty of the soul, but it is universal over all. Hence our Savior says,
John 3. Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh, it is wholly corrupted, it is
all over sinful; So then, when we say, it is natural, this implies, That it is
a Leprosy all over us, as far as our physical being extends: Thus also in a
moral sense does our sinful Being enlarge it self: Therefore our natural estate
is not compared only to a blind man, or a deaf man, what wants the use of some
faculties, but unto death it self, that depriveth of the use of all. The
naturality then of this sin does denote both the inward inheston, as also the
universal diffusion of it, nothing within a man being free from this contagion.

SECT. XI.
LAstly, The Naturality of this evil does appear In the great easiness,
promptitude This is a way to discover what is natural, if the actions be easy,
ready, and with delight; This discovers they flow from Nature, but what is of
art, that is with difficulty, and much observation. We need not hire, or teach
a man to eat or drink, these are natural actions, and are accompanied with
delight: And thus the Naturality of this birth-sinne is notably manifested;
with what ease, pleasure, and inward readiness is a man carried out to sin
from his youth up: Eliphaz speaks notably of this, Job 15. 16. How much more
abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water, like a
Leviathan, that is said to drink up the river, and hastes not. You see he calls
every man by nature abominable and filthy, which is discovered by this, He
drinks iniquity like water, as a dropsy, or feavorish man, that is scorched
with heat within, does with greediness and delight pour down water, and the
more he drinks, the thirstier he is, and he never says he has enough. Thus
it is with filthy and corrupted man, he does with earnestness and delight
fulfill the lust of the flesh, he is never satisfied. Every man in the world
has a Sheol within him, that is always craving, and saying, Give, Give, as
hell has unquenchable sparks of fire, such an hell is in every man's heart; As
our Savior said, It Is my meat and drink to do my Fathers will. Thus it is
every man's meat and drink by nature to be doing the Devils will: Do ye not see
it in children, how of themselves they are prone to any impiety, but call them
to learn, or to be instructed, then there is much aversness? All this arises
from the natural evil within us.

CHAP. IV.
Objections against the Naturality of Original Sin answered.
SECT. I.
THe Naturality of original sin has been in diverse respects asserted. I
shall therefore conclude this Text with answers to some Objections that are
made against this Doctrine: I do not mean against original sin it self, for
they are various; so unwilling is man to be convinced that he is wholly sinful,
but against the Naturality of it, which this Text does affirm: Neither shall I
take in all Objections of this kind, because they will be met with, on some
other Texts; only I shall pitch upon one or two, whereby your understandings
may be more fully cleared in this point, and so I shall part with this Text.

First therefore, Object.
it has been enviously of old objected against this Truth, That if there were
such a natural pollution adhering to all mankind, this would redound to the
dishonor of God, who is the Author of man. This Argument the Pelagians of old
insulted with, If ( say they) any man hold, God is the maker of man, presently
he is called a Pelagian; for thus they flourished, If there be original sin,
either the parents that beget, or the children that are begotten, or God the
Creator of the soul, and in a peculiar manner forming all the parts of our
body, must be the cause of this sin. This Objection they thought
unanswerable, unless we should charge God with being the Author of this
original defilement. Hence it is that they charged Man^cheism upon the
Orthodox, as if they thought, that Nature it self was evil. Five things there
were, that these Heretics did usually commend, Nature, Marriage, the Law,
Free Will, and Holiness; none of which they thought could be maintained, unless
we deny original sin.

But when these Arguments are fully searched into, Answ.
there will appear no matter of boasting. Let us call the first to account, and
examine, Whether the Doctrine of original corruption does charge God foolishly,
or no? Whether hereby all the sin in the world will be laid upon God?

Now there is a three sold charge drawn up against this Truth, as it relates
to God:

1. That it makes him the Author of this sin.

2. That it makes him unjust, imputing that sin of Adam to us, and punishing
us because of it, when we had no being, or any will of our own to act therein.
And

3. Of cruelty, that God who is so ready to forgive us our own sins, yet
should impute to us Adam's. But these are fig leaves only, and cannot cover the
Objectors nakedness.

SECT. II.
FOr, First, We do not say, That the Nature of man as it was created first, had
this imbred pollution in it, No: it came out of Gods hands pure and clean,
Eccles. 7. ult. God made man upright. It was after Gods own Image that he made
him, he had no experimental knowledge of any evil within him. But as it was
with the earth after man's fall, it brought forth briars and thorns, being
cursed, which (as it is thought) it would not have done so before. Thus upon
Adams transgression, then, and not till then, was his soul cursed spiritually,
to bring forth nothing but briars and thorns, such lusts as were fit
combustible matter for hell fire: Therefore every Infant almost may understand
this, That the maintaining of this Truth does not at all redound to Gods
dishonor, for we see the like in the Devils, Are not they become wicked
spirits? Is there not an utter impossibility in a Devil to do any thing that is
good? Are they not called the spiritual wickednesses in high places? Ephesians. 6.
12. as if they were nothing, but all over wickedness, yet the Devil, though so
vile and abominable, was made a glorious creature. None of this poison was at
first infused into him, but the Apostle Jude ver. 6, lays it wholly upon
themselves, That they kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation. The Devils then, though so full of wickedness, yet are not a
reproach to God their Maker, but it was through their own wilfulness, they
became such Apostates.

Hence in the second place, Adam when he first transgressed that command of
God, and thereby involved all mankind in darkness and misery, did it from a
voluntary free principle within, there was no internal or external necessity
compelling him to sin, for he was made with the image of God in him, and that
matter wherein he did transgress, he might easily have attained from God,
giving him liberty to eat of all other trees, so that it was merely, and solely
from Adams own will, that he undid himself and all his posterity. It is true,
God if he had pleased could have prevented his sinning, he could have confirmed
him in such grace, as we see he did the other Angels that fell not, whereby he
would certainly have been preserved from all sin, but God is the supreme
Sovereign, and is not tied up as men are to inferior Laws. It is true, he is
an eternal Law of Righteousness to himself, whereby he cannot do any thing, but
what is just and righteous, yet he has also an absolute Dominion over all
things, and may dispose of his creatures as he pleases; and from this it was
that he created man with power to fall, as well as to stand, making him mutable
and changeable, whereas the glorified Saints in Heaven shall be delivered from
such mutability, and there shall not be in them a posse peccare, a power to
sin, so greatly shall their souls be perfected in Heaven: So that still you
see, God is freed, and man's destruction is of himself.

Hence also in the third place, when Adam sinned at first, it was not after the
same manner, as we sin; for when we sin, this flows from a corrupted
nature within, Jam. 1. 17. Every one is tempted and drawn aside with the lust
that is within him; But in Adam there was no such vicious principle. It is
therefore a false and dangerous position of the Socinians, That we sin in the
same manner that he did, That we have no more corrupted Nature in us, then he
had, but as he had a free will, by which he chose either good or evil, so it is
with us. But this speaks open defiance against the Scripture; For was Adam by
nature the child of wrath? Were the imaginations of his thoughts only evil, and
that continually? Could Adam say, He found a Law of sin in his Members,
warring against the Law of his mind? Adam's sin therefore came from the mere
mutability and changeableness that was in his will, there being no antecedent
corruption in him: Insomuch that it has greatly exercised learned Divines, to
show how Adam could sin, and wherein the imperfection did first break forth,
he being made after the Image of God; but in us our sinfulness arises from a
necessity contracted by the first voluntary transgression, and so have a
corrupt nature which inclines to all corrupt actions. Adam was in some sense a
good Tree, and yet did bring forth bad Fruit, a sweet Fountain, and yet did
send forth bitter Streams; Here we might say, a Vine brought sorth Thorns, and
a Fig Thistles; but we are bad Trees, poisoned Fountains, Briars and Thorns,
only from the paralleling of our selves with Adam, we may conclude our
incurableness, as also the danger we are in, by every temptation; For if Adam;
though without any corrupt principle within him, though without the least spark
of any lust, was yet so easily inflamed by a temptation; What may we expect who
have the seed of all evil within us? If the green Ivy shall take fire so soon,
what will the dry Tree do? Oh take heed of coming near any occasion of sin!
As our Savior said, Remember Lots wife, so do thou Adams wife, yea and Adam
himself. These, though created holy, though without any lustful inclination,
yet did presently yield to the temptations of sin, What then wilt not thou
do? If Samson with his strength cannot resist the Philistims, much less, when
that is gone, can he withstand them. But of this difference between Adam and us
in sinning, more in its time.

In the fourth place, God is to be justified, though we be born full of sin,
because we are to distinguish between nature it self, and the corruption
cleaving to it. We say, our Nature, our Essence and Substance, our Souls and
Bodies in respect of their natural Being are the work of God, and we are with
David, to admire the curious workmanship of God, in respect of our Bodies; The
excellent composition of all the bodily parts, did convince even Galen, though
otherwise an Heathen. God therefore as a Creator is to be praised and glorified
by us; only, as Austin of old, we must not so praise Deum Creatorem, as to make
Superfluum Servatorem; We must not so celebrate the name of God, as a Creator,
that thereby we should make a Savior superfluous and unnecessary, Sub laudibus
naturae latent inimici gratiae, under the praises of Nature, the enemies of
Grace hide themselves; and so under the praises of God as a Creator, the
enemies of Christ, as a Savior, shelter themselves. Nature then, we say, is
good, our Substance and Being is of God only, the defilement annexed
inseparably thereunto is of man: Even as in our bodies, the substance of them
is of God, but God did not make death, that dissolution arises from sin. We
do not say, That sin is natural to us constitutive, or consecutive, but
transitive and inhaesive, it does not constitute our Being, neither is it an
internal consequence of it, but it descends with our Nature, and is inherent in
everyone.

Those only do give God his due glory, and vindicate him against all sinful
complaints, who do maintain original sin; For it was the ignorance of this
made the Heathens utter such impatient complaints against Nature, or rather the
God of it, because they were not informed of this, they thought, God dealt more
unkindly with man, than any other creature. Thus Austin takes notice of
Cicero, who greatly complained of Nature, Rem (says he) vidit, causam
nescivit, (Lib. 4. contra Julian. cap. 12.) latebat enim cur grave jugum esset
super filios Adam; and this was, Because (says Austin) not being instructed
out of the Scripture, he was ignorant of original sin. So that there is no
such remedy against those damnable Doctrines of the Marcionites and Manichees,
as by acquainting of our selves with the Truth in this point, for hereby we are
enabled upon just and solid grounds both to justify God, and condemn our
selves.

SECT. III.
LAstly, They that hold Adam was at first created with a pronity to sin, and
that it was natural in him to have the sensitive appetite rebel against the
rational; and therefore original Righteousness was given as a bridle to curb
and keep the inferior faculties in subordination to the superior. These (I
say) do hold that Doctrine, which makes God to be the Author, if not of sin,
yet of inclination to it. For, as the Socinians say, That death was natural to
man in his first Creation, only sin made it necessary, end by way of a curse.
So the Papists say, That even in Adam at his first Creation there would have
been a rebellion between his appetite and reason, had not there been grace
superadded to regulate it; For (say they) this is natural, and it abides in
all men still, and is not a sin. But we shall in time (God willing) show the
falsehood of this, and prove the inclination of the sensitive appetite to any
suitable object, as it was in Adam, was not irregular, but in us it is in all
things excessive, we not being able to move regularly, because we have lost
that inward strength we were created in. As you see in the Palsy member, that
moves very fast, not from strength, but from weakness, so is it with us now in
all our motions to any object, but God. There is a paralitical affection, we
cannot love or fear, but we do it too much. Now to say, it was thus in Adam,
would be to dishonor God, and to make him the Author of that ataxy and
confusion which is now in man.

SECT. IV.
AS for the other two particulars of Gods Injustice and Cruelty, supposed to be
in the depriving of us of that original Righteousness, we may speak more
hereafter: But for the present, this may stop the mouth of any caviller, though
it be as wide as a Sepulcher.

1. That as God was not necessitated to create man, neither did he make man out
of need of him, so when he had made him, he being supreme Lord and Sovereign,
might deal with him upon what terms he pleased: It pleased him therefore to
covenant with Adam not as a single person, but as a common head and universal
person, as appears Romans 5. by the collation that is made between the first
Adam, and the second Adam, as two universal principles.

Therefore secondly, God taking such a way, all the good Adam should have had
upon his continuance in obedience, would not have been in himself only, but to
all his posterity Then in him, we had all obeyed, By his obedience we had been
all made righteous, and by him life would have entered into the world; so that
it is great Justice in God, to transmit all the evils of Adams transgression, to
his posterity, who would have communicated all the good promised to them upon
his obedience. And thus we have answered that Objection, which is brought
against the Naturality of it.

SECT. V.
THe other Objections will come in seasonably from other Texts; I shall
therefore dismiss this Verse and Doctrine, with a vehement entreaty, not to let
the meditation of this Truth go out of your hearts, till it has humbled you in
the dust, till you look upon your selves as filthy and abominable, worse than
any Toads or Serpents: What is it a light matter, to have a nature that is all
the day long, either in thought, word or deed offending God? Your natural evil
is more to be deplored, in some sense, than all your actual evil; for as long
as this spring is, there will always be polluted streams: Many things may
humble and debase us, as men, but this is the Goliahs Sword, none like this to
pierce and cut at the very heart, even that we are naturally evil.

CHAP. V.
A Second Text urged and vindicated.
SECT. I.
ROMANS 5. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, etc.
THis later part of the Chapter is the Commonplace and proper seat of the
Doctrine of original sin, but the understanding of it is very difficult, for
there are Textual and Grammatical obscurities by the Hyperbatons,
Anantapodotons, and defective expressions, which are usual in Paul, whose
matter runs like a torrent, and cannot be so well bounded by words: And as
the Grammatical expression makes it doubtful, so also the profundity and depth
of that admirable matter, which is here delivered, adds to the difficulty of
it: For Austin of old said truly, Antiquo peccato nihil ad praedicandum notius,
nihil ad intelligendum secretius, It Is easily known that there is such a thing,
but what it is, is a great mystery, and secret: Insomuch that Salmeron, though
a Jesuit, upon the consideration of the difficulties in this Discourse of the
Apostle, spoke gravely, Non tam Thesei filo, quam Spiritu Sancto, and lumine
quo conscripta est, etc. We do not need Theseus his twine of thread, but the
holy Ghost, and that light by which this Epistle was wrote to guide us. Not
therefore to speak much of the Coherence, which is so much vexed by learned
men, in the Dispute of original imputed sin, especially that (...), of which
in time I shall take notice.

In the words we have a further and clearer Declaration of that Collation made
between Adam and Christ: Insomuch that this does clear what was formerly more
obscurely spoken, describing two Originals, or common Fountains, the one of
Sin and Death, the other of Grace and Life: For whereas in the verse before
he said, Condemnation came upon all by Adam; Lest God should be thought unjust
in this, he shows withal, That sin is propagated, so that there is the
Demerit of this condemnation in every one of us.

In this Collation or Comparison, I am only to take notice of the Protasis or
Proposition, which is, That by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.

So that in the words, we are to consider the Subject, or rather the cause of
mankinds sinfulness, and that is described in the Nature of it, and the Author,
The Nature of it is said to be (...). The Apostle called it (...) and (...),
which words do denote the hainousness of it; Rebellion is like the sin of
witchcraft, and Adams sin is called disobedience; yea some learned Divines
show, That the proper specifical nature of this sin was disobedience, there
were also many sins ingredient thereunto, this the Apostle does to aggravate
the hainousness of it: Insomuch that Peltan the Jesuit does wickedly accuse
the Protestants for aggravating the guilt of it so much. Apud illos (says he)
omnia sunt quasi tragica and infernalia, (De pecc. orig.) They have nothing but
tragical expressions, and proclaim hell and damnation because of this
pollution; For this is the Apostles scope in this place, to heighten the
consideration of it, that so Christ may be the more magnified: Even as an
Historian, who would make a parallel between two great Generals, yet intending
to prefer one before another, does in the first place amplify the gallantry,
the warlike power, the military stratagems of the one, that so he may the more
advance that other General whom he intends to prefer above him. Thus does the
Apostle here, he makes original sin to be exceeding sinful, that so the
grace of Christ may be exceeding rich, and precious grace. Adams sin then,
which is imputed, and made ours (as you heard) is disobedience.

SEC. II.
SEcondly, You have the Author of this disobedience, and that is said to be by
one man. Though Eve was the first in transgression, yet Adam is named as the
chief; and therefore Adam is sometimes used collectively, both for man and
woman; as when God said, Let us make man after our Image. Here then we have
Paul informing us of that, which all Philosophy was ignorant of, viz. The
imputation of Adams sin to us, and our natural pollution flowing from it.
Yea, Paul guided by the Spirit of God, finds out that mystery, which none of us
ever could discover, by reading the History of Man's Fall, related by Moses; For
there indeed we could see the cause of death, how that came upon all mankind,
but that Adams sin was ours, That we all sinned in him, that hereupon we were
all involved in sin and misery; for this we are to bless God for Paul, who has
so largely discovered it.

SECT. III.
IN the next place, We have the Effect of this disobedience, with the Extent of
it. The Extent is to many, that is, to all born naturally of Adam; For many is
not here opposed to all, but to one, the original, from that one, many, even
all are made sinners. Therefore it is a dangerous Exposition of Theodoret, as
Sixtus Senensis relates, which affirms, Not all, but some only to be
infected with Adam 's sin, exempting Abel, Noah, and others from this
pollution; For (1 Cor. 15.) the Apostle says, In Adam all die; and in this
Chapter at verse. 12. All have sinned in Adam; But the Effect, that is more
dreadful, and worthy of all meditation, We are made (...). This is more then
when all were said to sin in him, for this does denote the habitual depravation
of all the parts of the soul, as also a readiness to commit all actual sins.
Therefore the word is sometimes applied to signify great and heinous sinners,
as Mary Magdalen is said to be ((...)) a sinner. So then you see, that by Adams
disobedience all are made sinners.

CHAP. VI.
Whether we are Sinners by Natural Propagation, or by Imitation.
THere remains one great Doubt, Whether we are so by Natural Propagation,
because born of him, or by occasion only and imitation, because he sinned? We
are not ( say some) made sinners as soon as we are born, but when by free will
we come to consent to sin and choose it. Thus Pelagians of old, and Socinians
of late, with many others. Erasmus, though he says, he holds Original sin,
yet uses all his strength to enervate the Orthodox Interpretation.

SECT. I.
That Adam's Disobedience makes us Sinners by Propagation.
BUt there are cogent Reasons to understand it thus, That Adam 's Disobedience
makes us sinners by natural Propagation: As

First, Because the Apostle still charge our guilt and sinfulness upon Adam
only, upon that one man, and upon that one offense, whereas if it were by
example and imitation only, it might be upon our parents and others, and upon
their transgressions: So that the Apostle might have said, By many men, and
many disobediences, we are made sinners; but still he charge it on one man,
and one offense.

Secondly, If Imitation be taken strictly, then a man must know, and have in
his eye that which he does imitate; but how many thousands are there, that
run into all excess of wickedness, and never heard of Adam, much less could
not propound his sin for a pattern to follow? So that even in the Pelagian
sense, to be sinners by Imitation cannot be properly used in this Controversy.

Thirdly, If the Apostle understood sin only by Imitation, or occasion, not
Propagation, then as Austin of old well urged; it might be more properly
fastened upon the Devil, as the Original; for it was not by Adam, but the Devil
that sin came into the world, in this sense, and so death by sin; Hence the
Devil is said to be a manslayer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. or a murderer,
and that both of souls and bodies; In so much that the Devil was the occasion of
all the wickedness, and death the consequent thereof: And hence our Savior
speaking of wicked men, Joh 8. says, They are of their Father the Devil, and
what they see him do, that they do. So that the Devil is made to be the
original of sin by imitation to wicked men, and not Adam.

Fourthly, Adams sin must be made ours by natural Propagation, not Imitation,
Because death is made the necessary consequent of it all that (...) have sinned
Adam 's sin: But now death is propagated naturally; Hence Infant die, which
yet according to the best Divines have not actual sin, why (...) it that they
die? yea they are not only subject to death, but to exquisite torments and
pains; yea, Infants have been grievously possessed with the Devils, and
tormented by them: Now this could not be, if they were not guilty of sia: If
therefore death be by natural Propagation, then sin the cause of it, must
also be in that manner.

Fifthly, This comparison made between the first Adam communicating sin, and
the second, communicating Righteousness, does fully evince this: For we are
made righteous by Christ, not only as if he were a pattern, and example of
Righteousness unto us, but by an hidden and secret infusion of holiness into
our souls, whereby we are made new creatures, and said to be partakers of the
Divine Nature: For whereas the Papists would argue, as they think, very
strongly for our Justification by inherent Righteousness from the parallel made
between Adam and Christ; As ( say they) we are made sinners, not by imputation
only, but by inherency through Adam's disobedience; so we must be made
righteous by Christ, not by imputation, but inherently. We retort the Argument,
and say, Because Adam's sin is imputed tous, whereby we are made sinners, so
Christ's obedience is made ours, whereby we are constituted righteous: Yet we
grant further, That by Christ we are made inherently righteous, though by that
we are not justified; and this inward renovation comes not from Christ by
example, but a powerful and secret transformation of the whole man, so that as
to partake of Adam's sin, we must be born naturally of Adam; For if God
should create some men in an extraordinary manner, not by natural descent from
him, they would not have this natural contagion cleaving to them; so to partake
of Christ's Righteousness, it is necessary we must be new born by the Spirit of
God. Thus you see many Reasons, compelling us to understand the manner how by
Adam 's disobedience we are made sinners, to be by natural Propagation: For, if
this foundation be not laid sure, the whole fabric will quickly fall to the
ground. We come then to the Observation, which is,

SECT. II.
THat all mankind by Adam 's disobedience are truly and properly made sinners.
The Text is so clear that we would wonder any should be so deluded, as to
confront the Truth contained therein: Every one that is naturally born of Adam,
is thereby, and in that respect made a sinner, though he should have no actual
transgessions of his own: An Infant, that lives not to be guilty of any actual
evil, yet because Adam's seed, is thereby made a sinner, and so a child of Gods
wrath. Certainly, the Apostle would not have been so large and industrious in
affirming this Truth: But because of the evident necessity to know it, and the
great utility that may come to us, if duly improving this knowledge. To be sure
he lays this as a foundation, to exalt and magnify the grace of God by
Christ: So that they who deny this original contagion, must needs rob Christ
and his grace of the greatest part of that glory due to him.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Souls inward filth and defilement by Adam's Sin.
SECT. I.
TO explain this profound and weighty Truth, consider that expression in the
Doctrine, That we are by Adam 's disobedience, made truly and properly sinners:
For there are those that hold, we receive much hurt, Yea, some say, we are
guilty by Adam's disobedience, but not made truly and properly sinners, they
deny there is any inward pollution upon the soul of man.

When I had proceeded far in this Discourse of Original Sin, there comes
out an English Writer (Dr J. Tailor Vnum Neces.) in a triumphing and scornful
style, like Julian of old, peremptorily opposing this Doctrine of inherent
pollution by nature. He is not merely Pelagian, Arminian, Papist, or Socinian,
but an hotchpotch of all; So that as there were a Sect of Philosophers, as
Laertius reports ( Proem in fin) that was called (...), because they would
choose out some opinions from all the Sects that were: So does this man most
unhappily sometimes select what is most deformed in those several parties. With
this Writer we shall encounter as often as we find him throwing earth into the
pure springs. Although the word Sinner in some places, is as much as to be an
offender, to be obnoxious to punishment; yet in this place we must understand
more, as is to be showed.

For there are three things we are subject to by Adam's disobedience:

First, There is a participation of the very actual transgression of Adam, that
very sin he committed, is imputed to us.

Secondly, There is the guilt of this sin, whereby Adam was obnoxious to
death, and eternal condemnation, this also we partake of.

Lastly, There was the deprivation of Gods Image, the loss of that upon Adam's
transgression, so that his soul, which was before full of light, and a glorious
harmony, upon this disobedience, became like a chaos and confusion. And in this
state we are born, not succeeding Adam in the Image of God, he once had, but in
that horrible confusion, and darkness he was plunged into.

These three things then, we partake of by Adam's disobedience; but that which
is chiefly intended here, and which also my purpose is to treat of chiefly, is,
That inward filth and defilement we are fallen into by Adam 's sin.

SECT. II.
1. THerefore, when it is said, That we are made sinners by Adam, this is not
all, as if thereby we were put into a necessity of dying, or that death is now
made a curse to us: For thus much the Socinians grant, That Adam's sin did
hurt us thus far, That although death was natural to Adam even in the state
of integrity, yet it was not made necessary nor penal, but upon Adam's
disobedience, But

1. This is false, That death would have been natural to Adam, though he had
not sinned, as is to be showed. And

In the second place, Death as a curse, or as made necessary, is not all that
we are obnoxious unto by Adam's sin, for the Apostle makes that a distinct
effect of his disobedience: for he shows, That by Adam's offense sin did
first pass over the whole world, and after sin, death; So that to be a sinner
is more than to be obnoxious to death, for the Apostle distinguishes these two.

Besides, why should death fall upon all mankind for Adams sin, if so be that
that offense was not made every man's, and all had not sinned in him? Indeed
Chrysostom of old expounds this (...) by (...), or (...), subject to punishment
and death; as if to be sinners, were no more than to be mortal. Though
Chrysostom in some places seems not to hold original sin, yet in other
places he is expressly for it.

This Interpretation of Chrysostoms is received by the English Author
abovementioned, with much approbation, as if to be a sinner, were to be
handled, and dealt with as an offender; But the Apostle makes sin and death
two distinct things, the one a consequent from the other, because we are
sinners, we do become mortal. Besides, to be a sinner, is opposite to be
righteous in the Text; If then, that signify an inherent qualification,
denominating truly righteous, this must also an inherent corruption, whereby we
are truly made sinners: So that this Interpretation has no probability. Yea
from Chrystom himself on the place, we may have a Consutation of this
Exposition: For (says he) one to be made mortal by him of whom he is born, is
not absurd, but by another disobedience to be made a sinner, What congruity is
there in that? Now what justice is there that one should be made mortal by
another man's sin, unless he partake of his sin? Yea, he says, a little
before, For one to be punished for another man's sin, it has no reason, and
yet all along the Chapter affirmed, That by Adam 's sin we are all made
subject to death. This is no good Harmony.

SECT. III.
IN the second place, To be a sinner, is more than some others have likewise
explained it, which say, It Is to be obnoxious to the eternal wrath of God. This
way go Piphius, Catharinus, and Sal^^ero^s inclines much that way, though in
some things different. Yea, Arminius and the Remonstrants, they conceive, that
to be a sinner by Adam's disobedience, implies these two things, and no more:
First, That Adam 's actual sin is truly and properly made ours, (and thus
far they say the truth.) But then secondly they affirm, That this is all the
original sin we have. They grant, that by this there is a reatus, a guilt upon
all, but not any thing inherent, that has truly and properly the notion of
sin. They will therefore yeeled, That we are by nature the children of wrath;
But (say they) not for any inherent pollution, but because of Adam 's sin
imputed to us. But though these two must necessarily be granted, viz. the
imputation of Adam's sin, and the participation of that guilt thereby, yet
this is not all, that the Apostle means, when he says, We are by his
disobedience made sinners; for he intends besides this, the internal and
natural depravation of the whole man, which now in ecclesiastical use, is for
the most part called original sin. And there are these Reasons to evince it:

First, That it is more than guilt, or an obnoxious condition to eternal wrath,
because the Apostle having spoken of that (...) and (...), that judgment to
condemnation, which comes upon all, he does in this verse declare the inward
cause and demerit of this in our selves, and thereby declares the justice of
God: For, if we had no sin in our selves inherent, but that only imputed, the
justice of God would not be so manifest in condemning of us. It is true, we
must not separate or dis-joyn this inherent sin from that imputed sin, yet
we must not confound them, or make imputed sin all the sin we have by
nature. The Apostle therefore does in this Text, give a reason of that
condemnation, which has passed on all, because there is sin inwardly adhering
to all.

Secondly, To be a sinner is more than to be only guilty, Because (as you
heard) of the opposition made between the first Adam and Christ. Now the
Righteousness that we are invested with by Christ, is truly and properly a
Righteousness; It Is not only a claim or title to eternal happiness, it is not
only a freedom from guilt, but an inherent conformity to the Law of God: So
that as in and by Christ there is an imputed Righteousness, which is that
properly that justifies, and as the effect of this, we have also an inherent
Righteousness, which in Heaven will be completed and perfected: Thus by Adam we
have imputed sin with the guilt of it, and inherent sin the effect of it.

Thirdly, If this should be granted, That we are only guilty by Adam's
transgression, and not inherently sinful, then it would follow, that we had
free will to what is good, that we are not dead in sin, That the natural man
might perceive the things of God; For by this opinion, Though we are made
guilty by Adam's transgression, yet not inherently sinful. And thus while they
avoid Pelagianism in one sense, they are deeply plunged into it, in another
sense. We must therefore necessarily conclude, That original sin is more than
guilt, it denotes also an inward contagion and defilement of soul.

SECT. IV.
IN the third place, Adam's sin imputed to us, is not all our original sin;
for this is also affirmed by many, That Adam's actual transgression is made
every man's sin; So that there is but that one original sin common to all,
and every one that is born has not a particular proper original sin to
himself. This opinion, they think, is only able to withstand those strong
Objections, that are brought against the imputability of any thing inherent in
us, as truly and properly sin, while we are Infants, and cannot put forth any
acts of reason or will; Yea hereby they say, that intricate and perplexed
discourse about the propagation of original sin, will be wholly needless; so
that they conclude on this opinion, as laboring with the least inconveniences
and difficulties. Their Assertion is, That Adam 's actual sin is made ours by
imputation, and that is all the original sin we have, an Infant new born
having nothing in it, that is truly and properly a sin, it has (they say)
many things that have rationem poenae, but not culpae, a proneness to sin,
when it grows up, is not a sin, but a punishment; it is the effect of
original sin, not the sin it self.

Though this may seem specious and plausible, yet this will not satisfy the
Scripture expressions, which, besides that original imputed sin, does plainly
acknowledge an inherent one. And

First, When we have plain Texts that do assert any Divine Truth, we are
ininseparably to adhere to that, though the wit of man may raise up such subtle
Objections, that it may seem very difficult to answer them; Is not this seen in
the Doctrine of the Trinity, of the eternal Deity of Christ, of the
Resurrection of the Body, of Justification by Faith alone? In all, or most of
these points heretical heads have raised up such a soggy mist before our eyes,
that sometimes it is hard to see the Sun that should guide us: And thus it is
confessed, That in maintaining of original inherent sin, as truly and
properly a sin, there are some weighty difficulties, but yet not such as
should preponderate or weigh down clear Scripture; And therefore Austin does
sometimes confess, That though he were not able to answer all the Objections
could be brought against this original defilement, yet we were to adhere to the
clear places of Scripture. Hence it is that by Epistles he consulted with
Hierom in this case, acknowledging the many straits he was entangled in.

In the second place, there are clear Texts of Scripture, affirming this inward
pollution in all, and that as sin; for the Apostle in this discourse of his
does distinguish sin and punishment, yet both these, he says, come by Adam's
sin: If then by sin were meant only punishment, as some would have it, then
the Apostle in saying, Death came by sin, should mean, that God punished
punishments with punishments, for one punishment he should inflict another.
Thus whereas the Adversaries make it absurd, that a sin should be a
punishment of a former sin, they fall into a greater absurdity, making one
punishment the punishment of another. Besides, that it is sin inherent in us,
and not only imputed, appears by David's acknowledgement, Psalm. 51. In sin!
was I born, and in iniquity did my mother conceive me. But of this more in
time. You see by what has been said, That our original sin is more than mere
guilt, or Adam's actual sin imputed to us, it denotes withal an inherent
contagion of the whole man. Therefore it is absurdly and falsely said by that
late Writer, It may be called original guilt, rather than original sin.

SECT. V.
IN the fourth place, there are those yet who draw a more narrow line in this
matter, than the former: For when this Question is put, Whether original
inherent sin be truly and properly a sin? They then distinguish between
Peccatum and Vitium; It is vitium (say they) but not peccatum, or when it is
called peccatum, it is in a large sense, not strictly and properly; For with
these, nothing is a sin properly, but some action repugning to the word of
God; and because original sin cannot be an action, therefore (say they) it is
not properly a sin; In which sense they deny habits of sin to be peccata,
but only vitia. Though this be to play with words, seeing the same thing is
intended; And although Austin abstaineth much from the word peccatum, as if
that always did suppose a reatus, yet that is a needless scrupulosity, men may
use words as they please; Therefore Hierom thought, ( Vide Whitak. de peccato
orig. lib. 3. cap 6.) vitium was more than peccatum, contrary to Austins
notion, when he said, Some man might be found without vice, but not without
sin. They say indeed a thing may repugn the Law of God three ways; Either,
Efficienter, so the Devils and wicked men do, yet they are not sins. 2.
Materially, and thus the act of every sin does. 3. Formally, and so the
obliquity in the act only does; and this they make only truly and properly a
sin; But whether this will stand good or no, will be examined in the
Objections; As also that Assertion of a learned man, ( Molinaus, vide infra.)
That original sin is condemned by the Law, but not prohibited, it being
absurd (as he thinks) to appoint a Law for one grown up, that he should have
been born without sin. It is true, in assigning the proper notion of sin to
it, has some great difficulty; Neither does it become us to be overcurious in
this point above what is written, remembering that original sin came in, by
desiring too much knowledge. I shall therefore treat of it so far, as it may
tend to edification, not to satisfy curiosity. For when Austin was puzzled with
such doubts, he brings that known Apology, ( Epist. 29.) of one who fell into
a deep pit, and being ready to be suffocated, he cries out to one passing by,
to help him out; The man asks him, How he came in? Do not, says he, stand
disputing of that, but help me out. Thus (says he) every man being fallen into
this deep pit of original sin, it is not for us to be curiously and tediously
inquiting how we came in, but speedily seek for the grace of God, to deliver us
our.

CHAP. VIII.
That the inward Contagion which we have from Adam's Disobedience, is truly and
properly a Sin.
THerefore in the fifth place, This sin whereby we are infected from Adam's
disobedience, is truly and properly a sin, we are truly and inherently made
sinners by Adam. A man is not more properly and really made a sinner by any
actual transgressions he does commit, then he is by his original sin he is
born in: Insomuch that though an Infant knows not what he does, nor is
capable of acts of reason, when he is born, yet he is properly and formally a
sinner; and the discovery of this will make much for our humiliation, and
Christ's Exaltation.

Now that it is truly and properly a sin, appears by these Arguments:

Argum. 1. That the Scipture speaking of it, does constantly call it so, and
therefore we are not to recede from the proper interpretation, unless some
weighty reasons compel^us. What a poor and weak thing is it to deny original
sin, to be imputable to us, or to have the proper essence of evil, because
with Aristotle none are blamed for those things they have by nature, or are not
in their own power; For it is plain, Aristotle understood nothing of this
original pollution, and by his Philosophy, we must also quit many fundamental
points in our Christian says. It is enough that the Scripture speaking of it,
and that purposely does call it sin, as Psalm. 51. this Chapter of Romans, and
Chap. 7. often, It Is the Law of sin working in us: So that this want of Gods
Image, and an inclination to evil, is not to be considered, as a mere
punishment, or as a spiritual disease, and weakness upon nature, but no sin
at all; For it is as truly a sin, as an actual sin, yea, in some respects,
it is a more grievous and heavy sin than actual sins, (as is to be showed;)
For the cause has more in it, than the effect. It is from this evil heart that
all actual evils do flow.

Argum. 2. It Is truly and properly a sin, Because thereby a man is made
obnoxious to death, and eternal condemnation; The wages of sin is death, and
by nature we are children of wrath; If then for this inherent corruption, we
die, we are subject to miseries, to Gods wrath, and the curse of the Law, then
it must necessarily follow, that this is truly and properly a sin.

Argum. 3. That which is made opposite to Righteousness, that is truly and
properly sin; For not punishment and Righteousness, but sin and
Righteousness are two immediate Contraries. Now it is plain, That this inherent
corruption makes us sinners, so that we need to be made righteous by Christ.

Argum. 4. The Apostle distinguishes Adam 's imputed sin, and inherent
sin, as two sins, and so they have a twofold distinct guilt, (as is to be
showed) though some think it hard to say so. Thus the Apostle, By one man's
offense, sin entered into the world: Therefore Adam's actual sin, and that
sin which entered thereby, are two distinct sins, and differ as the cause
and the effect. By imputed sin, we are said to sin in him actually, as it
were, because his will, was our will, but by inherent sin, we are made
sinners by intrinsecal pollution.

Argum. 5. This original inherent sin is truly and properly a sin, Because
it is to be mortified, to be crucified. We are to subdue the reign of it in our
hearts, which could not be, if it were not properly a sin.

Argum. 6. It is a true and proper sin, Because by this our persons are made
unclean, so that naturally we cannot please God; We are corrupt fountains, we
are bad trees, and all this before we commit any actual sin.

Argum. 7. If Adam had stood, that which would have been communicated to his
posterity, would have been truly and properly holiness. An Infant new born
would have been called righteous in a proper sense; Therefore are we now born
sinful in a true and proper respect.

Argum. 8. This is a sin properly, Because it is against the Law of God. We
want that perfection which we ought to have; we are bound not only to actual
obedience, but to do this from an holy and unspotted principle within:
Therefore it is truly said, Original sin is in some sense forbidden in every
Commandment, and original Righteousness is commanded in all, but because this
is so much vexed by Objections, we are to speak more to it in answer to them.

We have brought in several Arguments to prove original sin to be a sin
properly and truly so, and this was the rather to be done, because of some
Papists, but especially Socinians and Arminians, with the Pelagians of old,
denying it to be so. But from Scripture it is clear, that it is as true a
sin, as actual, and therefore that division of sin into original and
actual, is of an univocal genus into its species, both the members of that
division partaking in a proper manner of the nature of sin. It being
therefore the foundation of this point, and all our fabric, which in times
shall be raised, being bottomed of this, we shall ex abundanti, offer two or
three Arguments more, to prove that it is a sin, not in a large, or a
metonymical lense, but rigidly and properly: And the first in order is,

Argum 9. From the necessity of Infants in respect of a Savior; Those Infants
that die in their Infancy, and go to heaven, cannot obtain this glorious
benefit, but by Christ: If therefore Christ be a Savior to some Infants then
they are lost and undone in themselves: But not for any actual sins:
Therefore for original. This fully demonstrates every Infant, though but a day,
but an hour old, to be truly a sinner, Why? Because even they need Christ a
Savior; if they had no sin, they needed not a Jesus; And this must
necessarily be confessed, That either Infants cannot be saved, and are not to
be accounted of the people of God, and of his Church; or if they be, that they
have sin from which they are to be cleansed and saved. The former is rarely
asserted, and therefore the later must be granted: And indeed when the
Scripture says, Matthew. 1. 21. Christ is called Jesus, Because he shall save
his people from their sins: As also Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Christ is said, to give
himself for his Church, that he may cleanse it, so as to be without spot or
wrinkle; Either we must say, Infants are none of Christ's people, they belong
not at all to his Church, or if they do, they have true and proper sin in
them, which the Scripture calls uncleanness; and it is evidently applied to
Infants in that sense, Job. 14. 4. Job. 15. 14. who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? And who is is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
Where to be unclean is made directly opposite to be righteous. Therefore when
the Pelagians of old would evade this Argument, saying, Infants needed a Christ
to bring them to the Kingdom of Heaven, though they had no sin. Austin well
urged, That they divided those two names of our Savior, Christ and Jesus,
making him a Christ, where he was not a Jesus: Certainly to be a Savior of
Infants implies, in themselves they are lest.

Argum. 10. Hence in the next place, The initial Sacrament which God has
appointed always in his Church for Infants does fully demonstrate, they have
sin in a proper formal sense, viz. Sin to be remitted, and to be abolished.
In the Old Testament, every Infant eight days old was to be circumcised, and
that Sacrament did plainly declare the sin and corruption that was in them,
though so young, for Romans 4. Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness by
Faith, which is a Gospel-righteousness by Christ, whereas if they had no sin
within, such a Seal would have been ridiculous and absurd; As for Christ, who
though he had no sin, yet was circumcised and baptized, that was upon another
account, for having voluntarily made himself subject to the Law, it beloved him
to fulfill all the Righteousness thereof, but Infants have not that
consideration; If then Infants needed a righteousness through faith, this
plainly demonstrated they had nothing but sin in themselves. besides, The
cutting of the fore skin in the Sacrament of Circumcision, did denote the
throwing away of that inherent pollution of their Natures, Deuteronomy. 10. 16.
Therefore Deuteronomy. 30. 6. God promises to circumcise their heart, which was to
regenerate them, of which Circumcision was a sign. Hence Romans 2. 28, 29. the
Apostle distinguishes of a Circumcision of the flesh, and a Circumcision of
the spirit; If then Infants needed a Circumcision of the Spirit; If they needed
that the sinful foreskin of their heart should be cut off, of which their
external Circumcision applied to them, was a Seal, it follows unquestionably,
that they had an universal pollution all over them, before they had committed
any actual sin. Thus also for Baptism, an initiating Sacrament in the New
Testament, that is to be applied to Infants; For though Anabaptists do now deny
it, yet the Pelagians of old, (though so exceedingly pressed by this Argument,
That Infants were baptized for Remission of sin, but it could not be actual,
therefore it was original, which was in them.) They never dared to deny their
Baptism, but ran to other evasions. I take it for a Truth at this time,
because so fully proved by those who have writ on this Subject, That Infants
are to be baptized; and if so, it is also plain by Scripture, That Baptism in
the nature of it, signifies Remission of sins and Regeneration, which
privileges, if Infants want, they must necessarily have that which is truly
and properly a sin.

Argum. 11. Lastly, Every Infant new born comes into the world with that, which
is truly and formally a sin, Because the Scripture makes it the peculiar
Character and property of Christ, that he was wholly without sin. Therefore
the Angel in his discourse to Mary calls him the (...), that holy thing which
shall be born of thee, Luke 1. 35. And the Apostle tells us, It behoved us to
have such an High priest, who was tempted like us in all things, sin only
excepted, Heb. 4. 15. These places do clear, that Christ only was born without
sin, and all others are polluted with it: And the reason why Christ is
exempted, is, because he was not of Adam, Quoad seminalem rationem, but
corpulatam substantiam, as the Schoolmen say, He was not the son of Adam by
natural generation, but by a miraculous conception. It is true, The Evangelist
Luke reckoning up Christ's Genealogy, ascends up to Adam, as if he were the
son of Adam, but that is because he was the supposed son of Joseph his
father, he was accounted his legal father, though he was not his natural.

The Arminians think they only have found out the true reason, why Christ
contracted not original sin from Adam, nor was not in his loins; For (say
they) Christ was not is Adam, as a common parent, and so sinned not in him,
because he did not come of a woman, by that first command, Increase and
multiply, but by a new and singular promise which God made to Adam after his
fall, viz. That the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent. But
though it be granted, That Christ was born of a woman by a singular promise,
yet that alone without the miraculous operation of the holy Ghost, would not
have cleansed the humane Nature of Christ from sin, especially if that be
true, which some learned men say, That the Virgin Mary did, in some measure,
concur actively to the body of Christ, and therefore Christ is called, The
fruit of her womb, and is said to be of the seed of David, 2 Timothy 2. 8. So that
being the Virgin Mary her self was unclean, till the holy Ghost over-shadowed
her, none could bring that which was clean out of her, but God in a miraculous
and extraordinary manner sanctifying that mass, of which Christ's body was made.
Besides, we read of Isaac, that he was born by the virtue of a singular
promise, Sarah's womb being as good as dead, yet for all that he was not free
from original sin; Therefore the holiness of Christ's humane nature, and that
in the very conception must be attributed to the wonderful operation of the
holy Ghost; If then this was peculiar to Christ alone, It follows
necessarily, That all those who in a natural manner descend from Adam come into
the world unclean, and infected with this pollution.

Thus we have laid sure and firm foundations to maintain this Truth, That
original sin is truly and formally a sin deserving eternal condemnation, as
well as actual sin.

CHAP. IX.
Objections Answered.
SECT. I.
I Am only demonstrating, that it is sin, and not what it is; Therefore I
proceed no further in the positive Explication of it, but come to answer those
Objections, that are made by all sorts of persons against this sin, whether
Pelagians, some Papists, Arminians or Socinians; And when these Clouds are
dispelled, the light of the Truth will shine more evidently. And

First, That which is a famous and obvious Objection, owned by all the
Adversaries to this Doctrine, is, The necessariness and involuntariness of it.

Object. Every sin ( say they) must be voluntary; This is a principle
ingraffed, as they conceive, in the conscience of a man: No man is to be
faulted, or blamed for that which is not in his power to prevent; And they
press that known Rule of Austins, Vsque adeo voluntarium peccatum est malum,
quod non sit peccatum, nisi voluntarium, If it be not voluntary, it cannot be
any sin at all. Now ( say they) this original sin comes upon us by natural
necessity, it lies no more in our power to prevent it, then to hinder our
being born; Shall then we conceive God willing to damn a man, especially an
Infant, for that sin which never was in his power, or his will to do? This
they think cannot be admitted. Therefore though some of them grant, Adam's
actual sin may be made ours, because our will is interpretatively in his, yet
not this inherent corruption, because this is a particular personal sin, and
so requires a personal actual will to make it a sin. And this seems to
have some plausible color, while we attend only to principles of humane
Reason, and Arguments of Philosophy: But let us see, whether it will not be too
light, if weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary. And

Answ. 1. We must understand in what sense any sin at all can be called
voluntary, and that is, not as if any man could will sin, no not he that
sins maliciously, as it is sin. This is granted by all moral Philosophers,
That no man wills sin, as it is sin, because bonum, either real or appearing
so, is the adequate object of the will: As in the understanding, that cannot
assent to any thing that is apparently false; so neither does the will choose
any thing that is manifested to be evil, as evil, but when it imbraceth any
sine, there is some deceivable good or other, which deceives the soul. Thus
Adam when he transgressed the command of God, he did not will this as a sin,
nor did he positively intend the damnation of his posterity (For we suppose
that he knew himself to be a common Parent, and that he received a common stock
for all mankind) But he willed that action, to which sin was annexed; And
thus no wicked man, when he sins, does will the damnation of his soul
formally, but consequentially by willing that to which this guilt does belong.

Secondly, Although it be granted, That every sin must be voluntary, yet (as
Austin of old answered) this sin may be called voluntary, as it is in
Infants, because their will is interpretatively in Adam, and we therefore are
all said to sin in him: Adam's will may be said to be our will two ways:

1. By way of delegation, as if we had chosen him to be our common parent, and
had translated our wills over to him, as amongst men, it is usual in
arbitrations, and then they are said to will, that which their Arbitrator has
done, though it may be they dislike it, and in this sense, Adam's will is not
our will, for we had no actual being or existence in him. Hence

2. Adam's will may be said to be ours interpretatively, God appointing him to
be the universal principle of mankind; what he did is interpreted, as if we had
done it, and the equity of making Adam's will ours, arises from the
instituting will and Covenant of God, that would have it so: But more
especially, because God then dealt with Adam in a Covenant of works, which if
broken and violated, carries condemnation to all his offspring, as appears
by the curses threatened in the Law. This original sin then is voluntary,
because committed by Adam's will, which by Gods imputation is made ours; so
that as in Adam upon his actual disobedience, the Image of God was lost, and in
stead thereof came an universal pollution of his whole man; which was in him
truly and properly a sin; So it is in every Infant descended from him.

Thirdly, If it be granted, That every sin must be voluntary, yet this also
will hold good in Infants sin; for a thing may be said to be voluntarium in
causa, but involuntarium in se. With moral Philosophers, all habits of sin
are involuntary in themselves, but voluntary in their cause; those actions that
did produce them; And thus is original sin inherent in mankind, it is voluntary
in its cause, which was Adam's sin.

Fourthly, Austin himself, who urges voluntariness in sin, yet afterward
considering how the Pelagians made use of it, he answers, That this is to be
understood of actual sin, not original sin; Every actual sin must be
voluntary, it is not necessary original sin should be personally and formally
so: Again, he limits that Rule to such sins as are merely sins, not punishments
also, but original sin is both a sin and punishment.

Lastly, He grants this to be true amongst the Laws of men, and therefore calls
it politica sententia; And no wonder if Philosophers required a formal will in
every sin, else not to make it imputable, because they were wholly ignorant of
this Truth.

But in the last place, our Divines do deny that voluntariness is requisite to
every actual sin; for there are sins of ignorance for which Sacrifices were
to be offered; And David prays to be cleansed from secret sins, which he did
not know, and if so, they must be involuntary; yea, Paul expressly calls that a
sin, Romans 7. which yet was against his will, although it may be granted, that
even in these there is some kind of voluntarines; For a thing may be voluntary
either in its cause, or in it self, or absolutely involuntary, but
comparatively voluntary, as when we do things for fear, or there may be a
mixture of voluntarines and involuntarines, which Paul seems to acknowledge
in himself, yet still the proper notion of a sin lies in the contrariety of
it to the Law of God: Therefore John defines sin by that, whether it be
voluntary or not, he does not take notice of. This is acknowledged by some
Scholastical Writers, especially Holkot (De imputabilitate peccati) answers
this Objection fully to our purpose, where he positively affirms, That sin
is not therefore imputable unto us, because it was in the power of the will,
but as righteousness is therefore praiseworthy, because it is righteousness,
so unrighteousness is therefore culpable, and damnable, because it is
unrighteousness (that is, if I may interpret him) because it is against a Law.
Hence he proceeds to show, That a thing is not righteous or unrighteous
merely because it was in the power of the will, for the will of a child would
have been made righteous by God, sine proprie motu, without any proper motion
of the child's will; And then why may it not as well be sinful without any such
voluntary motion in an Infant? So that he concludes, It Is as proper to
original sin to be naturally contracte^ or derived from another, without any
proper act of the will, as it is to an actual sin, to have the will one way
or other consenting to it: Even as in the state of integrity, original
righteousness in Infants would have been propagated, but actual Righteousness
voluntarily performed. And these things may satisfy this first Objection, yet
hereafter we shall speak more to this.

SECT. II.
THe second Objection is in effect to this sense, What is a punishment cannot
be a sin: But the deprivation of Gods Image in man upon Adam's disobedience
is a punishment; And therefore it cannot be a sin. Original sin, if not
totally, yet principally consists in the loss of that original Righteousness
and rectitude, which God made man in: Seeing therefore the privation of this
came upon man by way of punishment, when Adam transgressed; We cannot conceive
it ( say they) to be a sin also, for a punishment and a sin, are wholly
contradictory; a sin must be voluntary, a punishment involuntary, a sin is
an action, and a punishment is a passion; a sin is an evil, and God cannot be
the author of it; a punishment is good, and an act of Justice; so that God
cannot be said to permit that, but to inflict it.

This Argument (at the first view) has likewise some color, but upon the
examination of it, it will quickly vanish: I shall not answer in a large
dispute about that famous Question, Whether the same thing may be a sin and a
punishment? Or, whether God does punish one sin with another, but shall speak
as much, briefly, as is convenient for this Objection. And

First, You must know that Arminius began to dislike this Doctrine of original
sin ( Respons. ad Artic. 31.) which was mentioned in their public
Catechism, upon this very reason, because it was a punishment; and he gave this
Reason to the Minister then conferring with him, Because if God did punish
Adam's sin with this sin, then he must punish this with another, and that
other with another, and so there must be a processus in infinitum. But his
followers the Remonstrants (in their Apology for their Confession contra
Censuram) seem to disclaim this opinion, That our original corruption is either
malum culpae, or poenae, properly so called, Because where there is an evil of
punishment, it must be for some sin: But Infants have committed no voluntary
sin, and therefore could not deserve such a punishment. So that they profess
themselves to be of Zuinglius his mind, whether he retracted it, or not
afterward they are not certain, viz. That it is a morbus, a vitium, a languor,
an imbecility of nature, but neither the evil of sin or punishment. Some
Papists as Pighius, Catharinus, Mayro, and some Scotists hold, That native
pollution to be no sin, because it is a punishment, and that for Adam's sin
imputed to all, concluding on this, That it cannot be a sin, because it is a
punishment. The Socinians they say, The necessity of dying with other
punishments, is the punishment of Adam's sin; and therefore that repugnancy
and contrariety which is between the flesh and the Spirit, is from our very
Creation; The sensitive appetite rebels against the rational, from the very
first Creation of man, and would have been whether Adam had sinned or no; yea,
it was from this vehement opposition of the appetite to reason, that he did sin.

I shall consider the strength of their Objection, as it lies in this, The
same thing cannot be a sin and a punishment too. The Remonstrants affirm this,
and Papists likewise, but with some explication. And

1. It is confessed, That there are some punishments of sin, which are not
sin, as when God for Adam's disobedience has made man obnoxious to miseries,
to sickness and death; These are not sins; It comes from sin to have pain,
and to die, but they are not sins; and the Reason is, Because these are malum
natural, not morale, they are a natural evil, not a moral.

In the second place, Austin says, and he says it truly from Scripture, That
original inherent sin, which he calls concupiscence, is both a sin, a
punishment of sin, and a cause of sin; Even as blindness of mind, or hardness
of heart, is both a sin, a punishment, and a cause of further sin, ( Lib.
5. contra Juhan. cap. 3.) That it is a sin appears by the many Texts
already brought: And Austin's Reason in that place is very cogent, Quia inest
illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis; There is in it a disobedience
against the dominion of mind and spirit, therefore the Spirit lusts against
it. That it is a punishment is manifest by the event, for upon Adam's
disobedience he lost Gods Image, and so has blindness in mind, perverseness in
his will, and a disorder over the whole man, in which dreadful and horrible
estate we all succeed him: and this the Text in hand speaks to. That it is
the cause of sin is manifest, Genesis 6. 5. for from that corrupt heart of man,
it is, That the imaginations of a man's heart are only evil, and that
continually. This is a furnace red hot, which always sends forth those sparks.
Thus you see that original sin is all these three, a sin, a punishment, and a
cause of sin.

3. It is very clear and plain by Scripture, that God does punish one sin by
another; So that when a man has committed one sin, he is justly given up by
God to commit more. Amongst the many instances that may be given, I shall pitch
on two only, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. where you have a sin mentioned that God will
punish, viz. They received not the truth of God in love: A sin that is very
ordinary: But then observe how dreadfully God punishes this, God shall send
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie; This is their
punishment; a spiritual punishment, more than any corporal one; and that this
is a sin, as well as a punishment, is plain, Because to believe a lie is a
sin, to take falsehood for truth, the delusions of the Devil, for the voice of
Gods Spirit; This is a sin and a very heinous one. The other instance is Romans
1. 21. where you have the Heathens sins mentioned, Because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not. etc. There you have their punishment, to be
given up to uncleanness, to all vile lusts and sins against nature. None can
deny but these were sins, and that they were a punishment for corrupting
their natural light implanted in them, is plain, for the Apostle, verse. 24, 26,
28. says, For this cause, or therefore God gave them up to these lusts, and
verse 27. the expression is observable, That they received in themselves that
recompense of their error which was meet. Hearken to this with both ears, and
tremble all you who live under Gospel light, if natural light corrupted bring
such heavy soul-judgments, no wonder, if supernatural; And therefore if you see
men, notwithstanding all the preaching of Gods word, yet given up to be beastly
sots, or obstinate malicious men in their wickedness; Wonder not at it, for
they receive in themselves a just recompense for the abusing of that light God
has vouchsafed to them. Many other instances there are, wherein it is plain,
That God makes one sin a punishment of another; Yea, it is said, That every
sin since the first, is both a sin and a punishment; Therefore the want of
Gods Imagine us, as soon as we are born, with a proneness to all evil may be
the punishment of Adam's actual disobedience, and yet a sin in us.

4. As for the distinction assigned between sin and punishment, the one
voluntary, and an action, the other involuntary and a passion. Though there be
learned men, both Papists and Protestants, viz. Vasquez and Twisse, who
disprove this by instances, yet (if it be granted) it will not hinder or
enervate our Position, That original inherent sin is both a sin, and a
punishment also; For when the learned say, That sin may be a punishment of a
sin, they do not mean sin, qua sin, peccatum, qua peccatum, for that is,
wholly of man, but peccatum qua poena, as a judgment it is of God.

To understand this therefore, take notice, That in sin there is the
Obliquity, and the Action to which this Obliquity is annexed; Now sin in the
Obliquity of it, so it is not a punishment, but in the action or materiale of
it, to which it does adhere: As for instance, Those vile and unclean lusts the
Heathens were given up unto, were a punishment of their rebellion unto the
light; Now as they were sins in their formality, so they were only
permissive and ordinative of God; but take the Actions subtracted to that
Obliquity, which was in them, so they were efficienter of God, and he gave them
up to their lusts.

2. When God does punish one sin with another, the meaning is not, as if he
did infuse this wickedness, but only he denies that mollifying and softning
grace, which if a man had, he would resist the temptations of sin, as in this
particular of original sin; You must not conceive of God, in the Creation of
the soul, as if a man were pouring poison in a vessel, so he did put sin into
our natures, but he denies to give and continue that Righteousness Adam had,
and then our souls do necessarily receive the clean contrary, darkness for
light, Atheism for faith, disorder for order: Even as if God should withdraw
the Sun at noonday, continue the light thereof no longer to us, it would
upon that subduction be immediately dark, there needed no other cause to
introduce it: Thus it is here upon Adam's fall, God denying to continue his
Image, and original righteousness in us, original sin without any other
positive cause comes in the stead thereof; and therefore we are not, as Austin
of old well observed, to seek after the causa efficiens, but deficiens peccati,
sin has no efficient, but deficient cause.

Therefore thirdly, In this original sin we may consider that which is
peccatum, and so it is evil, and that which is poena, and so it is good; For as
you lookon it, being the deprivation of that rectitude which ought to be in a
man, so it is a sin; but as you consider it to be the denying of that
holiness on Gods part, which once we had, so it is poena, or rather punitio; The
denying of this Image o^ God at first was punitio, but this loss continued is
poena; so that the want and loss of that righteousness which once we enjoyed,
if considered on Gods part, who continues his denial of it, is a just
punishment, and a good thing ordained by God; but if you consider it as
inherent in man, who has deserved this at Gods hand, so it is an evil, and
properly a sin in him.

4. The same thing may be a sin and a punishment also, in diverse respects, As
it may be a sin in respect of a sinner, but a punishment in respect of
others. Thus Absolom's sin was a sin in respect of himself, but a
punishment in respect of David; So Parents sins may be sins in respect of
themselves, but punishments in respect of their children; and we are especially
to take heed of such sins, as are not our sins only, but others
punishments, such are passions and unmortified anger, this is a sin to thee,
and a punishment to others.

5. Every sin is a punishment, in this respect, That it brings anxiety,
terror, and fear with it, a guilt of conscience is contracted upon every sin.
Thus some expound that known saying of Austin, Jussisti Domine, and sic est, ut
omnis animus inordinatus sit sibi ipsi poena; O Lord, thou have so commanded,
and thus it is, that a soul immoderate any way, should be a punishment to it
self. Thus, as the moral Philosophers say, Virtus est sibiipsi praemium, so
peccatum est sibiipsi poena, Virtue is a reward to it self, because it brings
sweetness and comfort of conscience, so a sin is a punishment to it self,
because it brings terror and fear with it.

Lastly, The same thing may be both a sin and a punishment, both poena damni,
and poena sensus, a punishment of loss, and so every sin, in that it is a
sin, depriveth the soul of that spiritual good and glory which it ought to
have, and so is a kind of disease or death it self; and then in some sins they
are a punishment of sense, as in envy and anger. Thus when Ahitophel and Judas
hanged themselves, their self-murder was both a sin and a punishment of loss,
and sense also.

SECT. III.
IN the third place it is objected, Object.
If original inherent sin be made a distinct sin from Adam's imputed sin,
we do needlessly make two guilts, and so multiply sins without necessity, for
all the guilt that is in Adam's sin imputed, the corruption of Nature which
flows immediately from it, does not make a new sin, but makes the former more
heinous: As if ( say they) a man should by some sin lose his eyes, that act
whereby he put out his eyes was a sin, but then it is not a new distinct sin
in him, to be without eyes: Or if a Commander, who had a Castle to keep, upon
which depended the good of a Town adjacent, if he prove persidious, and give it
up to the enemy, his perfidious act at first is all the sin, if the Town
adjacent have much misery thereby, it is an aggravation of his sin, but it does
not make him guilty of two sins.

This has made some think, Answ.
That our original pollution, as distinct from Adam's sin imputed, is not a
sin; and that whenever the Fathers call it a sin, they understand it, as
connexed with Adam's sin. Thus the learned Vossius in his Pelagian History.
But the truth no doubt is on their side, who hold a twofold distinct guilt,
That Adams sin imputed to us, and that inherent are two distinct sins, though
one does necessarily imply an order to another, and the later is always to be
looked upon, as a relative to the former. Neither does that similitude of a man
wilfully putting his eyes out, make to this purpose: For when a man has lost
his eyes, there is a natural impotency ever to have them again; Neither is
there any obligation, or Law binding him thereunto: But besides the guilt of
imputed sin, we are bound to have that inherent rectitude we once lost, and
therefore being defective in that we ought to have, it is truly a sin. The
loss of a man's eyes is malum natural, this is morale; And thus Aristotle
determined that a drunken man, who committed any sin worthy of punishment, was
to be twice punished both for his drunkenness, and the other sin committed.
Thus Rivet also in the matter of Lot's Incest, which he committed while he was
so drunk, that he could not tell what he did, inclines to their opinion, who
say, That Lot's Incest was not only a punishment of his drunkenness, and so an
aggravation of his sin, but truly and properly Incest; so that he had two
sins, and was twice guilty. Some learned men do determine, That if a man commit
such a sin, upon which other sins do usually follow, though while they do them,
they cannot avoid them, not knowing what they do, yet those subsequent sins are
to be charged upon them, besides the first that was the cause of all; as murder
is to be charged, as a distinct sin upon a drunkard, though happily in his
drunkenness he knew not that he committed such a sin.

SECT. IV.
ARe we all guilty of sin as soon as we are born? This should teach us
Humiliation and Patience under the death or miseries of our Infants; we are
ready to say, Why are such poor Innocents exposed to such calamities? The
knowledge of original sin will stop thy mouth herein. When Titus the Emperor
was dying, who for his good and sweet Government was called Deliciae generis
humani, he quarrelled with the gods, because he thought they did eripere vitam
immerenti, he deserved not to die, he thought death was a wrong to him; but had
he understood original sin, he would have seen his desert of it, though he
had never committed any actual impiety. Pliny likewise if he had known this,
would not have uttered that foolish complaint, That homo was animal
infaeliciter natum, which did cum suppliciis vitam auspicari, unam tantum ob
culpam, quia natum est, that did begin his life with miseries, and punish us
for this fault only because he was born; No, The Scripture would have informed
him, it was, because he was born in sin. This is the rise and spring of all
man's calamity.

SECT. V.
I Shall at this time conclude this famous and noble Text, wherein we have the
Doctrine of original sin so evidently asserted, notwithstanding all the fogs
and mists that some have endeavored to bring upon it. The remaining work is to
dissolve some further Objections, that are laid in the way as stumblingblocks,
which, when removed, we shall proceed to the practical improvement of it.

In the next place therefore, Object.
this is thought a powerful weapon against this Truth, viz. It cannot be truly
and properly a sin, because it is not against any Law. The Apostle makes
contrariety to the Law, to be of the essence of sin: If therefore Infants
newborn, or before they are born, are not under a Law, then they are not
capable of any sin; and truly it has a seeming absurdity to say, Infants are
commanded by Gods Law, to be born without sin, seeing that is no more in
their power than to be born. This consideration did press that learned Divine
Molinaus (Enodatio graviss. Quaest. de peccato origin. page 130.) to
acknowledge, That no such Law was upon Infants, and therefore he says, That
the Law does condemn original sin, but not prohibit it. But this seems very
strange, For how can the Law condemn a thing, but because it is against it? And
how can it be against it, but because it does prohibit? If therefore the
meaning of that learned man be, that original sin is not immediately and
proximely forbidden, that is readily granted, for so only actual sins are, but
mediately and remotely, both the habits of sin, and original, must
necessarily be prohibited, if they be condemned. The learned Vossius also
affirms, That original sin is not forbidden by the moral Law, though he
confesses it is by the natural Law, which was at first in the Creation of man,
but that primordial and original Law is the same for substance with the moral,
though differing in some respects.

To the Argument therefore we say,

First, Answ.
That as this original sin is voluntary, voluntate causae, which was Adam's
will, so it is also against a Law which was enjoined Adam; For although Adam
had not a Law upon him in respect of the beginning or original of the
righteousness he had, he being created in that, and so was not capable of any
Law, yet in respect of the preservation and continuation of this for himself
and his posterity, so he had a Law imposed on him, and therefore violating of
that Law, we in him also did violate it: You see then this original sin is a
transgression of that Law which Adam was under, viz. the continuation of the
righteousness he was created in, both for himself and his posterity.

Secondly, Even by the moral Law, or the Decalogue, this original corruption is
forbidden. The Apostle Romans 7. shows, That he had not known lust to be a
sin, had not the Law said, Theu shall not lust: So that as the Law forbids
actual lusting, thus it does also the principle and root of it; for the Law is
spiritual and in its obligation reaches to the fountain, and root of all sin,
it does not only prohibit the sinful motions of thy soul, but the cause of all
these: Even as when it commands any holy duty, to love God; for instance, it
requires that inward sanctification of the whole man, whereby he is enabled to
love God upon right and enduring grounds, otherwise if this were not so, the
habits of sin would not be against Gods Law, nor the habits of Grace required
by it, as therefore it was with Adam his actual transgression, was directly and
immediately forbidden by the Law of God; but that habital depravation of the
whole man, which came thereupon, was forbidden remotely and by consequence:
Thus it is with that native contagion we are born in, and this should teach us
in every sin we commit, to think the Law does not forbid and condemn this
actual sin only, but the very inward principle of it; say to thy self, Alas I
should not only be without such vain thoughts, such vain affections, but
without an inclination thereunto; Therefore mark the Apostle reasoning, Ephesians.
4. 22, 24, 25. When he had exhorted them to put off the old man, that is
original sin, and to put on the new man, which is the Image of God,
immediately opposing that; See what he infers thereupon, Wherefore put away
lying, they must leave that actual sin, because they have in measure subdued
original sin. Thus it holds in all other sins, put away pride, earthliness,
profaneness, because the old man is first put away in some degrees, But oh how
little do men attend to this? They think of their actual sins, they say, This,
I have done, is against Gods Law, but go no deeper, they do not further
consider, but God forbids and lays his axe to the root, as well as the
branches and the fruit.

Thirdly, A sin does not therefore cease to be a sin, because the Law does
not now forbid it, it was enough, if it were once forbidden, and contrary to
Gods Law, otherwise we might say, That all sins which are past, are no sins;
for the Law does not require, that what has been done, should be undone again,
or not to be done, for that is impossible ex natura rei; If therefore ever
original sin has been under a Law prohibitive of it, that is enough to make
it a sin, though now it cannot be helped. Hence Almain the Schoolman has a
distinction of Debitum praecepti, and Debitum statuti (which other Schoolmen
also mention) now they apply it thus, To be born without sin, is not (say they)
Debitum praecepti, it does not become due by any precept or command, but it is
Debitum statuti, that is, God had first appointed such an order, that whosoever
should come of Adam, should be born in that righteousness, which Adam was
created in, and was to preserve for himself and his posterity; so that though
there be no direct Praeceptum divinum, yet (they say) there is Ordinatio
divina, that we should have been born without sin. Although we need not run
to this, because it is now against the moral Law of God, as you heard proved.

SECT. VI.
ANother Objection is from the Justice, Object.
Equity and Righteousness of God, as also his Mercy and Goodness; How can it be
thought consonant to any of these attributes, that we should be involved in
guilt and sin, because of another especially they urge that Ezekiel. 18. 18,
19. where God says, The child shall not bear the sins of his father, and the
Lord does it to stop their profane ca^il against his ways, as if they were
not equal, because the fathers did eat sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
were set on edge. The Remonstrants are so confident, that in their Apology,
cap. 7. they say, Neither Scripture, nor Gods Truth, nor his Justice, nor his
Mercy and Equity, nor the Nature of sin will permit this.

To answer this: Answ.
First, It is not my purpose at this time to enter into that great Debate,
Whether the sins of parents are punished in their children? And it so, How it
stands with the Justice of God? It is plain, That in the second Commandment it
is said, That God being a jealous God, because of Idolatry, he will visit the
sins of such persons, to the third and fourth generation. The same likewise is
attributed unto God, Exodus 34. 7. when his glorious Properties are described,
experience also in the destruction of Sedom and Gomorrah, as also in the
drowning of the world, does abundantly testify this; For no doubt there was in
those places, as God said of Ninevch, many little ones, that did not know the
right hand from the left, and so could not have any consent to the actual
iniquities of their Parents. To reconcile therefore that place of Ezekiel. 18.
where God says, The child shall not bear the iniquity of his Father, with
those former places, has exercised the thoughts of the most learned men
variously, endeavoring to unty that knot. Though I find some of late,
understanding that of Ezekiel, only for that particular occasion, as it did
concern the Jews, in their particular judgment of Captivity, who complained
that for their fathers iniquities they were transported into a strange Land; So
that they think it not to be extended universally, but limited to that people
only, and at that time, and that alone to that Land of Israel, because they
were driven from their own Country: But whether this Interpretation will abide
firm or no, it is certain that the Text does not militate against our cause in
hand. For

1. As has been showed, There is not the same reason of parents, since Adam 's
fall, as of Adam; for he was a common person, and therefore Christ and he are
compared as the two fountains, and universal principles of all; For which
reasons also it is that the Apostle does here call him (...), The Type of him
that was to come: Insomuch that we may easily see, why there is a difference
between Adam and other parents; So that although the child dies not for his
parents sins, yet he does, and most for Adams. Learned men use to illustrate
our being in Adam, and sinning in him, (for which our punishment is just and
due) by that of the Apostle, Heb 7. 9, 10 where Levi is said, to pay Tyths to
Melchizedech long before he was born, because he was in Abrakams l^ins: And
although it may be granted, that there is some disproportion, Abraham not being
such a common parent to Levi, as Adam was to all mankind; yet Sceinus his
exception is very frivolous. The Apostle says, he uses that diminutive
phrase, (...), as I may so say, which does demonstrate, that it was not a
proper saying. To this we answer, That if you do regard Levies actual paying of
Tyths, as it he had an actual existence, then there was some impropriety, which
made the Apostle use that phrase, but not in regard of the truth of his paying
in a moral consideration. Thus when we say, All sinned in Adam, we may well use
that phrase, and speak thus, As we may so say, we did all actually will Adam's
sin, we did all actually transgress that Commandment; Thus it is a diminutive
expression in relation to our actual existence, but not to our sin; For by
Gods Covenant we were looked upon, as in him. Though I must consess that is a
very absurd and forced expositiof Catharinus (Opusc. de pece^t. orig) whose
opinion is, That all our original sin is Adams actual sin made ours, and
refers that expression of Christ to Nathaneel, Joh. 1. 49. When thou wast
under the fig tree, I saw thee, to Nathaneels being in Adam, while he did eat
of the forbidden ^ruit, which some say was a fig tree: Howsoever it be, you see
that place in Ezekiel does not reach to our case in hand.

2. That place will overthrow the Socinians themselves also; For they grant,
That by Adam 's sin, death though otherwise natural, is now made necessary
and penal, insomuch that we actually die, because of Adam's disobedience. And

3. That place in Ezekiel, it is commonly interpreted thus, The child shall not
bear the Fathers siane, viz. if he be innocent, and not guilty of it, as well
as his Father. I do not discuss, whether this be the full interpretation of
that place: But if it be so, then our punishment, because of Adam, has no
injustice in it, because by that actual transgression of Adam, we are made
sinners, as well as he, and so have in our selves, though new born, a just
desert of all the wages of sin. The Infant dying because of that particular
inherent sin, which is in him, so that it is both Adams and his own, in several
respects.

In the second place, to answer this Argument, take notice, That though it be
of the will of God, that Adams sin is made ours, for if he pleased, he might
have done otherwise; Yet we are not to say as the Remonstrants, That God
imputes this sin to mankind, merely because he will, as if the thing in it
self were indifferent: Even as God appointed things should be unclean in the
Old Testament merely and solely from his will, because he had appointed so, for
it is from his Justice also, such is the hatred of God against sin, and
withal dealing with Adam according to the Covenant of works, the curse of
that, if violated, would descend from parents to children, as appears in
Moses his curses, pronounced against those that should not continue in the Law,
it was to them and their children. Therefore some learned men expound that
passage of Gods saying, The child shall not die for the iniquity of his Father,
which is also mentioned Jer. 31. 29. to belong to the Evangelical Covenant, but
according to the Legal Covenant, the child must suffer with the father, and
this interpretation they urge, because v. 31, 32. presently follows the
declaration of Gods Evangelical Covenant, he will make with his people: But let
this prove as it can, this we must conclude of, That God does not impute Adams
sin to us, merely because he will, but because of his Justice also inclining
him thereunto. So that the Remonstrants speak too slightly of it, as if it were
only a dispensative imputation to make way for grace through Christ. But I
shall hereafter have occasion to speak more fully to this particular; as also
to the other Objections, which may again frequently interpose themselves.

Use. Of Instruction, from all these subtle and specious Arguments against it,
and that in all ages, we may see the subtilty and craft of Satan, who would
gladly have this Doctrine wholly buried; for man is naturally proud and
self-righteous, hardly brought to be thought so miserable a sinner: If
therefore any Doctors shall arise, that shall likewise plead for such a
supposed innocence and freedom, How welcome and suitable is this to flesh and
blood? Therefore look upon this Doctrine, as a Fundamental Truth, specially in
reference to the practice of godliness, and acknowledge it the good hand of
God, that as there have been any, subtle and bold to deny it in any age, so he
has raised up eminent and choice men, in the same ages, to propugn this
Doctrine; especially do thou often compare thy foul nature with the pure rule
of Gods Law; Be not like the Elephant, which they say, before it drinks,
bemuddeth the waters that it may not see his own deformity.

CHAP. X.
A Third Text brought to make good this Fundamental Point about Original Sin,
improved and vindicated.
SECT. I.
JOE 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
THough other pregnant Texts in the New Testament may be brought to confirm
this Necessary and Fundamental Truth about original sin, yet I shall forbear
them, till I come to the handling of the Nature of it, or what it is; For that
is not true of the Remonstrants, which say, Original sin can be proved only
by two or three places; although if there were no more, it is certain, that out
of the mouth of two or three such Divine Witnesses, the Doctrine about it may
be established.

I come therefore and select one or two places out of the Old Testament, that
so you may see this Truth was always acknowledged in the Church of God, and
that even in the times of the Old Testament, where divine light and knowledge
was not so plentifully communicated, yet there was full and clear evidence
about this.

The Text I have read is deservedly both by the ancient and later Writers
esteemed a powerful place, to prove our natural uncleanness and sinnefulnesse.

To understand it therefore consider, That whereas Job in the former verses had
asserted the vanity and mortality of man, comparing him to a flower, which
though sweet for a while, yet is presently cut down. Thus all the comforts, all
the joys thou have in this world, they are but a Poesy, which have a pin
within them to prick thee for the present, while thou smellest on them, and
will quickly wither away. But because flowers also have some substance and
sweetness for the present, in the next place he resembles our life to a
shadow, which as he said was nigrum nihil, a black nothing; There is both
emptiness and transitoriness in all these things; and hitherto all the Heathens
have arrived, They all perceived these miseries and troubles we are obnoxious
unto: But then in my Text, we have the cause of this, which they were either
totally or in a great measure ignorant of; God then did not make man like a
shadow thus at first; but sin brought this corruptibility into the world, and
that not actual sin, but original; If there had been none but this, yet all
these miseries would have fallen upon mankind.

In the words therefore we have a full and clear Description of that original
sin or birth-sinne we are guilty of; Yea the Text says, It is impossible, it
should be otherwise: So that the Scripture, and those that deny original sin
are diametrally opposite one to another: They say, there is no such
birth-sinne: The Scripture says, It cannot be, but that there must be such an
original contagion.

In the Text, we have the Interrogation, and the Answer; The Interrogation is
therefore put to show the vehemence and peremptoriness in affirming this truth,
it is more than if it had been barely said, That none can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean; The meaning is, That every man being by nature unclean, it is
necessary that every one born of man therefore should be unclean.

By uncleanness is meant sin, as appears by comparing this with Chap. 15.
14. Chap. 25. 4. where you have this expression used, and it is opposed to
righteousness, and to be justified before God. It is therefore an uncleanness
not natural or bodily (as the Pelagians of old would have wrested it) but
spiritually opposite to Righteousness, and such as depriveth a man of
Justification: Yea, the word unclean, is applied to signify heinous pollution:
Hence the Devils are so often called unclean spirits, so that the Devils and
mankind are in this alike.

The Hebrew Preposition Min, is by some understood of mutation, by others of
origination, but one is necessarily connexed with the other; of mutation in
this sense, Who shall give (for so it is in the Hebrew) that is, Who can make
pure, him that is impure? Who can change that which is naturally filthy? No man
by his free will, or power can; or else it is for the originals, and that does
seem the most genuine, for Job is speaking what belongs to every man naturally,
and thus the sense is, From that which is unclean, none can bring that which is
clean: Even as our Savior says in another case, None can gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles, Mat 6. 16. or as the Apostle James, A sweet
fountain cannot send forth bitter streams, so neither can a bitter fountain
sweet streams, Jam. 3. Now when it is said, Of an unclean thing cannot come a
clean: Hereby Adam in his first Creation is excluded, for he was made holy, and
came not out of that which was unclean; and also Christ is hereby excluded, for
although he is said to be born of a woman, yet that was in a miraculous and
extraordinary manner: As for the Dispute about the Virgin Mary, whose freedom
from original sin, some have with great vehemence maintained, that seems
not any ways probable, as is to be showed. It is also good to observe the
emphatical expression in the word, Out of unclean thing, which implies, That
man by nature is all over sinful, in mind, will, affections; and the whole
man, it is the unclean thing; even as Christ was called the (...), the holy
thing, because he was in every particular altogether holy.

In the next place, you have the Answer, Not one. Some read this
interrogatively. Do not thou alone? as speaking to God, so the Chaldee
Paraphrast. These make the sense to be, That God alone, and no other can
deliver out of this uncleanness. Hence also some make that expression, Who can
forgive sin, but God alone? to be an allusion to this place. For, as Aquinas
says, De frigido facere calidum est ejus quod per se calidum est, etc. Of cold
to make hot, is the effect of that which is hot of it is own nature: So of
unclean to make clean, is the proper work of him, who is in his own nature
pure, and essentially holy. The Septuagint they read it differently from
others, who is free from uncleanness, nor a child, though he be but a day old.
That which is most genuine is to take it negatively, as our Translators do, and
hereby is demonstrated, That there is not one in all mankind born in a natural
manner, but he is sinful, and polluted: This same is expressed more fully,
Chap. 15 14. The Socinians give in their exceptions to that place; but I shall
defer the consideration of them, till we take that to treat on, which does
evidently show, That man is so naturally sinful, that he drinks sin down
like water.

From the Text observe, That every one by birth and natural descent is
spiritually unclean and sinful.

SECT. II.
A Threefold Uncleanness.
TO inform us of this Doctrinal Truth, we may first take notice of a threefold
impurity or uncleanness.

1. That which is corporal and bodily, man being born so loathsomly, that even
the Heathens have abhorred themselves, because of it, when they came into the
world: it did so debase them, that even the highest did refuse those
hyperbolical honors, which their flatterers would have put upon them. In the
sixteenth of Ezekiel you have this bodily filthiness at large described, and
thereby is represented the uncomely and impotent condition of the Church of
Israel in her Infancy, to promote her own welfare, no more than a little Infant
new born is able to help it self; Yea this place is allusively brought by some
to describe our spiritual uncleanness: The child comes not more naked and
polluted into the world bodily, then the soul does spiritually, being denuded
of the Image of God, and full of spiritual ulcers and fores, like a Job full of
botches, like a Lazarus all over spiritually ulcerous, though few take notice
of this, and lay it to heart.

2. There is a typical and ceremonial uncleanness, such as was appointed in the
Law, of which there were two sorts, one more heinous, and so did cast a greater
and longer separation from the company of men, and the public worship of God:
The other less, and so more easily purified, and that in a shorter space; and
the former kind of uncleanness, We read Levit. 12. That a woman upon her
bringing forth a child was guilty of: Insomuch that in the legal dispensation,
every woman that brought forth a child was to be separated so many days, as
unclean to be kept from the public worship of God, and at last to bring an
offering for to cleanse her. Now it is disputed, why God appointed such a law
about a woman's uncleanness, and purification in bringing forth children.
Although some, as Bonfretius and Grotius make it to no more signification, than
of other impurities that were legal, yet Austin of old, and Calvin are very
positive, that this was to inform them of the cursed and sinful estate,
that the child was brought into the world with. The father and mother (says
Calvin) by this ceremony were taught with what humiliation and sorrow they
ought to look upon that natural pollution, the infant was born in, and in his
comment on the place, he insinuates two Answers to those two Objections, that
are made against the typifying of original sin thereby, as that this
uncleanness and so purification, did belong to the child as well as the mother.
For the Objectors say, It could not denote original sin, because it related to
the mother only, and not to the child; but Calvin says, it belongs to both,
and that by Luke 2. 22. it may be proved. And Grotius prefers those Copies
which have the plural number, (...), their purification, relating to the child,
as well as the mother: But Junius does more probably think, it belonged only to
the mother. Another Objection is, That the mother was longer unclean by a
female, than a male, which if it were for original sin, would argue the
female had more of it, than the male. To this, Calvin gives this conjecture,
That therefore there might be so much spiritual signification to the female,
that so the defect in circumcision, the females not being to be circumcised,
might be made up this way. But the difference of time is commonly attributed to
a physical consideration; Howsoever these Answers be, yet Junius, as well as
Calvin does acknowledge, This was done, because of original sin, though he
had actual sins also. As for the Virgin Mary, who offered according to the Law,
when her time of purification was expired, Luke 2. 22. if it did relate to the
child, as well as the mother, that did not argue Christ to be born in sin, no
more than circumcision argued a duty of putting off the foreskin of the heart
in him, but it was to fulfill all righteousness, he being now made subject to
the Law. Not that such a ceremonial uncleanness is still under the
Gospel Times, as some ignorant superstitious women think, for all such
ceremonial Rites were abolished by Christ's coming into the world, only in the
general, that Ceremony in the Jewish Church, did teach us the nature of
birth-pollution.

3. There is a moral uncleanness, and that is sin, which is a pollution of
the soul, making it abominable and loathsome in the eyes of God; and this
uncleanness is upon every Infant, though but a day, or an hour old; and of this
uncleanness the Text speaks.

SECT. III.
A Comparison between Man's Moral Uncleanness, and Levitical Uncleanness.
TO understand the foulness of it, let us first compare our spiritual
uncleanness with the worst legal uncleanness in the Law, even that of Leprosy,
and we shall see, how fitly they agree. For

1. The legal unclean, especially the Leper he was to keep aloof off from all
men and company, even his wife and children (only such as were to provide
necessaries for them) and to cry, He was unclean, unclean. In what a sad and
miserable condition did such an unclean person apprehend himself to be, no body
to come near him, none to have any civil commerce with him, but to sit pining
and mourning alone? Thus ought every man in this original pollution, for by it
he has deserved to be deprived of every comfort, he is now cursed by the Law
with all curses thereof, so that no creature in the world might give him any
creature; The whole creation began to groan, as soon as man fell: Hence it is,
that though we truly say, Every man, though in his natural condition has a
civil right to the comforts he enjoys, yet he has not an holy and sanctified
right, being not in Christ, so that what is our due by nature, as soon as we
are born, is hell and damnation, the wrath and anger of God. Though we should
beg here as Dives did in hell for a drop of water, it might be denied us; Oh
miserable then and unclean man, who is thus to stand aloof off from all
creatures and comforts, saying, Woe unto me, for I am unclean.

2. The legal unclean person did make unclean every thing that be touched,
whatsoever he laid his hand upon, that was presently made unclean; yea, as
appears, Hag. 2. If he did touch any holy thing, he made that unclean, the
holy thing did not sanctify him. Now is not this too true in every man, who is
by nature spiritually unclean? The Apostle speaks this with evident conviction
to all that will not wilfully shut their eyes, Tit. 1. 15. Unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure. So then what a loathsome Leprosy of
sin is upon every one by nature, that he defiles all he medleth with; if he
eat, he makes it unclean eating; if he work, he makes it unclean working; yea,
if he prays, if he hears, he makes it unclean and impure praying and
hearing to him: Oh what a thunderbolt should this be in our ears! What a
polluted wretch am I, that in all places, at all times, in every thing I do,
have this uncleanesse upon me!

The uncleanness every man is born in, has been partly considered, and a
comparison made between every man in his natural estate, and the ceremonial
unclean person in the old legal constitution. Now that we may be the more
affected with this lamentable and woeful condition we are all born in: Let us
consider it absolutely in it self.

The uncleanness in the Text is not a natural or ceremonial, but moral
uncleanness; For although with us in our common speech, and sometimes in the
Scripture, uncleanness is taken more strictly for the pollution of the body in
any unlawful way, yet it is here taken largely for sin in the general, and
therefore to be righteous is the opposite to it, as Job 15. In this sense it is
used, Zech. 13. 1. where a fountain is said to be set open for sin and
uncleanness. Seeing therefore the holy Ghost does pronounce us all by nature to
be unclean, yea so unclean, that no power either humane or Angelical can make
us clean; but it is God alone, that makes grapes to grow of these thorns, or
rather turns thorns into vines: Let us examine what is comprehended in this
expression unclean.

SECT. IV.
What is comprehended in this Expression Uncleanness.
FIrst, There is evidently declared the loathsome and abominable objects we are
to God, as soon as ever we have a being. We are unclean, that is, filthy,
loathsome, abominable, such as the pure eyes of God cannot behold with the least
approbation: Hence Job 15. 16. man is called abominable and filthy, so that no
Toad or noisome creature can be more irksom and loathsome to our eyes, than we
are to God, while abiding in this natural pollution: God indeed when he made
man at first, saw that all was exceeding good: If Adam had continued in his
integrity, then there had the clean been brought out of the clean, then man
would have been glorious and comely, thirsting after, and drinking down
righteousness like water, then the imaginations of the throughts of his heart
would have been holy and good, and that continually; but now we are become
sinful, and thus polluted of our own making; It is from us, that of once clean
we are made unclean; For although none but God can make the unclean clean, yet
Adam by the liberty and mutability of his will, did quickly make the clean
unclean: Oh then how deeply should this thought pierce us, that we came into
the world abominable and loathsome in Gods eyes! The object of his wrath and
displeasure, finding nothing of that holy Image in us, which was at first put
into us: Oh consider how great, and glorious, and powerful that God is, to
whom thou art thus loathsome! If all men and Angels should abhor thee, it is
nothing to this, that God abominates thee.

Secondly, This also implies, That we should be loathsome and abominable in our
own eyes; that when we are grown up, and shall be truly informed upon what
terms we come into the world, we should be as so many spiritual monsters in our
own eyes. Job, you see here, though so godly a man, and who had such a glorious
character given him by God himself, yet because of this does loath himself. The
ulcers and sores upon his body, for which he sat abhorring of himself upon the
dunghill, seem not more to affect him then this spiritual vileness and
loathsomness that is upon him. It Is observed, That though Herod and others have
kept a festival Commemoration of their birthday, yet we never read that ever
any godly man did so, (though Calvin says, it is mos vetustus, and so not
vituperabilis, because of the good use may be made of it) in the Scripture.
Indeed the day of their death has been celebrated and called their birthday,
because then, and never till then did they begin indeed to live; And if
Solomon, merely because of the miseries and vexations that do accompany this
humane life, Eccles. 4. 2. praised the dead above the living, and he that never
had been, that was not born, better than both: How much rather will this bold
true, if we consider, how man is born in a sinful estate, and cannot but sin
all the day long? Certainly, we may say, it had been far better thou had
never been born, if not new born, if not delivered from this native filthiness,
as if thou must have a being, better have been any brutish creature than a
man, better be a Toad, a Tiger, a Serpent, than a man, if not washed by the
blood of Christ from this uncleanness; For although we have cause to bless God
that he made us men, rather than bruit beasts, in respect of natural
considerations, yet in a theological sense, because they are not subject to
hell and damnation, as man is, therefore their estate is not so miserable. For

In the third place, In that men is born unclean, thereby is proclaimed, That
he comes into the world upon far more dangerous and wretched terms, than
other creatures do. The bruit creatures they are not unclean; God does not
loath and abhor their young ones; They are not by nature the objects of his
wrath, neither are they exposed to eternal torments, but thus is the sinful
offspring of all mankind; Thou can not see a worm crawling on the ground,
thou can not hear a snake hissing in the hedge, but thou may think these
are not as bad as I am, these have no sin in their natures, God is not angry
with these, as he is with mankind: For though History report of a devout man,
who seeing a Toad fell a weeping, because of the goodness of God, who had made
him a man, and not that Toad, yet upon the consideration of original sin, he
might as deeply have mourned, because he was worse, than that Toad. Thou can
not see the fatted beasts driven to the slaughter, but thou may say, They
are happier than I am, for they are killed, and there is an end of them, but I
am a miserable and wretched man, born in sin, and if not cleansed from it,
must necessarily perish to all eternity. Luther, while in the deeps, troubles
and sorrows of heart, because of his sin, had this passage, Oh quoties optavi
me uunquam fuisse hominem! He went from place to place, his heart aching and
throbbing, crying out, Oh that I had never been a man! So that by sin a man
is not only made like the beast that perishes, but worse, for the beast
perishes totally, but so shall not he.

Fourthly, In our natural uncleanness is declared our manifest similitude and
agreement with the Devils themselves, that we and they are now under the same
consideration, for man is naturally unclean, and the Devils have this
appropriated attribute all along the New Testament for the most part, that they
are the unclean spirits. The Devil is an unclean spirit, and man is unclean in
body and spirit; Hence because of this natural pollution, we are all by nature
the seed of the Serpent; The Devils is said to rule in us, and we are therefore
under his Kingdom, for being not born in a state of grace, but of sin, we are
therefore under his dominion; and upon this supposition even in Austin's time
there were exorcisms used at the Baptism of Infants, which was not a Scripture
institution, no more than giving honey and milk to the baptized child, which
was very ancient, and yet now laid aside even by the Roman Church it self, that
amongst other Rites in Baptism, they had this of exorcismes and insufflation,
by which they signified, not that the child was possessed bodily with the
Devil, but that it was under the power of him. This Austin instanceth in, to
Julian the Pelagian, where he tells him, Ipse a toto orb exufflandus esset, si
huic exufflationi qua princeps mundi ejicitur for as contradicere voluist is; I
mention not this to allow or commend that Ceremony, for it was an absurd one,
though brought into the Church ^etimes, for it had been happy, if the Church
always had contented her self, with the pure, plain and sole institutions of
Christ, but to inform you, what even the ancient Church thought about Infants
new born, that they were wholly under the power of the Devils. Yea the Heathens
had some kind of confused knowledge about this (as in time may be showed) for
they had a custom with them of expiating and cleansing of their Infants, as
being unclean.

Fifthly, This expression of uncleanness, does denote our unfitness and
unworthiness to come into Gods presence, or to perform any holy duty, no more
than a person full of his vomit or loathsomness, or a man with the noisome
plague fores, is fit to come into the presence of a great King: As the legal
unclean person, was not to come into the Temple, or to touch any holy things;
And this was typified in Adam, when he was cast out of Paradise, and flaming
swords set to keep him out, all this denoted, That God had excommunicated Adam,
and (as it were) all mankind in him, so that now they have no fitness or
decency, no worth or suitableness to any holy duty. And certainly, this should
deeply humble us, yea at this our hearts should tremble and move out of their
places, to consider, that though none need God more than we do, none have more
need to pray incessantly to him, yet such is our pollution, that we are not fit
to pray, or to draw nigh to God, yea, our duties, while performed by us, in
this our original condition, are a provocation to God, and they become new
sins; for if no clean thing can be brought out of an unclean, then no clean
prayer, no clean holy duty can come from thee, who art unclean. It is true,
though we are thus polluted, it is our duty to pray; by our original Apostasy
we are not freed from Gods commands, we are bound to pray, and to pray with as
holy and heavenly frame of heart, as Adam in his integrity, but though it be
our duty, yet we have lost all power and ability: Yea, and besides this, there
is an unfitness and unworthiness, even as when the frogs crept into Pharaoh's
chamber: And to this Bernard a^luded, when he called himself, Ranuncula repens
in conspectu Dei, How dare such a loathsome frog as he, creep into the presence
of so holy a God? Certainly, if the Angels, though without any such blemish,
yea not having the least spot, do yet not cover their feet, but their faces,
the noblest part (as it were) because of the glorious and holy Majesty of God,
how much more must sinful and unclean man? Isa. 6. When the Prophet had beheld
God in his glory, he cries out, though a regenerated man, Woe be unto me, for
I am of pollutea lips! This made him afraid to make mention of God: How then
may every natural corrupt man, cry out, Woe be to me, for I am not only a man of
polluted lips, but also of a polluted mind and heart!

Sixthly, This title of being naturally unclean, makes us to be in the most
immediate (...) to God that can be. To say, Man that is born of woman had been
miserable, frail, subject to dangers and outward evils, would not have denoted
any immediate opposition to God, but calling him unclean and unholy; This
shows, that we are by nature in direct contrariety to what he is, for he is
by nature pure and holy, yea it is that glorious Attribute which makes all
others glorious, because his Wisdom is holy Wisdom, because his Power is holy
Power, therefore it is admirable Wisdom and Power; Hence those Angels, Isa. 6.
of all the Attributes of God single out that to celebrate, when they cry out,
Holy, holy, holy; Now man is born unclean and unholy, being herein directly
contrary to God: So that though man be endowed with many natural perfections,
yet this original uncleanness defiles them all; he has reason, but it is
unclean reason; he has an understanding, but it is an unclean understanding;
he has a will, but it is an impure and unclean will; So that of all the several
Arguments, which man has to humble him, he may choose out this, as the chiefest
of all, crying out, unclean, unclean, unclean, why is it that upon the
discovery of this contrariety to God, we do not more abhor our selves?

Seventhly, This attribute of uncleanness, proclaims the absolute necessity
of Gods grace, and of Christ's blood, for these only can make us clean. Did a
man truly consider, how it is with him in regard of his birth-estate, he would
tremble to stay an hour in it, he would neither eat, drink, or sleep, till he
be delivered out of it; for being wholly unclean, he can never, while so, enter
into the kingdom of Heaven: So that as no legal uncleanness was removed, but
with some sprinkling and washing, much less can any moral uncleanness be washed
away without Christ's blood; therefore that is said, to cleanse us from all our
sins, 1 John 1. 7. and without shedding of blood there is no remission of
sin, Heb. 9. 22. Oh then this natural uncleanness should teach us highly to
esteem Christ's blood, for we could never weep water enough, though our heads
were fountains to wash us, nothing can get out this spot, but Christ's blood!
and this every Infant, though but a day old needs; Christ's blood then must
purify us, else we perish, and with this also there is requisite grace, both
justifying and sanctifying, for these also tend to the cleansing of us;
Justification that is partly a cleansing and awashing away of our iniquities,
as God promises, Zech. 13. 1. He would set open a fountain for sin and
uncleanness; a fountain, so that there is plenty and fullness of grace to wash
away this filthiness. Thus also Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness. Besides this, there is
also grace sanctifying necessary, and this is a formal internal cleansing of
us; so that because of this work of grace, we are made clean, yet not so, but
that we need some washing daily, as Joh. 13. 10. He that is washed, needs not
save to wash his feet, for this uncleanness will not in this life be quite
taken away, but is like that of the Leprosy, which stuck so to the walls of the
house, that though it were scraped off, yet it would rise again, and so could
not be removed, till the very house was demolished. Thus while death lay this
house of clay in the grave, there will always be some uncleanness adhering to
thee.

Use. Of Instruction. Can none bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Then this
shows, That those who from the youth up, have lived civil, ingenuous and
chaste lives, are not to rest in this, for thy nature is foul and loathsome, as
well as of all others, though thy life may be cleaner. The Snake has a
glistering skin, though she has a poisoned body: Thus thou have a defiled
soul, an heart full of filthiness, though thy outward conversation be
unblameable. Certainly, if an Infant but a day old be thus unclean, and needs
the blood of Christ to cleanse it: Do thou flatter thy self with ingenuity
and civility? Thou have not less sinnefulnesse and guilt in thee, than a child
new born, yet that is a child of wrath, till cleansed: Oh then be (...) of thy
condition.

SECT. V.
Objections against this natural Uncleanness, answered.
THe Doctrine of our natural uncleanness and sinfulness by traduction from
Adam, being established out of these words, we come to answer some Objections;
That as the shaking of the Tree, makes it root faster and deeper, so doubts
about it, when cleared, may the more confirm us.

The first Objection, which I shall bring, seems in express terms to deny any
such uncleanness, at least to Infants of bellevers: So that it should seem,
Because believers are clean; Therefore their children are brought clean out of
them. The place that gives fuel to this Argument is known, being much vexed and
discussed in these days, especially in the controversy about Poedobaptism, it
is 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy; where
it is positively said, That the children, though but of one believing Parent,
are not unclean, (...), that answers the Hebrew word in the Text; yea the
contrary to this is affirmed, That they are holy.

I shall not range into all the controversal Disputes about this point, only in
the general we may say, That this place does not at all contradict my Text, for
Job says, That by nature none can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, but
if God by grace does it, that does not oppose Job; yea, we told you, some
render the later clause interrogatively; Art not thou he alone, viz. that can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Certainly, though no humane or Angelical
power can thus sanctify, yet God can; For, what do all those glorified Saints
in Heaven made perfectly holy, but proclaim this, for they were once unclean,
and impure, but now God has made them fully clean without the least spot or
blemish? Thus there is no contrariety between these two Texts, for one speaks
of what we are in a natural way, the other, what some are by a gracious and
supernatural way.

But yet in the second place, It Is good to have a more through discussion of
these words, though not so amply, as polemical Divines have enlarged it; and
the rather, because the Lutheran Divines do boldly and peremptorily charge it
upon the Calvinists, as if they denied original sin in all the children of
believers; And although they cannot be ignorant in what sense the Calvinists do
explain this holiness of believers children, yet they constantly calumniate in
this point, as if something would stick upon them howsoever.

Therefore in the third place, there are three or four Interpretations, that
are competitors about this Text.

The first is of those, who by uncleanness do mean a spurious bastard-brood,
and by holy, a civil sanctity, as it were, that is true and legitimate; as if
the Apostles meaning was, in answering the doubt of a believer, Whether they
might continue in marriage with unbelievers (for in Ezra's time, all the Jews
that had so married, were commanded to put away their wives?) did inform them,
that their marriage would be lawful, otherwise their children would be
bastards, but they were legitimate. Thus the Lutherans generally some of the
Ancients are alleged also, and Musculus upon second thoughts comes off to
this Interpretation, confessing he had formerly abused it against Anabaptists.
But this might easily be rejected, if it were our business in hand: For,

1. Marriage even among Heathens, is true lawful marriage, and their children
are legitimate; for although their very marriage, as all things else are
unclean to them in a sanctified sense, because they are impure, yet marriage in
it self is a lawful thing to them, so that it is not to be judged fornication.
And

2. The Apostles argument would not conclude, for those that doubted, whether
their marriage was lawful, would also have doubted, whether their children were
legitimate, and therefore this could not be an argument to prove their marriage
lawful.

In the second place, There are some who understand this holiness of inward
true inherent purity; so that their judgment is, that the Apostle says, all
godly parents have holy children, and if it fall out otherwise in some cases,
they say, it is an indefinite, not an universal proposition, which if it be
true, for the most part, it is enough; but experience seems to confute this;
Neither is believer here taken strictly, for one who did in a saving way
believe, but largely for one that did profess faith in Christ, and therefore is
opposite to an Infidel; Now all that were not Infidels, were not presently,
truly godly, though they did believe, as some are said, Joh. 2. To whom yet
Christ would not commit himself.

3. Therefore there are those, who understand this of Heathenish uncleanness
and Idolatry, and so they say, One born of believing Parents, is free from
that, especially, if we do regard the hopes that are in his education:
Therefore some expound this holiness only in respect of the designing and
dedicating of such unto real holiness. Hence Estius he understands this, De
filiis adultu, of children grown up; For it may be supposed, That if the
unbelieving husband will not leave his wife, but abide with her, that therefore
he will yield to her, and let her educate her children in the faith of Christ,
and be no enemy, or opposet, thereunto; and 1 Pet. 1. 3. is brought to expound
this place; so that they make this holiness to be only quoad spem, and
disciplinam; For the believer may by an holy godly life, gain both the
unbeliever and the children; and thus Hierom is said to answer a Question
proposed by Paulinus, concerning this place; Lapide consents to this, and
opposes Calvin and Beza concerning this foederal holiness, as also Tirinus on
the place, because the Church is not like a civil Commonwealth, but is a
supernatural Society, says Lapide; This is no Reason; for though it be a
supernatural Society, yet God may give what spiritual privileges he pleases
to them and theirs; and therefore Salmeron, he understands this holiness of a
Church-holiness, that they are esteemed children of that; And in his Comment on
that place, brings that Promise, which the Calvinists use to do, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed.

Hence the fourth and last Interpretation, which is justly deemed most genuine
and orthodox, is to expound this holiness of a Covenant and foederal holiness,
of a Church-priviledge, That being born, though but of one believing parent,
yet they are not unclean, as Heathens and their children, who have no right or
claim to any Church-Ordinance, but are holy by the gracious favor and Covenant
of God, who takes in believers and their seed. When parents are taken into the
Church, their children also, or Infants are received in with them, not that all
are made internally holy, only they have a right to Church Membership; and
therefore the initial sign ought not to be denied to them: So that the hope of
godly education, or to be candidates of the true faith, is not enough, but both
are requisite, as Tertullian of old mentioned, both seminis praerogativa, and
institutionis disciplina: Though therefore children of both, or one believing
parent, are in this sense clean and holy, yet by nature they are unclean;
neither does this external holiness deliver them from inward contagion; Yea,
suppose some should be regenerated in the very womb, as John Baptist was, yet
this Text holds true in him; for he was by nature unclean, he had not the
holy Ghost by natural descension from his parents, for then all children should
be so sanctified, but it was Gods grace and power that made him clean of
unclean; John Baptist therefore was conceived in sin, and by nature a child
of wrath, but the grace of God made him clean, yet not totally and perfectly,
as if no uncleanness was in him; for even Job, though in so high a degree
sanctified, yet speaks this truth in the Text, to himself as then, and at that
time considered, not to what he was once before his conversion, but even in
that renewed estate he was in, if God should cast his eyes upon him, and judge
him with severity, he would find much uncleanness adhering unto him.

The second Objection is propounded by Socinus, Object.
who says, It cannot be conceived, that one actual transgression of Adam
should infect the whole nature of man, one Act cannot contract an habit of
sin: So then he says, It Is impossible that one sinful act, should all ever
defile Adam, and make him totally sinful, much less that it should infect the
whole nature of man. And the Remonstrants they pursue this Argument, If ( say
they, Apolog, pro Confessione exam. Cens. cap. 7. page 85.) that one act of
sin did expel all grave in Adam, then it did it, either quatenus peccatum, as
it was a sin, and if so, then every little sin the godly man commits, much
more gross sins would cast him out of all grace, would root out the seed of
God in him, which yet ( say they) the Calvinists will in no wise endure; Or it
comes so from some peculiar ordination, and divine appointment of God; If so,
they bid us, bring out that order, and manifest such an appointment, that one
sin only should deprive a man of the whole Image of God, when now one sin
does not, or cannot extirpate the habit of grace; but every godly man has
sin and grace also in him.

To this many things are to be answered: Answ.


First, That it is a vain and an absurd thing to give leave to our humane
reasonings, that such a thing cannot be, when the event discovers it is so. It
is plain, That upon Adam's actual transgression he was deprived of the Image of
God he was created in. Adam therefore having lost that spiritual and
supernatural life, we need not curiously dispute, how one stab, as it were of
sin could kill him; Certainly, even the least sin is present poison, and would
kill immediately, if Gods grace did not prevent.

Secondly, That one sin may suddenly deprive the subject of all Grace it
has, appears plainly in those Apostate Angels, Did not the first sin?
which was in them a thought or an act of the will, (what it was it is disputed)
Did not that immediately throw them out of their divine and blessed
Habitations? And by that one and first sin, was not a glorious Angel made
immediately a black Devil? It is true indeed, We cannot say the Devils have
original sin, In this sense, As if because when the first Angel sinned, all
the rest sinned in him, as if all their wills were bound up in him; No, They all
stood upon their own bottom, they all sinned personally and voluntarily by
their own actual transgression, though happily it might be by imitation and
consent to him that first sinned; yet for all this, we see plainly, that in
every Apostate Angel, one sin was enough to deprive him of all the good he
had, and to fill him with such inveterate enmity to all goodness, That the
Devil, though of such natural light in his conscience, yet is not able to do
one good work, or have the least holy thought.

Thirdly, Sin does expel grace, both formally, or (as some call it)
efficiently and meritoriously also; it expels it formally, as darkness does
light, as diseases do sickness, or death, life, and meritoriously deserving,
that God should deprive us of all holiness, and deny any further grace to us.
The Remonstrants they call this folly and absurdity, to say, Sin expels grace
actually and meritoriously also; For if it do actually, what need is there of
meritoriously? If a man actually put out his eyes, it is absurd to say, he
deserves by that to have them put out; Or if a man wilfully throw away his
garments, making himself naked, that he deserves to be naked. But these
instances do no ways enervate this Truth; for in that sin does thus actually
and meritoriously also deprive us of grace, we see the hainousness of it; one
shows, how sin is in it is own self like poison that presently kills, and the
other, how odious it is to God, that if it did not of it self deprive us of
spiritual life, yet it does so provoke God, that because of it, God would not
continue his daily grace to us. Besides, though sin does formally expel the
grace that is inherent in us, yet Gods grace without us, his preventing
cooperating and continuing grace, without which we could not abide a moment in
the state of grace, that it chaseth away meritoriously only; So that Adam in
his first sin did both chase away the Image of God in him, and deserve, that
God should withdraw his assisting and preserving grace, without which he could
not have continued in his good estate; yea, sin does so meritoriously expel
grace, that could Adam by his own power, have immediately recovered himself,
and instated himself into the condition he was in, yet he deserved for that
former transgression, that God should have outed him of all: As they say, A man
that hangs himself, if it were possible (...) to live presently again, the
Law would adjudge him to death, for (...) of himself.

Therefore in the last place, you see, why every sin in a godly man, no,
(...) it be a gross sin, does not immediately deprive him of all grace, as we
see it did in Adam, and the Apostate Angels: Not that sin in it self would
not do so in them, as well as in those, but because God entered into a gracious
Covenant and Promise with every believer through Christ, to perpetuate his
interest and union with him; so that if he fall, he shall have grace to recover
himself, neither will every spark of grace within him be suffered wholly to be
extinguished, although in Adam there was a peculiar reason, why his sin did
infect all mankind, because (as Aquinas says well) Adam in quantum fuit
principium (...) naturae habuit rationem causae universalis ex Adam, in that he
was the (...) of mankind, was a kind of universal cause, and so by his corrupt
act, all mankind was corrupted.

Use Of Instruction, That nothing more is requisite on our part to be partaker
of Adam's sin, and to be made unclean, but natural generation and descent
from Adam; It Is true, there is on Gods part also a Covenant, and his
imputation, otherwise Adam's sin would not have been ours, no more than other
parents; but on our parts, there is no other way of conveying it, but by
natural descent from him, whereas to be in Christ, and to partake of his divine
benefit, there is required a supernatural work upon us, a spiritual insition,
and incorporation of us into Christ, but to be a sinner in Adam, our very being
born in a natural way, before we are able to know, or will any thing, or to
discern the right hand from the left, is enough to entitle us to it: Oh then
with what shame, sorrow and holy confusion of face, should we think of this our
natural uncleanness! How vile and loathsome should we be in our eyes? Oh the
distance and contrariety that is between so holy and pure a God, and thou an
impure and unclean wretch? If our righteousnesses are menstruous rags, how
abominable then is our real iniquity?

CHAP. XI.
A Fourth Text to prove Original Sin, opened and vindicated.
SECT. I.
PSALM. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.
THe sad occasion of this Psalm is plainly set forth in the Inscription, David
a godly man, after Gods own heart, a Prophet, a King, who had been exercised
under several afflictions, yet when arrived to peace, plenty and ease, falls
into those foul sins of Adultery and Murder, which later was contrived with
much deliberation, subtilty and bloodiness; Yet after some security in this
sin, being admonished and awakened by Nathan, he repents and bitterly
bewaileth these transgressions. So that in this Psalm is described a form for
every Prodigal, repenting, and coming home to his Father; That David was only
in a Lethargy, or Apoplexy, not quite dead, that the seed of grace, was not
wholly extinct in him, is sufficiently proved against the Arminians by the
Orthodox, though they deride, saying, The Calvinists Elect persons; The Albae
Gallinae filii, They may do any thing, commit any sin, and nothing will hurt
them; But this is to mock and scorn at that special Covenant of Grace in
Christ, made to those who are given to him by the Father; and indeed such
present meltings and remorse of soul, upon Nathan's admonition, without any
rage, malice, or fury at the Prophet, who rebuked him, intimate, That the seed
of grace was not quite overcome within him.

For the Psalm it self, that is Supplicatory, wherein David wrestleth in
agonies with God, for to obtain mercy, using several Arguments; One from the
Mercy, yea the multitude of mercy, that is in God: Another is, from the
confession and deep sense of sin in his soul, he acknowledges it, and it is
always before him, he never puts it out of his memory: Whither soever he
goes, and whatsoever he is doing, still his sins are (as it were) so many
Devils appearing in horrid shapes before his eyes.

A third Argument is in the Text, from the aggravation of those actual sins
he committed; They were not sins to be considered merely in themselves, but
from the cause and root whence they sprang, even the defiled and corrupt nature
that was in him, it being not so much those actual, though so horrid sins
that made him so guilty, as that they did flow from such a defiled fountain
within him: Thus he aggravateth those actual sins from the root and cause
within him; For although he was regenerated, and so delivered from the dominion
of original corruption, yet it was with him, as with Paul, The Law of sin did
still war within him against what was good, sin dwelt in him still, and was
apt upon all occasions, like a Dalilah, to betray him into the hand of the
Philistims, into the power of some soul transgressions. It is true, some have
thought, that David speaks this to extenuate and lessen his sin; as if his
meaning had been, Lord, it is true, I have committed these foul sins in thy
sight, but they are the more venial and pardonable, because my nature is
corrupt: It is no wonder, that being not an Angel, or a man in integrity, as
Adam, or confirmed in grace, as the glorified Saints in Heaven, but the son of
corrupted Adam, that I have thus tumbled into the mire; And it cannot be
denied, but that this truth of our original corruption may be pleaded, both for
aggravation to punish, and also for pity to spare: Hence Genesis 6. 5. Because
every imagination of man's heart, was only evil, and that continually, therefore
God was provoked to destroy the world by water, yet Chap. 8. 21. the very same
thing, viz. because a man's heart is evil from his youth, is made a reason, why
God will not smite the earth again with such an universal destruction. But it
seems far more genuine and consonant to David's scope in this Psalm, to
make these words by way of aggravation; for David is humbling and debasing of
himself, desirous to justify and clear God, and therefore he lays himself as
low, as possibly he can, digging into the very bottom of all that evil, which
cleaves to him.

In the words therefore we may take notice of the matter confessed and
acknowledged with the introductory particle, to make it more considerable. It
is not an ordinary or slighty thing, he is to speak of, and therefore he begins
with that note Behold; This Ecce may be called the Asterisk of the holy Ghost,
or the Bibles nota been; It is commonly used either for Attention or
Admiration, or Caution; and it may have this three fold use here.

For Attention, the matter being of so great concernment, so little minded or
believed by most men; for David does not speak here, as if it were his
particular case alone, as if none were born in iniquity, but him; yea, rather
it follows, if David, though so eminent and godly, so blessed by God, was yet
born in sin, then no doubt, but all others are likewise.

Again, It may be a note of Admiration, because of the mysterious depth of this
original defilement: It is unsearchable, and the more he considers of it, the
more amazed and astonished he is; even as David at another time, Psalm 19.
cries out, Who can understand his errors? when he has set himself with his
whole might, to sathom all the evil that is in him, yet he cannot do it: Hence
Jeremiah, Chap. 17. speaking of this deceitful and desperate heart of man,
because of the native pollution of it, says, Who can know it? And then
answers, It Is God alone that searches it, God knows the depth of all that
evil, which no man can reach unto.

Lastly, It may be a note of Caution [Behold] and take heed of it; for you see
even David betrayed by it, the holiest man that lives may quickly and suddenly
fall into the most enormous sins, because of it.

In the next place, we have the thing it self confessed, and that is in two
things.

He was shapen in iniquity, that is the first: The word is many times applied
to the bringing forth of a child, and does properly signify to bring forth
with sorrow and pain; Hence some render it, I was born in iniquity, and so it
may very well be translated; but if we render it shapen, or formed, then this
shows, That in the forming of the parts of the body, and disposing of it for
animation, even then sin is there initially; so that before we are born, as
soon as that mass is enlivened and animated, so soon is original sin in a man.

The other expression is, That in sin did his mother conceive him; The Hebrew
word is, Did warm him, or nourish him; So that this does not so much relate to
the actual conception, as to that whole time his mother did bear him in the
womb, all that while this pollution was in him. Hence Aquila renders it, (...),
and the Septuagint (...), which though happily some might think it a fault in
writing, (...) for (...), yet there are those, who make that word emphatical,
and say, it is a metaphor from the fowl, that is called (...), Pica, the Pie,
that while building of her nest, is with great vehemence and violence compiling
of it, breaking off the tops of twigs, and flying from place to place, as if
some inward heat did transport her* Others make it to signify a multiform
appetite from the color of that Bird. Well, howsoever it be, the word from the
Hebrew is to be extended to that whole time, the child is carried in the
mothers womb, being warmed and nourished there; So that not only, as Ambrose of
old, we may say, Hominis ortus in vitio est, a man's birth is in sin, but as
soon as ever that mass of flesh in the womb is informed and animated, so soon
it becomes sinful. It is true indeed, the parts of the body are along while in
forming before the soul be inspired, and sin is not properly, till the soul
be united to the body, yet because that is part of man, and tends to it, we may
say sin is there inchoatively and imperfectly, because it is in tendency to
make up man, and therefore it was, that Christ being to be man, yet without sin
was to be conceived by the holy Ghost, The very corpulent substance of the
Virgin Mary, from which his body was made to be purified and sanctified by the
holy Ghost.

In the last place, we are to take notice, in what he is thus formed and born,
and that is also in two words, Gnanon and Cheteh, both which signify, that
which is truly and properly a sin: So that it is plain, when David could have no
actual will, or consent of his own, yet then sin and iniquity was truly in him.
This place therefore is very evident and unanswerable, to prove this, That all
by nature are born in sin. The Fathers of old, before Pelagius arose did
expound it so, and generally after Austin's time; The Popish Interpreters also
grant it a clear place to prove this truth; yea, the Rabbis, they from hence
also prove original sin, and say, it has seven names in the Old Testament,
whereof two that they mention, viz. The foreskin of the heart, and an heart of
stone, are without all doubt applicable unto it: Insomuch that they who deny
this Doctrine, in these days, must needs wilfully put a veil before their eyes.

It is true, Clemens Alexandrinus has a passage, which would seem to enervate
the force of this place, which the late Writer ( Vnum Necessar. page 395.)
makes use of, (...), ( Lib. Stromat. 3. sub finem) But how much his Authority
herein is to be regarded, appears, in that he makes the mother (here spoken
of) to be Eve; he calls his mother Eve prophetically, says he (though
happily that does hint something of original sin, else why should he name
Eve?) Besides, this Clemens does a little before, speak strangely, which
passage is taken notice of by the same Author, as speaking home to the point,
(...), etc. Let them tell us, Where an Infant did fornicate? Or how he who had
done nothing could fall under the curse of Adam? Bellarmine thinks these
words to be the objection of Heretics, and truly those books do well deserve
their name (...), for there is so much confusion, we can hardly tell when the
Author himself speaks, Some would interpret him of actual sins, but the
learned Vossius (Histor. Pelag. l. 2. pars 1. page 160.) says Clemens did not
fully understand the Doctrine of original sin; And Coccius (Tom. 2. Artic.
2.) the Catholick-Treasurer, from this very passage, says, Clemens parum
novisse de peccato originali videtur.

SECT. II.
Objections against this Ineerpretation answered.
BUt let us hear, what is objected by the Adversaries to this clear Text? And

First, Object.
It Is said by some, That David does not here bewail his own sins, but his
parents in begetting of him, as if it was their sin he acknowledged, and not
his own.

This is a miserable shift; Answ.
for, First, David was not begotten in adultery, neither were his parents
unlawfully joined together, therefore in begetting of him, they did not sin;
for Marriage is honorable, if the bed be not defiled with adultery or
fornication: Therefore if Adam had stood in the state of integrity, there would
have been procreation of children; so that his parents did no more sin in
this, than in eating and drinking, or any other lawful act God has appointed,
either for the propagating of the species, or conservation of the individuums.

Secondly, This Interpretation is against the scope of David in this Psalm,
which is to debase himself, to humble himself from what is in him, not what is
in others, I will acknowledge my sin, and my iniquity is always before me,
and so proceeds to bewail this original, or birth-sinne.

Thirdly, If his intent were to confess his parents sins, why does he instance
in his mother only, In sin did my mother conceive me? he says, Why did he
not rather bewail the sin of his father, who begat him, who would have been a
greater sinner, than his mother in that matter, if it had been a sin at all?

Lastly, It Is good to take notice of what Bellarmine, in the Exposition of this
place, though a Papist says, It may be to prevent such calumnies, that future
Heretics would raise, the holy Ghost in this Text would use no word, that did
properly and directly relate, either to the fathers begetting, or the mothers
immediately conceiving thereupon, for this might seem to attribute sin to
that, which yet is of Gods appointment, and if true, would necessarily condemn
marriage, as unlawful; So that as he observes, The words do properly relate
to the child afterward in the womb, when formed and nourished there.

A second Objection is, Object.
That what David says here is hyperbolical. Thus the Socinians, David does not
mean, as if he were born in sin, but does hyperbolically aggravate his
wickedness, in that from his youth up he did quickly fall into sin, and they
compare two places (amongst others) Psalm. 58. 3. Isa. 48. 8. where wicked men
are said to be transgressors from the womb.

But first, Answ.
Seeing David intends to abhor himself before God, there is no sense to go
from the plain words, otherwise we might turn all the Scripture into tropes and
figures, and so make no certainty at all; And as for those two places, they
confirm this Text, for how come men to be transgressors from the womb, to act
wickedness so early, to sin as soon as ever they are able to act any thing?
Does not all this demonstrate they were born in sin?

Besides, those places are not parallel, for they speak of the facts of men
after they come out of the womb, and in such particulars an Hyperbole may
sometimes be admitted; but this relates to David while in the womb, and not to
his own action, but that wherein he was passive.

Lastly, Another Socinian says, It is to be understood of actual sins, and
not original, because it is in the Plural number, whereas original sin is but
one.

The Answer is, That indeed the Septuagint, and so the Vulgar Latin they
render it in the Plural number, in iniquities, etc. And thereupon it is disputed
by the Schoolmen, Whether original sin be one or more sins? Some (though
but few) say, it is more; Others, but one, and excuse their vulgar Translation,
by saying, that it may be called sins in the Plural number, because it is the
root of many, or because it being a body of sin, has (as it were) many parts
and members. Arminius likewise among other exceptions, brought this against
their public Catechism, because it said Innata peccata in the Plural number,
as if original sin were many sins: But all this Discourse is needless, for
in the Hebrew it is in the Singular number, and so our Translators render it,
and that David cannot mean actual sins, is plain, because he was born in this
iniquity he speaks of.

The Text then thus vindicated, first from the note of Attention, [Behold.]
Observe,

That the true Doctrine about original sin, is not only to be believed, but
we are diligently to meditate and consider about it. Behold (says David) I was
shapen in iniquity, etc. Great will be the spiritual advantage, that a man may
reap hereby; but because I have mentioned many already, I shall now name but
two or three, not spoken before.

SECT. III.
More Advantages accruing from the Belief and Meditation of this Truth.
FIrst, The man who deeply considers this, he will dwell at home much, he will
much commune with his own heart, his work will be to rectify his inwards much,
to attend more to his heart-work. Alas, how many do you see spend all their
time in disputes about Religion in quarrellings and strises about this opinion,
and that opinion, whereas if he were deeply sensible of that wound upon him by
original sin, and how his whole soul is out of order, he would presently give
over that way, he would say, I have greater work in hand, I have more necessary
business to do? If a man's house were on fire, he would give over any disputes
he had with his neighbor, and go presently to quench that: Thus the Pilot,
when the ship is leaking, he would not attend to needless cavils, and in the
mean time endanger his Ship; when thy vitals, yea thy very heart is diseased,
thou stand disputing about the cure of thy fingers end: Oh how much better
were it to be searching into your hearts, diving into the bottom thereof, then
to spend thy time in useless disputes!

Again, If we did meditate on this more, We should not be so forward to judge
and censure others, to be always meddling and talking of other men's
infirmities, for we should find our selves had enough at home.

Yea further, When men accuse in, and falsely slander us, charging this sin
and that upon us: Now though we may bless God, and appeal to him, because of
our innocence, yet we must withal confess, that if men knew all that stirs
in our hearts, as God does, they would abhor us: Even Socrates, though an
Heathen, when he was told, how men reviled him, What would they say (says he)
if they knew all by me? Certainly, there is no godly man, but loatheth himself
more in Gods eyes, because of this depth of pollution within him, then all the
world can despise him, he is not more abominable in their eyes, than he is in
his own.

Lastly, Hereby a godly man is provoked to walk with more fear and trembling,
because David had this birth-sinne, therefore was he so quickly tempted to
those foul sins: Oh if God should not keep down, and by his Spirit mortify
this body of sin, it would quickly break out even into a very hell! Thou
carriest therefore fit fuel for any sin: Oh take heed, how thou come near
the fire of any temptation!

SECT. IV.
That we are sadly to bewail, and be humbled for this Original Sin all our
days.
WE have considered the Introductory Note of Attention, and now proceed to the
Matter it self, which is acknowledged and bewailed, and that is not actual
sin, but the sin he was born in, even before ever his understanding and
will, could put forth any actions. David (you heard) does not here hyperbolize,
he speaks it not only humiliter, but veraciter; he does in his own experience,
find that there is such a bitter root within him, such a corrupted nature, that
if left to it self, would immediately flame out into most accursed and
abominable transgressions; and therefore David knowing, that the strength of
all his actual sins, was in this original, he composeth himself in a serious
and affectionate manner to acknowledge that.

That we are not only to believe there is such a thing, Doct.
as original sin in us, but we are sadly to bewail it, and to be humbled for
it all our days.

This is not a truth in Divinity, that is to be in a speculative and barren
manner disputed about, but we are to descend into our own hearts, to discern
the woeful and bitter effects of it upon our own souls: It is not enough for
you to be of this says, That there is original sin, that it is the sin of
the whole world, and of all mankind; but you are to take notice of, and to be
affected with that particular and proper original sin, which difsuseth it
self over thy whole man: Original sin is not one sin, as there is one
Sun, and all partake of the light of it; or like one Intellectus agens, as
some Philosophers dreamed, but it is in every man that comes in the world,
every one that is born has his birth-corruption; Therefore David does not
speak of that iniquity, as it is in all mankind, but as it was his case, and as
he was born in it: So that it is not enough for you to say, It is true, it
cannot be denied, but that all are sinful by nature, but you must come home to
your own heart, you must take notice of the dunghill and hell that is in your
own hearts. Thus the Apostle Paul, as you heard, Ephesians. 2. 3. to humble them,
and to lay them low, that they might see all the unworthiness and guilt that
was upon them, before the grace of God was effectual in them, he informs them
not only of those gross actual impieties they had walked in, but that they
were by nature the children of wrath. But you may see this duty of bitter and
deep humiliation, because of original sin, notably expressed in Paul, Romans 7.
most of that Chapter is spent in sad groans and complaints, because of its
still working and acting in him. It was the sense of this, made him cry out, Oh
miserable man that I am? Do thou therefore flatter thy self, as if there were
no such law of sin prevailing upon thee, when thou shall see Paul thus sadly
afflicted because of it? Therefore it is, that I added in the Doctrine, We are
to bewail and acknowledge it all our lives; For Paul speaks here (whatsoever
Papists and Arminians say to the contrary) in the person of a regenerate man,
Who did delight in the Law of God in the inward man; and yet these thorns were
in his side, Original sin in the lusts thereof, was too active, whereby he
could not do the good he would, and when he did, he did it not so purely and
perfectly, as he ought. So that you see, the work you are to do, as long as you
live; Though regenerated, though sanctified, you are to bewail this sin, yea
none but the truly godly do lay it seriously to heart. Natural men, they either
do not believe such a thing, or they have not the sense of it, which would
wound them at the very heart; Therefore we read only of regenerate men, as
David, Job and Paul, who because of this birth-pollution, do humble themselves
so low under Gods hand. But let us search into this truth.

SECT. V.
Which needed not to have been, if Adam had stood.
FIrst, Take notice, That had Adam stood in the integrity God made him in, had
he preserved the Image of God for himself and for his posterity, then there had
been no occasion, no just cause for such self-abhorrency, as does now
necessarily lie upon us. Adam did not hide himself, and run from God, neither
was he ashamed of himself, till sin had made this dreadful breach; In that
happy time of man's innocence, there was no place for tears or repentance; There
was no complaining or grieving, because of a Law of sin hurrying them,
whither they would not, then Adam's heart was in his own power, he could joy
and delight in God, as he pleased, but since that first transgression, there
has become that grievous ataxy, and sad disorder and confusion, under which we
are to mourn and groan, as long as we live, for as we necessarily have
corruptible bodies which will be pained and diseased, as long as we are on the
earth, so we have also defiled and depraved souls, which will always be
matter of grief and sorrow to every gracious heart, so that they must
necessarily cry out, Oh Lord! I would fain be better, I desire to be better,
but this corrupted heart and nature of mine will not let me! The Socinians, who
affirm, That Adam even in the first Creation, had such a repugnancy planted in
him, and a contrariety between the mind, and the sensible part, that this
prevailing made him thereby to commit that transgression, do reproach God the
maker of man, and make him the Author of sin: So then this necessity of
confession, and acknowledgment of our native pollution, was not from the
beginning, but upon Adam's transgression.

SECT. VI.
We must be humbled for a twofold Original sin, and seek from Christ a
twofold Righteousness.
SEcondly, When we say, That original sin is to be matter of our humiliation
and sorrow, we must understand that twofold Original sin heretofore
mentioned, viz. Adam 's actual sin imputed to us, and that inherent or
in-dwelling sin we are born in; For seeing the guilt of both does redound upon
our persons, accordingly ought our humiliation and debasement to be; Yea,
Piscator thinks David confesses both these in this verse: In the first
place, In iniquity was I shapen, or born, as he interprets it, viz. in Adam's
iniquity; And in the second place, in (or with, for so some render it) sin
did my mother conceive me, which is to be understood of that imbred pollution;
howsoever it be, here it is plain, Romans 5. that the Apostle debaseth and
humbles us under this twofold consideration, first, That we all sinned in
him, there is the imputed sin: And secondly, That by his disobedience we are
made sinners, there is our birth-sin: So that those who would hunger and thirst
after Christ, finding a need of him, must seek for a twofold benefit by
Christ, answering this twofold evil; First, the grace of Justification, to
take away the guilt of all sin, and then of Sanctification, in some measure,
to overcome the power of it, that as we have by the first Adam imputed and
inherent sin, so by the second Adam imputed and inherent righteousness.

SECT. VII.
The Different Opinions of Men about Humiliation for Original Sin.
THirdly, There are those who make such an humiliation and debasement, as David
here professes altogether needless and superfluous, but they go upon different
grounds: For,

First, All such who do absolutely deny any such thing, they must needs
acknowledge all such confessions to be lies and falsehoods, that it is but
taking of Gods name in vain, when we confess such a thing by our selves, if it
be not indeed in us: For if Adam should have said, Behold, God created me in
iniquity, and formed me in sin, would not this have been horrible lying to
God, and blaspheming of his Name? No less is it; If their Position be true,
That we are born in the same condition and estate that Adam was created in,
derogatory to God, and a bold presumptuous lie, for men in their prayers to
acknowledge such a sin dwelling in them, when indeed it does not; So then, if
this be true, That we are not born in original sin, then David does in this
penitential Psalm, fearfully abuse the Name of God, speaking that which is a
lie, and a most abominable untruth; But whose forehead is so hardened, as to
affirm this? Yet all such who deny there is any birth-sinne, they must also
say, there is no confession to be made of it, neither are we to humble our
selves because of it.

Secondly, Others there are, that though they hold it to be a sin, yet (they
say) it was absolutely forgiven in Baptism; and if it was then totally
forgiven, what necessity is thereof confession and acknowledging it afterward?
That original sin was forgiven to all that were baptized, was the opinion of
Austin, who yet did more earnestly propugn this Doctrine of original sin,
than any of the Fathers: Yea in his time, these two seemed to be Catholic
Doctrines of the whole Church, viz. an universal efficacy of Baptism in all
Infants baptized, to purge away original sin, as also the necessity of
damnation of those Infants which died without it. The Papists also, they
generally conclude, That this original sin is forgiven to all baptized
persons; and Socinus in his Exposition of this place, approves this Position,
That it is not to be confessed; Yea, it cannot be denied, but that some learned
Protestants, adversaries both to Papists and Arminians, as Davenant, Ward, have
affirmed also, That all baptized persons have their original sin forgiven
them, and so dying in their infancy, must without doubt be saved.

Thirdly, There are others, and such are the Remonstrants, who affirm, That
upon Adam's fall. God entering into a new Covenant of Grace with fallen mankind,
by Christ our Mediator; Therefore it is ( they say) that none is damned for
original sin, no not Heathens or their children, but that by the second Adam,
viz. Christ, there is taken off all that guilt which came by Adam's
transgression. So that in this respect, they make the children of Heathens, and
believers all alike: So that by these men's Positions, though going upon several
grounds, we see it affirmed, That original sin is pardoned, and that before
there is any confession, humiliation and sorrow for it; Whether indeed, though
it be pardoned, some of the forementioned Authors will not hold it necessary
to confess it, and to beg for the pardon of it, may well be doubted, (I say,
some of them) For how profanely and arrogantly does a Remonstrant Adolphus
Venator, in his Apologia contra Ministros Dordracenos, speak in this matter, as
he is cited by Sandaus the Jesuit (for I have not the Book it self) in his
Hydrus Hollanda, lib. 2. cap. 20. page 268.) where, when from the diversity of
opinions about original sin, he concludes, There is scarce any certainty
about it, adds, Etiam hinc intelligi potest, nihil esse, quia nemo in se
reperiat, morsum conscientiae, vel accusationem suiipsius ob peccatum ante
quinquies mill, and quingentos annos in Paradiso comissum; Ego saltem non
sensi, nec credo Derdracenes fratres propter illud vel ingentem conscientiae
stimulum persensisse, vel copiam lachrymarum profudisse: How wretchedly does
this man speak? Certainly David, and Paul had other apprehensions of this
original sin, with the immediate effects thereof. For the Orthodox hold
against the Antinomians, That though our sins be pardoned, yet we may, yea,
ought upon special occasions to confess them, and to renew our humiliation
again for them, as David prays, God would not remember the sins of his
youth; and here in this Psalm, he prays to be purged and washed, which
relates to all that uncleanness both original and actual, he had formerly
confessed: Thus Paul also does several times with humiliation and
self-debasement make mention of his former persecutions and blasphemies he had
been guilty of.

Fourthly. Whatsoever may be the opinions of men about this sin, either
denying it wholly, or making it universally pardoned to all mankind, or at
least to some when baptized, of which more is to be said, when we treat of the
effects of original sin; Yet from this example of David, and from other Texts
of Scripture, we see, It is our duty, as long as we live in this world, to
groan under it, and bewail our miserable condition, because of it.

SECT. VIII.
Repentance may be taken either largely or strictly.
LEt therefore David's example here in the Text, be more to thee, than what ten
thousand cavillers may say unto thee, only you must know, that when we speak
of sorrow and repentance about this sin, we may take repentance largely or
strictly for any kind of holy sorrow and humiliaton of soul, and that because
God is displeased with us, because we have that which is contrary to his holy
Law, and so is offensive to him, and damnable to us; and in this respect we are
in a deep measure to humble our selves for original sin, as being a most
grievous and heinous sin, the guilt whereof would press us into the lowest
hell, did not Gods grace interpose, or else it may be strictly taken for a
change of our mind, or an alteration of that purpose and will we once had: Now
in this strict sense, though it be our duty with sorrow to be humbled for
original sin, yet we cannot be properly said to repent of it, because it was
not a sin ever committed by us personally, or through our own actual will. So
that although we may not so properly (it may be) exhort men to repent of this
original sin, yet we must press them to a deep and daily humiliation under
it, and that not as a punishment, or an affliction only, but as a true and
proper sin; So that as without confession and sorrow no actual sin will be
forgiven unto a man, so neither will original sin, and therefore we do by
consequence in the Lords Prayer, when we say, Forgive us our sins, pray not
only for the pardon of actual sins; but original also, whatsoever the
Remonstrants say, neither is their Argument against it of any worth, when they
say, then the meaning likewise is in the clause following, That we forgive men
their trespasses, and their original corruption against us, for the comparison
lies not in the Nature of the sins, but the manner of forgiveness; otherwise,
when the Church prays for the pardon of Idolatry, or any sin against the
first Table, adding, As we forgive others, the meaning should be, As we forgive
them their Idolatries, or sins against the first Table, which would be absurd
and blasphemous. Besides, we are not only to forgive the actual trespasses of
those who wrong us, but even their thoughts and inclinations to hate us; If
therefore original sin be a sin, and will damn us without Christ's blood,
and Gods gracious pardon thereby, then we pray for the pardon of (...) in the
Lords Prayer, and we are all our life long, because of the relics of it in
us, to humble ourselves, because of it; And although because Wallaeus, an
eminent Divine spoke of, Reliquiae peccats originalis. The Remonstrants call it
an absurd phrase; For what is meant (say they) by these relics of original
sin, either actual sins or original? If original, why then are they called
the relics of it? Yet we may say, The phrase is very proper, for it supposes
original sin not to be wholly extinct, but busy and acting, even in the
godly, and therefore we may truly say, Paul, Romans 7. complained of the relics
of it.

It is our duty (we heard) from this example of David, to humble our selves for
the original sin that is in us, as long as we live. Hence whatsoever Austin
said at other times, yet in one place he spoke most truly in this point,
Propter vitium quantum libet praeferimus, esse nobis necessarium dicere dimitte
nobis debita nostra, cum jam omnia in Baptismo dicta facta, cogitate dimissa
sint. (Epist. 29) Because of original sin, although we have never so much
profited, yet we are to pray, that God would forgive us our sins.

This truth is the more diligently to be pressed upon us, by how much the more
doctrinal opinions have risen up against it; for those that deny any such
thing, they must needs make confessions of it to be a lie, and a mere mockery.
And as for the Papist, though most of them hold original sin to be truly a
sin, yet they say, Baptism is instituted for the remission of that, as
repentance is for actual sins: So that it should seem by their Doctrine,
Confession and godly sorrow are required only to take away actual sin; but as
for original, Baptism in the very opere operato does remove it; for no Infant
can put an obex to hinder the effect of that Sacrament: Hence it is that Almain
a rational Schoolman, ( Opus. de peccato orig. page 72.) makes this Objection,
Suppose an adultus, a man grown up, be to baptized, and at that very time he
puts some obex by a gross sin to hinder the fruit of Baptism; How then can
that man (says he) ever have his original sin pardoned; for there is not a
second Baptism, and repentance is only to take away actual? To this he answers,
That such a man is not indeed either to have attrition or contrition, or
confession of original sin; for as it was not contracted by our free will, so
it does not require such a nolition, whereby I would not have been born in it;
Therefore such a man, in his opinion, is to repent of that sin which was the
obex, and then when that is repented of, original sin is forgiven by the very
receiving of Baptism. I bring this instance, to show, That according to the
Popish Doctrine, which yet holds original sin, yet there is to be no sorrow,
no contrition or confession, yea that we are not to have a nolition of it,
because it was not committed by our freewill. Bellarmine likewise ( lib. 1. de
Sacramento Baptismi, cap. 9) says, Originale paccatum non est materia
poenitentiae, nemo enim recte poenitentiam agit ejus peccati, quod ipse non
commisit, and quod in ejus potestate non fuit: Although Onuphrius (De
poenitentia Disp. 3. Sect. 1. Quaest. 5.) brings out of Aquinas that
distinction I mentioned before, viz. of Repentance taken strictly and largely,
and in this later he joyneth with Aquinas, holding it necessary for original
sin, opposing Medina, who affirmed, That Repentance taken any way, though
never so largely, was not necessary for original sin. But our Doctrine out of
this Text, will endure as gold and precious stone, when that error will be
Conte^^ed as hay and stubble: For as actual sin, so neither original sin
will be forgiven to any persons grown up, unless they do acknowledge, and with
true (...) of heart bewail it; so that many commands which are to confess (...),
to bewail it, and to abhor our selves, because of it, as also to pray ea^^^ly
and fervently for pardon, must extend to original sin, as well as actual
neither is Baptism a Seal of the pardon of original sin only, but of all
(...) sins to grown persons, which shall by faith make an holy improvement of
that Ordinance, only it is true, as was hinted before, there is some difference
in our godly sorrow for original sin, and for actual.

SECT. IX.
The Difference between Godly Sorrow for Original Sin and Actual.
FIrst, Repentance, or change of our minds and wills, is not strictly and
properly for original sin, because that was not actually committed by, us
neither was it ever in our own single persons to have prevented it, yet in
respect of sorrow, detestation, and self-abomination, so we are as much, if not
more, to bewail our selves, than for actual sin.

Secondly, Again, In actual sins, there is this necessity in our repentance,
That we do so no more, he only truly repents, that does not commit those gross
sins again, at least not habitually or customarily, as our Savior said to one,
Go thy way, and sin no more; but this will not hold in original sin, we
cannot say, we will have it no more within us, we cannot say, this Jebusite
shall abide no longer within our borders, for we shall always carry about with
us this body of sin.

And therefore in the third place, Original sin and actual differ exceedingly
in this, That actual sin when pardoned, both the sin itself, and it is guilt
is removed, but in original sin, though the guilt be removed in the godly,
neither is it imputable to them, yet the sin it self in some measure and
power remains with us, as is more largely to be showed in time; Only you see
some difference there is, in our sorrow and humiliation, between original and
actual, yet not such, but that in respect of deep confession, and humble
acknowledgement, both are alike; so that we cannot have any pardon of either
without such contrite hearts, as the Scripture speaks of; and it is good to
consider the grounds, why we ought to be greatly debased, and to lay our selves
so low under this consideration.

SECT. X.
Reasons why we must be humbled for Original Sin.
FIrst, Because original sin is in some sense all sin; It is the universal
contagion of all the parts of the soul; it has Maculam universalem, all actual
sins they have only their particular spot or stain, and do more immediately
pollute that power or faculty of the soul, it is immediately subjected in, as
blindness of mind does properly infect the understanding, not the will or
affections: so contumacy in the will, does not but by consent or sympathy, as
it were, infect the mind, but original sin does pollute all over, it is like a
Gangrene over the whole body, whereas actual sins are like so many several
sores: Thus original sin is universal subjectively, there being no part of a
man, no not his mind, or his conscience, but it is all over defiled, whereas no
actual sin has such a general defilement with it: Oh then what cause is
here, why our hearts should bitterly mourn and even roar out, for this sin
makes thy soul all over like a Blackmoor! Thou may behold thy self in the
glass of Gods word, and not see one fair spot; it is a leprosy upon the whole
soul, so that it leaves nothing good in thee. It Is true, the substance and
faculties of thy soul are left still, yet they are so corrupted and vitiated,
that in a moral consideration there is nothing whole or sound in them.

Secondly, From hence it is, That it has as it were an universal guilt, it
makes the understanding guilty, the will guilty, the affections guilty, even
guilt all over; Every actual sin has its proper formal guilt; the guilt of
theft is one thing, the guilt of adultery is another thing, but now original
sin is as it were an universal guilt: As God is that bonum, in quo omnia
bona, so in some sense original sin is that malum, in quo omnia mala, not
only effectively, of which in the next place, but because of the general guilt
accompanying; For as it has a general maculam, so it must have suitably a
general reatum. This is greatly to be laid to heart; for as original
righteousness was not the perfection and glory of one faculty only, but the
universal rectitude and general harmony of the whole man; Thus original sin
is not any particular guilt of one kind of sin, but it is the ataxy, the
dissolution of that curious workmanship which God at first made in man, and so
is a general guilt; and therefore the more are we to bewail this condition,
saying, Lord, It is not one or many sins, it is not this, or that peculiar
guilt I am to humble my self for, but I am all over guilty, as the Land of
Israel is said to be, Isa. 1. 6. From the sole of the foot to the head, there
is no soundness, nothing but wounds and putrefying sores. Thus are we to judge
of our selves in respect of this overspreading contagion.

Thirdly, We are greatly to bewail and humble our selves under this
birthpollution, Because it is the fountain and root of all the actual evil we do
commit. This is enough, if there were no external temptations to plunge us into
all impiety. I shall not here dispute it rigidly, Whether every sin
committed, because of that original defilement within us, of that we are to
speak hereafter. It is enough, that the Scripture does attribute all actual
evil to this, as the cause, Jam. 1. 17. Every one is tempted and drawn aside by
the lust which is within him; and out of the evil heart, as an evil treasure,
our Savior says, Mat. 12. 35. proceed all evil thoughts, words and actions.
Thus also Genes. 6. The imaginations of the thoughts of a man's heart are evil,
and that continually, but of this more in its time; only take notice of this
consideration in this place, as a full and clear ground, why thou should with
all thy might all the days thou live, abhor thy self, and loath thy self:
It Is from this original sin David's adultery and murder did flow: And thus
there is no actual iniquity, which lies as a load upon thee, but it did flow
from this bitter fountain at first: Will thou therefore condemn the fruit of a
Tree, and not much rather the root? Will thou abhor the stream, and not much
rather the fountain? Oh remember that here lies the strength and power of
sin, and therefore the strength of thy sorrow ought to bend that way likewise.

Fourthly, We are deeply to humble our selves for this birth contagion, Because
in it self it is a most grievous and heinous sin. It Is a dispute, Whether
original sin be not gravissimum peccatum, the heaviest and greatest sin
that is; It is true indeed, many sins may exceed this in several respects, but
yet if we lay all things together, we have cause to judge it the heaviest sin
that is; For although Bellarmine minceth the matter, and says, it is minimum,
peccatum, the least sin in this respect (though he acknowledge it very
heinous otherwise) because it has minimum de voluntario, yet we must not
judge of the greatness of a sin by a Philosophical notion, but according to
the judgment of God, who best knows the heinous nature and guilt of sin;
now by Gods punishing of it in such a manner, it appears to be the greatest
sin, the event does demonstrate it; In that we read not of any sin punished
by God in such an high degree, as original sin was in Adam our first parent,
in whose loms we are; For whereas all other sins bring only the temporal and
spiritual curse upon the offender himself, this does upon all mankind: Indeed
God does visit sometimes the sins of Parents to the third and fourth
generation, but here it is as long as there shall be a generation: And besides,
it is not only temporal evils we suffer for Adam's sin, in which respect many
may suffer for other men's sins, as in Achan and David's case, but it is in
spiritual destruction likewise, all mankind is obnoxious to eternal damnation
for this transgression: That therefore must needs be an horrid sin, and of a
crimson nature, for which we see God to be so sevre, yea not only mankind, but
all the creatures likewise are cursed for this; so that had not God provided a
new Covenant of grace for some of mankind thus fallen, the whole race of men,
would have been eternally damned, and that for this sin alone, though there
had not been one actual sin committeed in the world by any one man since the
fall: Oh then tremble under this consideration, because the anger of God is
thus stirred up against that one sin, morethan all the sins that are committed!
For though the sin against the holy Ghost be in this respect more terrible
than original sin, because God will never pardon that, whereas original sin
is pardoned to all believers, and as Antiquity has thought, even to Adam
himself; yet in other respects, original sin is in a more extense and
universal manner cursed than that: Do not then go to extenuate this sin, to
say, It was but the eating of some for bidden fruit; or original sin, it has
none of my will, I cannot help it (for we join original, imputed, and inherent
at this time together, because of their inseparable connection;) but rather
consider the great anger of God that is gone out against all mankind, because
of it, and then thou will look on it with the same abborring eye that God
himself does.

Fifthly, We are greatly to bewail this original defilement, Because it makes
us wholly incurable, it depriveth us of all spiritual ability and power to
recover our selves; We are thus shapen in iniquity, and so must live and die,
and go to hell in it, if Gods grace does not interpose: Does not Job, Chap. 14.
4. make it impossible for any man, to bring a clean thing out of an unclean? So
that all mankind is born in an absolute impotency to help it self, if we would
give thousands of worlds to come out of this lost estate, we could not help
ourselves: Hence it is that the Scripture attributes all the good we have to
the alone free grace of God.

Sixthly, We are to bewail it, Because it makes us senseless, stupid, depriving
us of all spiritual sense and feeling: So that by it we are put into this sad
perpiexity, for none need, or are bound more to bewail this sin, than an
unregenerate man, and yet he cannot send forth the least sigh and groan,
because of it: So that hereby we have contracted such an unavoidable exigency
upon us, that we cannot turn our selves any way; mourn and cry we must for this
pollution, yet mourn and cry we cannot, because this is one inseparable effect
of it, to take away all tenderness and mourning: Hence the stony heart
mentioned by Ezekiel, Chap. 11. 18. is in a great measure original sin: Till
therefore we are regenerated, as we see in David, Job and Paul, we cannot truly
mourn under it.

Lastly, This is a work to do as long as we live, Because it is inseparable from
our natures, while we live in this world. God indeed could in our life time,
wholly free us from it, as well as at death, but he lets these relics
continue, that our triumph at the Day of Judgment may be the greater, Vivum
captivum reservantur ad tryumphum, Captives are preserved alive for the greater
trymph; And the rather God does this, that so even his very Paul's, his most
eminent and choicest servants may have matter of debasement within themselves,
and more earnestly groan for a day of Redemption.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin.

The Second Part.

SHOWING What ORIGINAL SIN is, AND How it is Communicated.

By Anthony Burgess.

ANCHORA SPEI.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin. PART. II.
CHAP. I.
Of the Name Old Man given to Original Sin,
SECT. I.
ROMANS 6. 6. Knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified with Christ, etc.
IN the beginning of the Chapter, the Apostle informs us, That no Gospel
privileges, or Evangelical grace amplified to the highest, may encourage to
sin, for the Apostle makes an Objection himself from the Doctrine he
delivered; If grace abound where sin does abound, then why may not we sin
more, that grace may abound more? Thus there have always been some who have
turned bread into stones, and fish into serpents, making the grace of God to
exclude our duty, and a tender care against sin. But the Apostle, as if
blasphemy were in this Objection, tries out, God forbid; You see with what
indignation and detestation we should look upon all those Doctrines, which
under pretense of advancing Grace, do cry down Duties and an holy life, making
it a legal and a servile thing.

Now the Apostle brings an Argument against indulgence in sin,
notwithstanding Gods grace, Because we are dead to it, and then how can we live
to it? Would it not be a monstrous, and an afrighting sight, to see dead men
come out of their graves, to live and walk amongst us? Thus also it ought to be
no less wonderful, yea terrible, to see a Christian give himself to any evil
way. And that we are dead to sin, he proves by our Baptism, concerning which
he speaks admirable and sublime matter: So that if we consider what great
things are here spoken of it, we may wonder to see, how cold and rare our
meditations are about it; for he makes it to be that Sacrament, in the right
use whereof* we put on Christ, yea that thereby we are ingraffed and implanted
into him: Hence ver. 5. he uses that word of being planted into him; a
metaphor from the Husbandman, who by planting his Science into, another stock,
does thereby make it partake of the life or death of the Tree; if the Tree
lives, that lives; if the Tree dies, that dies; so it is with us and
Christ. By the phrase then is intended no more than our communion with, and
interest in Christ, and that both in his death, and his resurrection: For you
must know, that the Scripture does not only make Christ's death and resurrection
to be the cause of the death of our sins, and of our spiritual resurrection to
holiness, but also makes them types and resemblances of such things in us, That
as Christ died in his passible body, so we should die to sin; and as Christ
after his death did rise again to glory and immortality, thus we should rise
out of sin, to walk in newness of life, and both these are signified in
Baptism.

1. Our Communion with Christ in the efficacy of his death and resurrection.

2. The Representation of this; that what was corporally done to Christ, should
be spiritually fulfilled in us; and therefore some think, that the Apostle does
allude to that primitive Rite and Custom which was in baptizing; when the
baptized party was first put under the water for a little season, which
represented Christ's burial, and our death to sin. 2. There was the emersion,
or rising again out of the waters, which signified Christ's Resurrection, and
also our rising again to holiness and godliness.

This is the Sum of the Apostles discourse concerning Baptism in its
sacramental signification, which he amplifieth further in my Text, and that as
a reason, why we should not live to sin who were baptized into Christ, viz.
Because our Old man is crucified with Christ; Both because Christ in being
crucified did subdue thereby the dominion of sin, and also we are to do to
the body of sin within us, what was done to Christ's body, to crucify it, and
thereby to destroy it. There is nothing more to be enquired into in the Text,
but what is meant by our Oldman?

They limit it too much that understand it only of the habit, or acquired
custom of sin, which we live in before Regeneration, as Grotius seems to
understand; But we are to take it, as both Popish and Protestant Commentators
do interpret it, for that vicious and corrupt nature, which we all derive from
Adam, putting it self forth into several lusts and ungodly actions, whereby
there is an habituated, inveterated custom at last in sin; so that although we
may understand lusts and actual impieties with long custom therein, under the
phrase of the Old man, yet principally and chiefly we are to interpret it of
that polluted nature we have from Adam; and this will easily appear to be so,
if you consider the other two places, where this expression is used, Ephesians. 4.
22. That ye put off the Old man, etc. and that ye put on the New man. Col. 3.
9, 10. Ye have put off the Old man with his deeds, and have put on the New man.
Where,

1. You see the Old man is distinguished from the effects and deeds of it,
which are actual sins. And then

2. Old man and New man are made two immediate opposites; now the New man is
plainly expressed by the Apostle, what it is, viz. not so much actual holiness,
as the Image of God repaired in us, so that as the New man is the Image of God,
and that holy nature repaired in us, so the Old man is the contrary to this,
viz. a deprivation of that Image of God, and and an universal pollution of all
the whole man: So that whereas sometimes the word Old is used absolutely, as
the old Serpent (there is no new Serpent) which is the Devil; So here its used
comparatively, and called Old in respect of the New man, the work of grace
succeeding therein.

SECT. II.
HAving therefore hitherto showed the Quod sit of original sin, That there is
such a thing, maugre all adversaries, and that by the mouth of two witnesses
out of the New Testament, and two out of the Old (not but that there are many
more, only I shall (God willing) treat on them upon some different notions.) I
now come to inform you of the Quid sit, What it is; for here is much opposition
likewise; And because in knowing what a thing is, there is the Quid nominis,
and Quid rei, what the name is, and what the thing is.

I shall first begin with what the Name is, for that way Socrates did use to
commend, from the name to go to the nature of a thing: And whereas this
native-pollution has Scripture names, Ecclesiastical, used by the Fathers, and
Scholastical used by the Schoolmen, yea the Rabbis say, it has seven names in
the Old Testament. I shall only pitch on the Bible names, and that not
universally, but upon some eminent and chief ones, which it has in the
Scripture, from which alone we shall be best able to discern the nature of it.

The first whereof is here in the Text, wherein it is called the Old man; From
whence observe, Observe.


That the natural or birth-pollution we are barn in, is called by the
Scripture, The Old man that is in us.

Several names indeed the Scripture gives it, and some are applied to it by
Divines, of which, yet some question may be made; as when Christ is said, to be
the Lamb that takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 29. By that they say
is meant original sin, for that is not so much my sin or thy sin, as the
sin of the world, and therefore he speaks in the singular number, The
sin, not the sins of the world; but this is not so probable, for Christ came
into the world to take away not only original sin, as some Papists have
thought, but actual also. Others apply that of Heb. 10. to it, The sin that
does so easily beset us; And indeed that is a very proper word to explain
original sin; but whether the Apostles scope be so immediately to point at
that, may be further enquired into. I shall therefore take only some few clear
and undoubted Titles, that the Scripture gives to it, of which this in the
Text is a notable one, The old man; And before we inform you, how comprehensive
this is, let us remove a twofold mistake, or erroneous apprehension that may be
about it.

SECT. III.
Two Mistakes removed.
THe first is that of Flaccius Illyricus, who because the Scripture uses such
concrete and substantive terms about original sin, calling it a man, a body,
therefore he erred in a contrary extremity to the Pelagians; and some
Pontificians, making original sin not to be an accident, but the essence and
substance of the soul; but of this more when we come to search out the nature
of it; only you must know, that original sin is not the substance of a man,
but an universal disease adhering to it; as the Leprosy in a Leper, it is not
his body, it is not his corpulent essence; the body is one thing, the Leprosy
is another thing; and thus in man, his soul and body are one thing, his
original corruption is another thing: Though as in an universal Leprosy, you
cannot touch one part of the body, but it is infected; so neither can we name
one part of the soul, but it is polluted; we must therefore distinguish between
nature and sin, to avoid Flaccianism; yet we must not separate or divide one
from the other, to avoid Pelagianism; but of this more in its time.

Secondly, We must not conceive that it is called the Old man, because of any
impotency or weakness, as if it were not able to put forth into vigorous acts
and lively lustings of sin, as old men have all their natural strength and
vigor decaying: No, though it be called the Old man in us, yet it is constantly
working, drawing aside, captivating and enflaming of us, yea making war daily
against any thing of God within us.

These things premised, let us consider, why the Scripture gives it such a
name, for it might seem a very harsh exposition, to call that which is an
accident or a quality in a man, by the name of an Old man.

SECT. IV.
Why Original Sin is called Man.
THerefore let us see the reason, why it is called Man, and then the Old man;
original sin may be called a Man,

First, Because that so far as we are men, quanti sumus, we are all over
polluted; So that the old man is the whole man polluted in this sin before he
be regenerated: Insomuch that this phrase may sadly and deeply humble us, that
the Scripture gives the name of man to sin, as if that were all we are: Hence
(as you have heard) to walk as a man, to speak as a man, is to do a thing
sinfully, as far as thy humanity reaches, so far thy pollution reaches;
So that the very calling of thee a man may greatly debase thee; for though thou
art a rich man, a great man, yet this Old man does infect thee.

Secondly, In that original sin is called a Man, there is implied the Subject
of it to be every man, as well as every part of man, Totus homo, and totum
hominis, yea ad omnis homo, not one exempted that is by natural propagation: So
that every little Infant has this Man in it; Every one that needs a Christ,
that wants a Savior, has this Old man abiding in him.

Thirdly, It Is called Man, Because of the heap or collection of all sin that
is in it; For as a man is not one part of the body, the finger, the eye, or the
hand, but the whole Compages and Fabric of all the parts united together. Thus
original sin is not one particular sin, but the mass or spawn of all; It Is
not a stream, but the ocean, and therefore this shows the horridness also of
it, that it is the womb wherein all sin is conceived; Let a man be totally
cleansed from this, as the glorified Saints in Heaven are, and then no actual
sin can come from him.

Lastly, It Is called a Man, Because of the intimate and tenacious adhesion of
it to the whole man, there being no way to sever our Natures and that, while we
abide in these mortal bodies: So that it supposes sin to be in us, as fire
in the iron when it is red hot (though there is some dissimilitude also) that
we cannot see the color and substance of the iron for the fire, nothing
appears but fire; Iron though of it self black and cold, yet by the fire in
it is altered; so the soul of a man; yea the whole man that was at first made
upright and holy; now through this pollution manifests nothing thereof, yea the
clean contrary; in stead of the Image of God, there is the image of the Devil,
there appears nothing but of the sin and the Devil in a man; for if Paul
could say, He no longer lived, but Christ in him, Gal. 2. 20. when yet grace
was not full and complete in him, How much rather may we, while abiding in our
natural estate say, We no longer live, but sin in us, for sin moves all,
and does all, having full dominion over us?

SECT. V.
Why it is called Old Man.
IN the second place, It may be called the Old man; First, Because it came from
Adam the first man, and most ancient: Thus it is a sin of great antiquity, it
has been in the world ever since Adam's transgression; Most things have had
their times and their seasons, but this has been always; There was never any
age, wherein men were not born sinful, though some actual sins have abounded
more at one time than another, though Adam be dead thousands of years ago, yet
the sin lives and is propagated.

2. It is Old, Because it is from every man's particular beginning: Thou can
not think of the number of thy years, or how old thou art, but thou may with
groans remember also that sin is just as old as thou art; Have thou lived to
threescore or an hundred years, even thus old sin is? Alas we are apt to
complain of old age, to count it a disease; we say, Alas now our best time is
gone, we are weak old men: Oh but there is an old man within that is more to be
lamented!

3. It Is the Old man, Because of the crast and subtle ways that this sin
has within us: Insomuch that Jeremiah complains Chap 17. None can find out
the depth of sin, none but God can search thy heart: This is the old subtle
fox within thee, and therefore it is said to deceive and to tempt us.

4. It Is the Old man, Because it is to be renewed; That which is old (says the
Apostle) is to vanish away. The Old Testament was removed that the New might
succeed. Thus the Old man is to die, is to continue no longer, that the New may
be established in us.

Lastly, It Is called the Old man, Because there is no loveliness or comeliness
in it; For old age is like winter, making the blossoms of beauty to fall: Thus
the name Old man argues the uncomeliness of it.

Use. Of Instruction, To acquaint your selves with this Old man in you, young
and old, rich and poor, all have this Old man, that will at last betray and
damn you: Oh consider you carry your own bane about with you, out of thy own
bowels, thy own heart, will arise that which will destroy thee, and this Old
man is in every one; The Pharisees told the blind man, He was wholly born in
sins; They thought it was the condition of some miserable afflicted people to
be so born, but it is the condition of all, and therefore expect no heaven or
slavation, till this Old man be crucified, and the New man repaired in thee.

CHAP. II.
Of the Name Law of Sin given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
ROMANS 7. 25. So then, with the mind I myself serve the Law of God, but with the
flesh the Law of Sin.
THis Chapter is the common seat and proper place, wherein the nature of
original inherent sin is expressly handled; so that he who by reading of this
Chapter shall not be convinced that there is such a thing as original sin,
and that in some measure putting it self forth in the godly to their great
grief and misery, I think we may say, he would not believe any such thing,
though men should rise from the dead, and come and preach it to us. I shall in
time (God willing) fully improve the chief matter herein contained; for herein
is described that Christian conflict which is in all the godly between the
regenerate and unregenerate part, as also the consequents thereof: For the
present, I must take two Hypotheses, or Suppositions for granted, which in time
(God willing) I shall fully prove.

The first is, That the Apostle speaking of such a sharp combat within him
between the Law of his mind, and the Law of sin, does not assume the person
of another, as of a carnal unregenerate man, or a Legalist convinced by the
Doctrine of the Law, yet his heart carrying him in the clean contrary way, but
speak it of his own Person, and that as regenerated. The former way go the
Arminians, and some Papists, and all Socinians, but the later way generally go
the Protestants, even as Austin of old, retracting the former opinion he once
had; yea the best and choicest Commentators of the Papists, Salmeron, Pererius,
Estius and Lapide, etc. do adhere to this Exposition. So that you must not
think, that the combat here spoken of, is like that which Aristotle describes
his incontinent person by, that does like videre and Probare meliora, but
deteriora sequi, which is only a fight between an enlightened conscience, and a
corrupt heart. Nor

2. Is it like those preparatory and initial works anteceding sometimes
conversion, which Austin does notably speak of in himself, desiring to be freed
from sin, and yet afraid his prayer should be heard; so that he was always
going, but yet never did thoroughly go to God, till at last he found that gratia
Dei vorti cordis, which no hard heart can resist, because it is given on
purpose to take away the hard heart: But the Apostle does here not only
doctrinally affirm such a thing as original sin, but experimentally he
declares the actings of it: So that he does not only write a doctrinal and
dogmatical Truth, but also an History of what he observed in himself.

The second Supposition to be granted is, that by flesh the Apostle does not
only mean the sensitive or sensual part, but the whole man, so far as
corrupted. So that with the Apostle, the soul is flesh, the understanding, the
will, are flesh, because all are corrupted with original sin; Of which more
in its time.

These two things premised, you may know, that this Text read is the Epilogue
or summary Conclusion, which the Apostle makes from that doctrinal and
practical discourse about himself (to wit) that there are two principles in
him, two selves, two men, as it were; There was both a sweet fountain and
bitter within him, and from these did flow two suitable streams, The Law of the
mind, did incline him to serve the Law of God, but the Law in his members, the
Law of sin; Not that the Law of sin and members are two distinct things, as
Calvin and Beza thought, making the Law of sin, to be original sin, the Law
in the members to be the actings and stirrings of this in the whole man; for
ver. 23. The Law of sin is expressly said to be in the members; And whereas
the Apostle in that verse says, He sees a Law in his members bringing him
into captivity to the Law of sin, that does not argue a distinction between
these, but according to the use of the Scripture, the Antecedent is repeated
for the Relative; the sense being. That the Law of his members did bring Paul
into captivity to it, notwithstanding the Law of the mind with in him, as Genesis
9. 16. I will remember (says God himself) the everlasting Covenant between God
(that is my self) and every living creature.

We see then in these words, that the Apostle gives another name to that
original sin, which dwells in him, he calls it very emphatically The Law
of sin in him; Original corruption is even in Paul, though converted, how
much more in all unregenerate persons by way of a Law: From whence observe,

That the Scripture calls original sin the Law of sin Within us.

SECT. II.
TO understand this, take notice of these things:

First, The Apostle in his Epistles does delight to use the word Law, and that
when speaking of contrary things, The Law of God, the Law of Works; This he
mentions properly, but then he calls it, The Law of faith, because the Hebrew
word for Law, signifies no more than Doctrine, for Torath either comes, they
say, from a word that signifies to appoint or teach, or from a word that
signifies to rain, because (says Chemnitius) as the rain is gathered
together in the clouds, not to be kept there, but to be emptied on the earth,
that so it may be made fruitful. Thus the Law of God was appointed by God, not
merely to be written in the Bible, but also to be implanted in our hearts. The
word then in the Hebrew signifying Doctrine in the general, no wonder if the
Gospel be called, The Law of Faith; So Regeneration, Romans 8. is called, The Law
of the Spirit of life; as in other places it is, The Law of God written in our
hearts; but the Apostle does not only apply it to these things, but especially
in this Chapter he calls it; The Law of sin, not sin only, but the Law of
sin, and the Law in our members; why the Apostle does so, you shall hear
anon. Only

In the second place, you must consider, when the Apostle calls it, The Law of
sin, it is in an improper and abusive, or allusive sense; for a Law properly
is only of that which is good, the matter of a Law, must be honest and just,
because a Law is pars juris, and Jus is a justo; Therefore Aquinas says, That
unjust Laws are rather violentia, than leges. Yea Tully says, Such Decrees are
neither Leges, nor ne appellandae quidem, yet the Scripture speaks of some, who
make iniquity a Law, Psalm. 99. 20. or who frame mischief for a Law. Tacitus
complains of the multitude of Laws in his time, and says, The Commonwealth
groaned, ut flagitiis ita legibus; So that although the properties of a Law are
to be good and profitable, yet by allusion, all unjust and hurtful Decrees are
called Laws, and thus the Apostle calls it the Law of sin, alluding to those
properties, or effects, which a Law has; What the Law of God does in a
regenerate man, the contrary does the Law of sin in a natural man.

SECT. III.
Original Sin compared to a Law in five respects.
ORiginal sin therefore may be compared to a Law, in these respects:

First, A Law does teach and direct, Lex est lux, It informs and teaches
what is to be done. Thus the Schoolmen, they make Direction the first thing
necessary to a Law; The work of grace in a godly man, is called by the Apostle,
The Law of the mind, in this Chapter; Because grace within a man does teach and
direct him what to do; Hence 1 John 2. 27. the godly man is said to have an
anointing within him; The Law of God is written in his inward parts, and so
from within, as well as by the Word without, they are taught what to do: Thus
on the contrary the Law of sin in a natural man, does teach and prompt him to
all kind of evil; This Law of sin does not indeed teach what we ought to do,
but it does wonderfully suggest all kind of wickedness to us; and from this
cause it is, that you see children no sooner able to act, but they can with all
readiness run into evil; sins that they have not seen committed before
their eyes, they can with much dexterity accomplish: What a deal of instruction
and admonition is requisite to nurture your young ones in the fear of the Lord?
And all is little enough, And why is this? The Law of God is not in their
hearts, they have not that in them, which would direct and teach holiness; But
on the other side, children need not to be taught wickedness, you need not
instruct them how to sin, they have much artifice and cunning in an evil way,
And why so? The Law of sin is in them, this is that they are bred with: So
that as the young ones of Foxes and Serpents, though they have no teacher, yet
from the Law of nature within them, they grow subtle and crafty in their
mischievous ways: Thus the Law of sin does in every man, he is ingenious and
wise to do evil. As the ground ere it will bring forth corn does need much
labor and tillage, but of it self brings forth briars and thorns: Thus all
by nature are so foolish and blind, that without heavenly education and
institution you cannot bring them to that which is holy, but of their own
selves, men have subtilty and abilities to frame mischievous things: And why is
all this? They have a Law of sin within them, which directs, suggests and
informs to do much evil: So that we are not to put all upon the Devil, to
say, He put it into my mind, he suggested such thoughts to me; No, the Law of
sin within thee, can sufficiently prompt thee to all evil.

Secondly, A Law does not only teach, but it does instigate and incline, it
presses, and provokes to the things commanded by it, Thus the Law of the mind
in a godly man, does greatly instigate and provoke him to what is good; It is
like a goad in his side, it is like fire in his bowels, he must do that which
is good, else he cannot have any rest within him: You read when David refrained
for a while from speaking good, at last he could hold no longer, but the fire
did break out: So Paul, 2 Cor. 5. The love of Christ constrains us; Thus the
true believer he has a principle of grace within him, which is like a Law upon
him, he cannot do otherwise, he must obey it: Thus on the contrary, Original
sin in a natural man, is like a Law within him, it provokes him, it
enflameth him to all evil; Whenever any holy duty is pressed upon him, this
Law of sin stirs him up against it, makes him rage at it, as the Apostle
does abundantly testify in this Chapter, he tells us, This Law of sin did
war and fight against the Law of God, it did lead him captive, it conquered
and subdued him against his will: If then a godly man find this Law of sin so
powerful, and operative in him; No wonder if men wholly carnal and natural,
they find the Law of sin as fully prevailing over them, as the Devils did on
the herd of Swine, which they hurried violently into the sea without any
resistance. As then the Devil when he possessed some bodies, provoked and moved
them to many violent and sudden actions, which they could not gainsay: Thus
does the Law of sin in men naturally, it provokes, it instigateth, it
turns the soul upside down, it is continually pressing and enclining to evil,
which makes the Scripture say, Genesis 6. That the imaginations of the thoughts of
man's heart is only evil, and that continually.

Thirdly, Original sin is a Law, because by this a man is bound and
captivated to the lusts thereof, there is an indissoluble union till death.
Thus the Apostle argues from the Law of an Husband and his Wife, she cannot
marry another, while her Husband lives; Neither can we be married to Christ,
while this is predominant, yea, we must die, ere we be wholly freed of it.

Fourthly, Original sin is called a Law of sin within us, because of the
injurious command and rule it has in every man by nature: And this indeed is
the most explicit and formal reason, why it is called a Law; for to a Law
there is not only required a directive power, for so counsels and admonitions
have, which are no Laws; but there must be also a preceptive and commanding
power; so that a Law has vim coactivum, a compelling force; to have a thing
done; and in this respect, the Apostle gives it this Title of a Law of sin
within us, for even in the person of a regenerate man; What sad complaints does
he make of this tyrannical power of sin within him? He is not his own man, he
cannot do what he would, yea he does what he would not; insomuch that he calls
himself carnal, and sold under sin: These expressions are so great, that
therefore some have thought they could not be applied to a godly man; For it is
said of Ahab, as a sure Character of his wickedness, That he sold himself to
do evil, 1 Kings 21. 20. but Ahab did that willingly; Paul is here passive, he
is sold against his will, because sin has such tyranny over him: Therefore
the afflicted Israelite did not more groan to be delivered from his oppression,
than Paul cries out to be delivered from this body of sin; Well therefore
may this birth-pollution be called, The Law of sin within us, for it rules
all, it commands the whole man; what sin bids us think, we think; what it
bids us do, we do; No natural man can do othewise: The Apostle speaks
peremptorily, They that are in the flesh cannot please God? Romans 8. 7, 8. And
the carnal mind is not subject to God, neithe indeed can be: Oh the miserable
and unhappy estate we are all then in by this original sin! We cannot but
sin, we do not love that which is good, neither can we; The Law of sin has
wholly enslaved us: Though all the curses of the Law be denounced against us,
yet we cannot but sin: As venomous creatures cannot vent that which is sweet,
but necessarily that which is poison, yet (as Bernard of old said well) This
necessity in sinning does not take off from voluntarinesse and delight in it,
neither does the delight take off from the necessity.

Lastly, It may be called, The Law of sin (says Aquinas) Because it is that
effect of Gods penal Law inflicted upon mankind, because of Adam's
transgression; So that upon Adam 's sin, God has so ordered, that it should
be by way of a punishment upon us, to be prone unto all evil. For (as you
heard) this original sin, is both a sin and a punishment; So that as God
has appointed that every man should die, it is a Law that shall never be
repealed; so likewise that every one born of man in a natural way should be
unclean, and have a fountain within him daily emptying it self into poisonous
streams.

Use. To be informed, whence it is that thy heart is so out of all measure
evil, whence it is that no godly thing is pleasing to thee, whence it is that
upon searching into thy heart, thou find a noisome dunghill there, that thou
art never able to go to the bottom, whence it is that lust is so ready at hand
always, that sin always appears first in thy soul; All this is, because
original corruption is by way of a Law in thee; That teaches to sin, that
instigateth to sin, yea that commands and imperiously puts thee on to all
manner of evil: If you do not feel this heavy thraldom and pressure upon you,
it is not because it is not there, but because thou art dead in sin, and have
no feeling of it. Solemon speaking of a good woman, has this notable
expression, Prove. 31. 26. The Law of kindness is in her lips (The Law of
kindness) she cannot but be loving and friendly in all she says. Now on the
contrary, The Law of sin is all over thee; The Law of sin is in thy heart,
the Law of sin is in thy mind, the Law of sin is in thy eyes, in thy
tongue, thou can not but sin in, and by these.

CHAP. III.
Of the Name, The Sin that dwells in us, given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
Of the Combat between the Flesh and Spirit.
ROMANS 7. 17. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me.
THis excellent Chapter, which contains the heart and life of the Doctrine of
Original Sin, so that it may be called the Divine Map thereof, describing all
the parts and extents of it, will afford us many testimonies for the
confirmation of it.

We therefore proceed to another name that we find here described to us in this
Text, viz. The sin that dwells in us. The Apostle you heard (as we take for
granted) does here speak in his own person, and so of every regenerate man,
that there is a conflict, and a combat between the flesh and the Spirit. In
all such there are two Twins struggling in the womb of the soul, which causes
much grief and trouble of heart, which the Apostle does in a most palpable and
experimental manner relate in this passage, verse. 15. That which I do, I allow
not; for what I would, that I do not, but what I hate, that I do. Now you must
understand this aright, lest it prove a stumbling bl^ck, For,

First, The Apostle speaks not this, as a man merely convinced, but yet carried
away with strong corruptions; This is not to patrocinate those who live in
sins against their conscience, but have some check and bitter reluctance
sometimes, so that they can say sometimes, I do the things I allow not, yea I
hate; When the Apostle, Romans Chap. 1. and Chap. 2. speaks of some Heathens,
that had their consciences accusing of them, and that they detained the truth
in unrighteousness, he supposes, That those who yet never tasted of the power
of the Gospel, may have such truth and light in their consciences, that it
shall suggest what is to be done, yet love to their lusts will hurry them the
contrary way, but as in time is to be showed, the combat between reason, and
the sensitive appetite, is a far different thing from the conflict between
the flesh and the spirit in the godly.

Neither secondly must you understand Paul speaking of gross and foul sins, as
if when he said, The evil he would not, that he does, were to be understood of
scandalous and wicked enormities; No, but it is to be interpreted of those
motions to sin, and constant infirmities, which cleave to the most holy. Let
not therefore any profane person, that customarily walloweth in his impieties,
excuse himself with this, It is true, I am such a beast, I do such soul things
sometimes, but I may say with Paul, The things that I allow not, yea that I
hate, those I do. This is to turn honey into poison; This is to make the
Scripture an incentive to thy impiety; No, Paul, and such as thou art, differ
as much as the Sun and a dunghill; Paul did not mean, the drunkenness, the
uncleanness that he would not do, that he did, but he means such corruptions
and infirmities that immediately flow from the polluted nature within us, from
which we are never thoroughly cleansed in this life.

Thirdly, Neither when the Apostle says, The good he would, that he does not,
and the evil he would not, that he does: Is thus to be so understood, as if it
were perpetual, and in every particular act, as if sin had always the
better, and grace the worse, as if in no action he did, grace did conquer
sin; for in other places, the godly are said to have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts thereof: As also, That sin shall not have dominion
over them; but sometimes in some temptations they are captivated against their
wills.

Fourthly, Neither may you thus understand Paul, when he says, He would do
good, but evil stops him, as if he had only the sluggards will and wish, who
would eat, but does not labor, who would be rich, but yet lets his field be
full of briars and thorns, such velleities and incomplete wishes many formal
Christians have; so that such lazy and sluggish desires without efficacious
operations are not to shroud themselves under Paul's expression.

Lastly, Therefore Paul's meaning is, That the good which he would do, be
cannot do it perfectly, he cannot do it with that alacrity and fervency, as he
would do; Though the flesh do not wholly conquer the spirit, yet it does stop
and hinder it. Therefore Nazianzen calls it the Echineips, the fish that stops
the ship that it does not go so speedily, though it does not drown it.

SECT. II.
In what sense those words, It is not I, but sin that dwells in me, are to be
understood.
THis premised, we may take notice of an inference or conclusion that the
Apostle draws from this, Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me, which he speaks not as excusing or putting off the blame from
himself, but to difference and to distinguish these two principles that are
within him, the regenerate and unregenerate; So far as he is regenerate, he
does not do these things, neither are they to be charged upon him, he speaks it
to distinguish not excuse; which is the rather to be observed, because of those
Carpocrations of old, and Libertines of late, who excuse all their impieties,
saying, It is not they that do such things, but the flesh within them, and so
make a mock of all sin: yea some of late have arrived to such horrid
blasphemy, as to say, It Is not they that do such and such evil actions, but God
in them; Neither does the Apostle lay the fault upon the Devil, it was not his,
but the Devil, as many are apt to do, but upon that fountain, and root of all
the bitterness in his heart and life, which is original corruption, here
described to be the sin dwelling in him. From whence observe,

That original sin is an inherent, in-dwelling sin in us. It is the sin
that sticks fast to our Natures, and dwells in us.

Some will confess, That there is original imputed sin, but not inherent, where
does the Scripture call it so, say they?

But first, They grant original imputed sin, yet Where does the Scripture
call it imputed sin?

And secondly, we say, The Scripture calls it inherent in this Text, The sin
that dwells in us, that is the same in sense, with the sin inherent in us.
So then, original sin is the sin that dwells, inheretit and abides in
us. To open thus,

First, Take notice, That there are three kinds of sins, as to our purpose,
Original, Habitual, and Actual; Actual sins are all such which are a
transgression of Gods Law, whether by thought, word or deed; for the sins of
the mind and the heart are actual sins, though never committed bodily and
externally; Now these actual sins, they cannot be called sins that dwell in
us, for they are transient, and when committed, they are passed away, only the
guilt remains, viz. An obligation to eternal wrath; Neither does the Apostle
so much complain in this Chapter of the actings of sin (though that be part)
as the Law of sin in his members, which is the fountain of all.

In the next place, There are Habitual sins, such as are acquired by frequent
acts, and daily commissions of sin; and these indeed must be confessed to be
in-dwelling and fixed sins in us; and these habits of sin do much intend,
and strengthen our original corruption, making it more vigorous; and if so be
that custom be a second nature, how miserable is an unfegerate man, who has as
it were a twofold nature inclining him to sin? Original corruption, which is
like an innate habit, and custom in sin, which is like an acquired: So that
as the Scripture speaks of some, who are twice dead, so we may say, These are
twice alive, in respect of their vigorous propensity to sin; Therefore the
Scripture speaks sometimes of men, that have these double chains of wickedness
upon them: Thus when the Apostle, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12, etc. does from several
places in the Old Testament apply those things which are spoken of men in an
high nature flagitious, to every one by nature, that does comprehend both their
innate and acquired impiety, and therefore might well by the Apostle be applied
to all, because all by nature would be carried out to such enormous rebellions.
The Psalmist, because of original and habitual sin in some persons, has a
notable expression, Psalm. 5. 9. Their inward part is very wickedness, or
wickednesses, as in the Hebrew, Their inward part is nothing but wickedness.
Now although therefore habitual sins may truly be called sins dwelling in
us; yet the Apostle does not speak here of such habitual sins, for he speaks
all along of one sin, as the mother, as the fountain and root of all; And
besides, Paul speaking in the person of a regenerate man, could not complain of
the acquired habits of sin within him, for in Regeneration, there is an
expulsion of all habitual sin; and in this sense, Those that are born of God,
are said, not to sin, viz. habitually and customarily, as wicked men do,
although some actual sins, and those of a very heinous nature, may consist with
the work of grace, yet habites of sin, and habits of grace can no more
consist together, than light and darkness: It is evident then, that the Apostle
not meaning habitual sin, must understand original, in the immediate actings
and workings of it, for this will always be a troublesome and molesting
inmate; This is not conquered but with the last enemy, death it self.

SECT. III.
Why Original Corruption is called, The Inherent or In-dwelling Sin.
THis premised, Let us consider, why original corruption is called the Inherent
and In-dwelling Sin, and that even in a godly man.

And first, The Apostle calls it, the sin, ((...)) Because of the propriety,
and proper right it has to us. As a man is said to dwell in his house, because
he has a right to it, and it is his own: This original sin is in every man,
as in its proper place, as the stone does rest in its center, and will not move
further; So that as hell is said to be the proper place of Judas. He went
(says the Text) to his own place; Thus is the heart and soul of a man, the
proper and fit subject for all the natural impiety that cleaves to us; and
therefore, though the Devil be also said, To rule in the hearts of wicked men,
he dwells also in them, as well as sin, for which he is compared to an armed
man, keeping the house; yet this is more extrinsecal, and from without; The
Devil could not find a room ready swept and garnished for him, but because of
this native pollution: Hence the Apostle does not in this Chapter complain of
the Devil, but sin dwelling in him; He does not say, I would do good, but the
Devil hinders me (though that be sometimes true) but sin dwelling in him.

Secondly, This expression of sin dwelling in a man; denotes, The quiet and
peaceable possession it has in man by nature, it dwells there, as in its own
house, nothing to disturb or molest it: Hence it is, That all things are so
quiet in a natural man, there is nothing troubles him; he is not disquieted in
his conscience; he feels no such burden or weight within him, as Paul here
complains of; so that you would think many civil and natural men in a more
holy condition than Paul; They will thank God, They have a good heart, and all
is quiet within them; but this is not because original sin does not dwell,
and live, and work in them, but because they are senseless and stupid, sin is
in its proper place, and so there is no trouble and restlesness in their
conscience; Therefore its thy want of experimental discoveries that makes thee
question original sin, otherwise thy own heart would be in stead of all books
to thee in this particular. Indeed in godly men, though sin dwells in them,
yet it has not peaceable possession, it is as a tyrant in them; Therefore the
regenerate part makes many oppositions, and great resistances; There is
praying, watching and fasting against it; They are as sollicitous to have it
quite expelled, as some were to have Christ cast out the Devils from their
possessed friends; otherwise in the natural man original sin prevails all
over, and there is no noise, no opposition, yea great delight, and content
there is in subjection thereunto, so that they resist Grace, and the Spirit of
God by the Word, which would subdue sin in them.

So that there is a great difference between the In^dwelling of original sin
in a natural man, and a regenerate; In the former it dwells indeed, but as
the Jebusites in Canaan, upon hard terms, as the Gibeonites were in subjection
to the Israelites. It is true, Arminius (In Cap. 7. ad Romans page 696.) from
this expression of sin dwelling in Paul, does think a firm argument may be
drawn, to prove that he discourses of an unregenerate person, Because (says
he) the word to dwell, does in its proper signification, and in the use of the
Scripture signify a full and powerful dominion, and therefore rejects that
distinction of Peccatum dominans, or regnans, which is said to be in wicked
men, and inhabitans, which is in the godly; he would have it called inexistens,
not inhabitans: But we have showed, That sin is said to dwell in a man, not
because of its dominion in a godly man, but because of its fixed
inseparability, and from this word a servant, who has no rule in an house, is
called (...), 1. Pet. 2. 18.

Thirdly, The word does denote permanency, and a fixed abode in us; it is not
for a night, or year, but our whole life dwelling in us: So that sin is not
in a man's heart, as a pilgrim, as a stranger that is presently to remove, but
it has taken up a fixed abode in us, here it dwells, and here it will dwell,
you see our holy Apostle sadly complaining of this inseparability of it from
him, as long as he l^veth; Actual sins they are committed, and so pass away,
yea when pardoned, it is as if they had never been; but original sin is like
Samson's hair, though cut it will grow again, and be as strong as ever, till it
be plucked up by the roots.

Fourthly, In this expression is denoted the latency also, and security of it,
it dwells in us, and it is called, The Law in our members. The chief actings and
stirrings of it are in the inward man; Therefore it is that the natural man,
the Pharisaical and hypocritical man know nothing of it; Paul while a Pharisee,
and so zealous against gross sin, abounding in external obedience, yet knew
not lust to be a sin, neither was he so sensible of such a load and burden
within him.

Use 1. Of Instruction, not to think imputed original sin, or Adam's actual
transgression made ours, to be all the original sin we have: No, you may see
there is an in-dwelling sin, an inherent corruption, from whence flows all
that actual filth which is in our lives. And why is it that we hear no more
groaning and laboring under it? Is it not because the spiritual life of grace
is not within them? Oh why are all things so still and peaceable within thee!
Is it not because sin does all in thee, and flesh will not fight against flesh?

Use 2. Why is it that even the most holy are to walk humbly, to go out of
themselves, to lay fast hold on Christ and his righteousness, is it not because
they have such a treacherous enemy within, that hinders them in every holy
duty? Why also is there such a necessity of watching, praying, of holy fear and
trembling? Is not all this because of that secret deceitful adversary within
our own breasts?

CHAP. IV.
Of the Epithete Evil is present with us, given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
ROMANS 7. 21. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, Evil is present
with me.
I Shall not for the present say any more in the general, the may relate to the
Explication of this Chapter, especially of that conflict and combat mentioned
therein, as also in whose person he describes it; for all will be fully
considered, when we come to speak of the fruit and immediate effects of
original sin.

To come therefore immediately to the Text, You may easily perceive that it is
part of that paroxysme, and spiritual agony Paul is in between the principles
of good and evil, working in him: therefore he says, (...), I find, that is,
by experience: As for Grotius, who makes this no more than the combat of
conscience with corruption, which may be in natural men, alleging places out
of the Poets, and Epictetus, where some have said in the like manner, they knew
it was evil they did, and they do not allow it, but yet their frail flesh
compels them to do it, so that they do not what they would, and what they
would not, that they do: As also bringing in a Pagan out of Lactantius, saying,
That he sins, Non quia velo, sed quia cogor, the flesh being so strong in
him. These are but low and philosophical notions, arguing the ignorance of the
work, of Gods Spirit in a man, and the repugnancy thereunto by the unregenerate
part: But of this more in its time: It is enough for the present to take
notice, that Paul says of himself, That he finds this in him.

In the next place, There is the object matter of this experimental discovery,
which in the Greek is something intricate, and has so tormented Interpreters,
that there are eight Expositions given to make the grammatical connection: Yea
Erasmus is so bold, that unless we receive the supply of that Ellipsis or
defect, he thinks in Paul's speech which he gives, that we must confess
Paulum balbituri; but as Beza well says, Erasmus does ineptire in saying so,
our Translators render it smooth enough, I find a Law, and then follows the
specifical description of it, for (...) is taken many times (...), which is
this, That when I would do any good, I cannot do it so fully, so perfectly, so
freely, because evil (...) is present with me; it is adjacent and pressing upon
me; it does not signify a mere presence of sense, but the activity and
vigorous motions of it. Beza thinks it an allusion to that which was spoken
to Cain, Genesis 4. 7. Sin lies at the door, it is at hand upon all occasions
in the punishment thereof to lay hold on a sinner, howsoever if the simple word
(...), does not signify a bare simple nearness, but that which is a burdensome,
destructive approximation, as when it is said, Matthew. 3. 10. The ax is laid to
the root of the tree, (...), in the Original, and so also some expound that, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The Law is not made for the righteous, (...), as a burden imposed
upon him by constraint, for he has a voluntary principle within; If I say the
simple word (...) be used so, then much more the compound (...), for (...) and
(...) are called 'Diabolicae praepositiones, because they do so intend the
signification; Paul then finds sin always at hand, when his heart is ready
to do any good, to pull him back, to press him down, and so he is like the bird
tied in a string, which assaying to fly up to heaven immediately is plucked
back again; Now this sin thus present, is not actual, habitual, or an
accustomed sin; Though Gratius relates it to the custom of sin, even as he
does ( Lib. 2. de Jure belli cap. 12. 26.) expound that of the Apostle [By
nature the children of wrath] making nature to be custom, saying, The Apostle
does not so much speak of his own person, as of the Romans amongst whom he then
lived. For Regeneration delivers from the custom of sin, but it is that
original sin, that corrupt nature, which does always cleave to us, as the
shadow does the body, or rather, as the Ivy the Tree, secretly consuming it.
From whence observe,

That original sin is the adjacent sin, or the sin that is always
troublesomly present with as: So that whereas we may go from one company to
another, from one place to another, yet we can never go from this original
sin, but we carry it about with us at all times, in all places, in all
duties, and that even the most holy do, whereby it is that they are kept so
low, and humble in themselves; Why is it, that when we are regenerated, we
should not be like Saints in Heaven, without any spot or blemish? Why should we
not delight in God, and heavenly things, more than in earthly? Why should there
he the least difficulty and unwillingness in us to any thing that is good? Is
not all this, because this sin is thus readily present with us, it lies not
at the door, but in the very heart of us all?

But let us explain, What is comprehended in this Epithete given original
sin, That it is present with us?

SECT. II.
What is implied in that Epithete.
FIrst, It implies, That this sin puts it self forth first in the soul:
The motions and thoughts of sin arise first in us, before grace can prevent
them. The Schoolmen speak of the motus primo primi, the very immediate and
first stirrings of the Soul, before the will gives any consent, or the mind
has any deliberation, and these are sins, because contrary to the Image of
God; But whence come they? Even from this womb of original corruption: So that
it is like a furnace always sending forth sparks: The Scripture expresses it
notably, Genesis 6. 5. where every imagination of the thought of the heart is said
to be only evil, and that continually. Valentia (Analysis Dis. de peccato
originali) and other Papists complain, That we aggravate original sin too
much, we speak too tragically about it, and indeed the Subject is very
distasteful to every man; how unwilling is he to bear, that he is all over thus
sinful? This is to make them like Devils, and to send them to hell, they
think; but what can be spoken more terribly against man in regard of original
sin, then God himself here speaks, where every word is like so much thunder
and lightning, as is to be showed? Only for the present purpose observe, that
he says, Every imagination of the thought of a man's heart is evil;
Imagination, or framing, and fashioning the heart of a man, is compared to a
shop of wickedness, and every thing framed or fashioned there, is only evil.
Sin then is present in a powerful manner, when there cannot so much as rise
a motion in thee, a stirring of thy soul, though never so involuntary and
indeliberate, but it is only evil: Oh it was not thus in the state of
integrity, then every imagination, every motion was good, and only good; but
now our gold is become dross, and wine water; Let a natural man observe his
heart, and he shall see what rises first in his soul is all filth, like the
muddy fountain it comes from; Yea, even in a godly man, How many thoughts and
motions rise up in his heart, that he abhors and trembles at? It is true,
sometimes the devil injecteth vile and blasphemous thoughts; so that his heart
is not at all active in them, and therefore are not sins, but compared to the
Cup in Benjamin's sack, they knew not how it came there, and it is a great
dexterity in casuistical Divinity so to direct a Christin, that he may know
when such motions arise from the devil alone, so that they are my afflictions,
but not sins, or when they come from my heart, and so are truly imputable to
me; of which in its due time, it may be; but for the present we may sigh and
groan under this consideration, That evil is so present with us, that nothing
rises up in the heart sooner than sin.

Secondly, In that evil is said to be present, to Paul, there is denoted the
universal and diffusca presene of it. Paul does not say, it is present in one
part, in one faculty, but to me, that is in every part susceptible of sin.
Therefore it is called The Law in his members, because it puts forth its
efficacy every where: sin is present in the mind, by atheism, unbelief, etc.
in the will by obstinacy and obdurateness, in the affections by inordinacy and
confusion, yea sin is present in the eye, in the tongue; So that the Apostle
means, this original sin is of such an universal extent, that it is present
in every part in him; For you must not think (as some Papists do) That original
sin is only in the inferior, sensitive part of a man, but it is principally
and chiefly in the intellectual and most noble part, the mind and the
understanding; and indeed because it is so predominant, therefore is conversion
so difficult for the Ministry, bringing arguments and convictions out of Gods
word. The sin that is present in the understanding puts a man upon
atheistical cavils, and carnal disputes, whereby he shuts himself up
voluntarily in his darkness, rather than he will receive light.

Thirdly, In that evil is said to be present with us, here is denoted the
continual assaulting and vigorous acting of it at all times. Though original
sin be not an actual sin, yet it is an active sin; Hence Paul attributes
such actions to it, as if it were some mighty, imperious and conquering tyrant,
he says, it does (...) and (...), It warreth against him, it leads him into
captivity; Do not then think this sin has a mere bare sluggish presence, is
if it lay asleep in thee? No, it is daily assaulting thee, it is continually
pulling thee down; As the heart and pulse are in continual motion, thus is
original sin within thee; Therefore our imaginations are not only said to be
only evil (Genesis 6. 5.) but also continually; Thy soul never acts, but it
acts sinfully and corruptly. It is true, while men are in their natural
estate, They are dead in sin, and so they find not, feel not these stirrings,
neither do they groan under them, but there are innumerable Myriads of sinful
motions in thee to sin, though thou do not apprehend them; As a man shut
up in a dark dungeon full of Toads and noisome vermin, he sees nothing, till
light come into the place, and then he trembles, being afraid to stay there
any longer; such a loathsome dungeon is every man's heart naturally: Oh the
atheism, vanity, wickedness that is bound up therein, but thou do not know or
believe any such thing, because dead in sin.

Fourthly, There is implied the facility and easiness in sinning. The way to
sin is no narrow or strait way; There needs not much striving to enter
therein, for it is ready at hand; May not all find, if they will search, this
readiness of sin at all time? Why is thy heart so quickly moved and drawn out
to any earthly or sinful pleasure, but it is a long while, ere thou can make
any fire, or kindle a flame in thy soul to that which is good? Thy soul is a
dry Tree to the former, but a green Tree to the later, as the Scripture speaks
concerning the righteousness of faith, It Is night thee; Thou need not say,
Who shall go into the deep for it? Romans 10, etc. Thus it is true of sin in
thee, thou need no instruction, no masters, thou need not fetch devils
from hell to commit sin, for that is always present with thee: Hence Eliphaz
compares it, Job 15. to drinking of water, when a man is scorched with thirst;
If you see there are many, who by a natural conscience are so convinced, that
they are difficulty brought to commit some sins, especially gross ones; It is
no contradiction, for a man to be all over polluted and prone to sin,
notwithstanding such dictates of conscience implanted in all men; This is
plain, That sin ss so present, that without any difficulty or pain, we are
carried out to sin, so that the kingdom of hell does not like the kingdom of
Heaven, need any violence to take it.

Fifthly, When evil is said to be present, there is denoted the subtle and
daily insinuation of it into all that we do. It Is in a man, like leaven, that
sends forth its fourness into all the meal, it leaves not the least part
unleavened: This sin is like a Dalilah in Samson's heart, it is always
enticing and tempting of thee; and therefore it is called by the name of lust or
concupiscence; and Jam. 1. 17. there it is said (...), to entice, by setting
baits for us: Hence in Jer. 17. the wickedness of the heart is expressed by
this, That it is deceitful above all things; who can think, that the wise,
holy God made us with such hearts at first: No, but upon the first
transgression came this desolation upon us. Because then evil is thus present
with us, hence every holy duty is contaminated; hence there is flesh as well as
spirit in the best performances: This close subtle insinuating nature of
original sin, is the cause why a godly man can never know the bottom of his
heart; This makes so many hypocrites and apostates; This is it that makes a man
so uncertain about himself; for when he has done all, that we would think
there were no danger, yet some embers or other may lie, as it were, under the
ashes, and set all on flame.

Lastly, When it says, Evil is present with us, that denotes, the molesting
and retarding nature of it, stopping us in all the good we would do. This is
that especially for which Paul makes this sad complaint, so that he cannot step
one step, but sin pulls him back again; This is the millstone about the neck;
This is the clog and burden upon every man: Oh Lord, I would even fly up into
heaven, but this burden does press me down! When we would run our spiritual
race, this makes us halt.

Use. Of Instruction, to abhor all such Doctrines as teach a perfection, that
holds, We may attain to be without sin in this life. Some Anabaptists and
Papists, though so extremely contrary, yet have understood that place, Ephesians.
5. 27. Not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing (to be fulfilled in this
life, forgetting the words before) that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church; so that till this be done, it is not without spot; And near to
these are such, who though sin be every way present in them, yet because of
their pharisaical and doubled minds (as Paul once was) they do not discover or
feel any such thing. But let the tender enlightened heart go into Gods presence,
and sadly bewail himself, saying; O Lord, How ill is it with me? What shall I
think or say of my self? How unspeakable is my misery, I might have thought all
sin within me even dead and buried? But oh, how it stirs! Oh how ready is it
to put forth it self! Lord, I know not how to live with this burden, and yet I
cannot live without it, I should utterly faint, but that thy grace is
sufficient for me.

CHAP. V.
Of that Name, The Sin that does so easily beset us, given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
HEB. 12. 1. And the Sin which does so easily beset us.
THe Apostle from those several Examples of many Worthies recorded in the
former Chapter, which he calls, A Cloud of Witnesses, partly for the multitude
of them, and partly for Direction; As the Israelites had a Cloud to guide them
in the wilderderness, does infer a conclusion by way of Encouragement, to go
on constantly in the way of Christianity; which he does here, as in other
places, compare to a running in the race. This similitude shows the
Difficulty in the race, the Earnestness, the Fortitude and Patience that ought
to be in such who will be saved. What an antidote should the meditation of this
expression, be against all dullness, slothfulness and negligence, whose life is
like a running in a race to Heaven: Now the Apostle following this Metaphor,
exhorts to lay aside all those burdens that may hinder us in this work: It
would be (...) in him, who is to run a race, to put burdens upon his back,
and lay as many heavy weights upon himself, as he can; No less absurd are
they, who give way to sin in the lusts thereof, and yet hope to arrive at
Heaven.

Now the burden we are to lay aside, is expressed in two words:

1. (...) weight, by this is meant, all actual sin, especially love and cares
about the world, for the earth is an element that descends downward, and so he
who has an earthly heart, cannot but have his soul press downward.

2. There is the Root and cause of this, expressed in that phrase, The sin
that does so easily beset us, (...), the word is but once used, and that in
this place, it is a two fold compound, and so the more emphatical, (...), which
is as much here as easy, and (...), so that it is a sin which besetteth and
compasses us about, and that very easily, it finds no resistance, neither have
we any power to withstand it.

Some understand this of actual sins, but not only Protestant Interpreters,
but even some Papists also; Ribera and others understand it of Concupiscence
within us; The word is made a Metaphor several ways; Erasmus renders it,
Tenaciter adhaerentem, That sin which does so tenaciously adhere to us,
making it an All^sion to Ezekiel Chap. 24. where there is a Pot set on the
fire, yet all the fire and burning cannot get off the rust and filth that
cleaves to it. Gretius makes it to respect Lament. 1. 14. where there are
yokes and bands mentioned about the neck, which are impediments to the beast in
his going.

Others they make the Metaphor from a Wall, or an hedge that stops the
passenger in his way; Yea, Lapide following others, makes it to be the outward
temptations, or the dangers that are in the way by enemies and adversaries to
the Truth, but the Greek (...), does not well agree to that: Hesichius
rendereth (...), Varinus (...). If we compare this expression with what Paul
says of himself ( Romans 7) concerning original sin, keeping and pressing him
down; we may well with Beza put a procul dubto upon that exposition, which does
apply it to original sin, for that indeed is the only weight, that does
constantly and perpetually beset us and hinder us in our way to Heaven, and
that with all ease and facility: Observe then,

That original sin is the sin which does so easily beset us: That does
circumcingere, as Beza says, bind us up strait and close, that our limbs are
not expedite and free to run our holy race; So that it is with us as a racer
that has his arms or legs bound, his garments so strait-laced to him, that he
cannot have that liberty and freedom to run, as he does desire. Some consider
the word, as it did allude to a millstone about the neck, plunging us down into
the Sea.

SECT. II.
What is implied in that Expression, So easily beset us.
LEt us take notice, What is contained in this excellent and emphatical word.
And

First, There is implied our utmost impotency and inability to shake off the
power of it. For although the Apostle exhorts us to lay it aside, yet that
must be understood as a duty always in doing, that we are neverable to
compleatfully and perfectly; You see, though they are godly to whom he writes,
and they are already in the race, yet it is their work daily to be unburdenning
of themselves: When therefore it is called, The sin so easily besetting us,
hereby is taught us our inability and insufficiency to withstand it; Insomuch
that all those Doctrines, which teach Free Will, and a power to do what is
good, are justly to be abandoned, John 15. when separated from Christ, we
cannot do any thing, and therefore are said to be not asleep, but even dead in
sin; so that no Infant new born is more unable to help it self, than we are
to promote the good of our own souls. This therefore must be laid as a
foundation, without this our humiliation does not go deep enough; We are to
lie bemoaning our selves, as that poor Cripple, which had no power to put
himself into the water; And indeed till we be sensible of this impotency, we
cannot expect that Christ will help us; When that Cripple said, He had no man,
than our Savior relieved him: Oh then, bewail the strait and misery thou art
in If it were a temporal calamity thou were in, and such as neither thou thy
self, or any man in the world could help thee, How greatly would it afflict
thee? But now though neither men or Angels can deliver thee out of this
spiritual evil, yet thou do not lay it to heart.

Secondly, As it densteth that our power to good is lost by this original
sin; So also our will and desire: For why should it be said to beset us so
easily? But because we have neither power or will against it; so that till the
principle of Regeneration be infused into us; sin has defiled our will, as
well as our power; as we cannot, so neither we will not gain say the lusts
thereof. We must not then conceive of man, as indeed miserably polluted, and
such as cannot help himself, but is very willing, and heartily desires to be
freed from this bondage, but his will is as grossly polluted, as any thing, He
wills not the things of God, he loves not, yea he hates every thing that is
spiritual and holy; Insomuch that we may truly say, That the actual wickedness
in men's lives, does not only arise from weakness and impotency to what is
holy, but from an unwillingnesse, and an averseness to it. Though they be
allured with the glorious promises of Gods favor, and eternal glory; Though
the terrors of God, and the everlasting flames of hell be set before them, yet
they will not; Though their consciences be convicted, though the word of God be
plain against their lusts, so that they cannot tell what to say, yet they will
not: So that herein lies the sad and dreadful efficacy of original sin,
that it has corrupted the will all over, so that whereas we will the lusts of
the flesh, the pleasures of sin, the comforts of the world, we have no will
to what is good: If then the will, which is the appetitus universalis, and like
the primum mobile, that does carry all the inferior orbs with it, be thus
infected with sin, no wonder if we be easily beset by it: This is to bribe
the Commander in Chief, that rules all, and so it is no wonder, if all be at
last betrayed into the hands of sin and Satan.

Thirdly, When original sin is said thus to beset us, and compass us about,
hereby is denoted, What an impediment and hinderance it is to us in our way to
Heaven, that were it not for this clog upon us, we should with all cheerfulness
and alacrity run the way of Gods Commandments. It is this that makes the
Chariot-wheels of the soul move so slowly; It is this that stops us in the way,
that makes us draw back.

SECT. III.
How many ways Original Sin is a Burden, and an Hinderance unto us.
NOw because this property is chiefly aimed at by the Apostle in this
expression, viz. that it is a burden, an hinderance, a stop to us, while we are
in our race: Let us consider, How many ways original sin is a burden and
hinderance, so that if this were removed, there would be no complaints of the
difficulty that we find to what is good, yea the more perfect and spiritual any
duty is, the more pleasing and acceptable it would be to an heart eased of this
burden. And

First, Original sin is a burden incurvando, By bowing down and pressing to
the soul to these creatures here below; So that now by nature the creature with
the comforts thereof, is the center of a man's heart, is the ultimate object his
soul is placed upon. God indeed made man after his own image and then his
heart, his affections, they did all ascend upwards to God, then he could not
satiate, or fully delight himself in any thing but God, but through this
original sin a man is habitually averse to God, and converted to the
creatures; So that God is not in all his thoughts, yea Ephesians. 2. 2. they are
said to be without God in the world, Even as the body of a man, when deprived
of its sense; falls prostrate presently upon the ground; so when that
original righteousness was removed, which was the soul of the soul, presently
we fall downwards to the creatures, knowing no better good, nor desiring any
better comforts, but what are in them. No marvel then if this make the godly go
stooping and bowing down, because it depresseth and leans to the creature,
leaving God; That as you see the body is a burden to the soul, especially if
diseased, which made Plato say, (...) was (...), the very grave and sepulcher
of the soul: Thus original sin is a spiritual burden to it, that there cannot
be those ascensions and elevations of the mind to God, as ought to be.

Secondly, It Is an impediment in our race, Obnitendo, by a plain opposing and
contrary thwarting of any good that the Spirit of God either externally offers,
or internally operates. Thus this native sin does with all violence oppose
and thwart whatsoever is spiritual; Therefore you see the Apostle expressing
this resistance by military words, that it does war against him, and
sometimes lead him into captivity; Thus even a Paul is like a poor captive or
prisoner, carried up and down whether he would not: Now this obnitency and
reluctance of original sin is seen two ways against what is good:

1. There is a good published and tendered by the preaching of the Gospel. God
does by that proffer unto us everlasting and eternal life; but this original
sin stirs up a man to reject it, and to refuse it; it is no suitable or
acceptable offer to our natures, no more than pearls or sweet flowers are to
the beastly Swine. Indeed when a people have lived long under the preaching of
the Gospel, yet do reject it, and oppose it, loving darkness rather than light,
these have a double blindness and hardness upon them; The natural one by
original sin, and the habitual contracted one, which they are justly
delivered up into by God for the contempt of the light they do enjoy; but I
speak here only of the natural blindness, and natural hardness upon our hearts:
So that upon the very first offers and tenders of grace, the first Sermon that
ever we hear, the first time that the Gospel does sound in our ears, we have a
contrariety to it; and why is it that a man should thus naturally be an enemy
to his own peace? Is it not because of this imbred sin working in us?

2. If the Spirit of God go further, and does not outwardly teach only, but
inwardly and spiritually also, changing even the whole man, making it a new
creature, yet because this corruption is not quite rooted out, it does
continually gain say, and withstand that Law of the mind within us: Whence then
is it that such rebellion and opposition is within thee to every good thing? Is
it not because original sin has put thee into this disorder?

Thirdly, It is an impediment alliciendo and inescando, It does ensnare and
allure the heart, so that while the soul should pursue the race, that throws
in the way some alluring objects or others, and thereby it is stopped in its
course; As the Heathens speak of golden Apples cast in the way to hinder one
that was swiftly running in the race: He that runs in a race, must not step
out of the way to gather every flower that grows by the way-side; nor is he
to stand still and refresh his eyes with pleasant objects: Thus neither ought
we in our way to Heaven; but this original corruption bewitches and enticeth
the heart with many deceitful and alluring lusts: So that by this means we are
for the most part in golden, sweet, dreams, promising this and that comfort to
our selves, till at last with Dives we awaken in hell, and see our selves
bereaved of all happiness. The Apostle James does fully confirm this secret
bewitching way of original sin within us, which he calls lust, Jam. 1. 14.
So that, marvel not to see thy self drowned in all the pleasures of sin, to
be sucking down the comforts of earthly things with all delight, for this lust
within thee, this bewitching Dalilah in thy breast, puts thee into a sweet
sleep, and so heavenly things have no relish, no taste to thy appetite, but the
things of the world are sweeter than the honeycomb: Oh why is it that sin
which is indeed full of stings and bitterness should be so sweet! Why should it
be such a pleasing thing to go in the ways that lead to hell and damnation?
that when thou art sinning, it is as thou would have it? Is not all this,
because sin has ensnared and enticed thee?

Lastly, Sin is a burden to the soul in our race, debilitando, By weakening
and debilitating the principles of grace within us: So that although we are
regenerated and sanctified, yet because original sin does intimately adhere
even to the very habits of grace within us, so that they are not perfect and
pure: Hence it is that their actings are more remiss and languid; we cannot
love God perfectly, we cannot have pure and sinnelesse actions, because we have
not pure and sinnelesse principles: So that whereas some have thought, that
there is not such a spiritual conflict in a godly man, as we speak of, because
that would make the will, to will and nill at the same time two contrary
things; they do not rightly understand this Assertion, for it is not from
contrariety of volitions, but because the will being not perfectly healed,
wills good things remisly and faintly, not with that perfection, or freedom
and alacrity as it ought to do.

Use. Of Instruction. Every day to bewail this depraved estate of thine more
and more; We take thee (as Ezekiel was in another case) and cause thee to see
every day more and more abomination: Thou have not heard all the worst, nor
have we discovered all the worst that is in us, yea, we are never able to go
to the bottom of it. This original sin is an unsearchable Mystery; It is a
long while ere we come to know any thing of it, and longer ere we come to know
the breadth and length of it. Know this sufficiently, and then be in love with
thy self, or trust in thy good heart, and thy own righteousness, if thou can.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Name Evil Treasure of the Heart, given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
MAT. 12. 35. And an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings
forth evil things.
THese words are part of an Apologetical Answer, that our Savior made against
the Pharisees, who were guilty of blaspheming the holy Ghost, because they did
maliciously oppose the known truth, and what was done by the Spirit of God,
attributing it to the power of the devil. And in this Apology the fervency and
zeal of our Savior, does appear in the compellation he gives them, Generation
of vipers: Here you see, That it is not always railing and indiscreet zeal, to
call wicked men by such names that their sins do deserve.

In the next place, he gives the reason of this their blasphemy, it is no
wonder if they speak ill, who have ill and naughty hearts, which he expresses
emphatically:

1. By an interrogation, How can ye?

2. By the impossibility, How can ye?

3. From the matter mentioned: he does not say, How can ye being evil de good
things, but speak; We might think wicked men might easily forbear evil words,
though not evil actions, but their heart is first set on fire with hell, and
then the tongue. The Physician discovers how the heart is by the tongue, and so
does Religion also. Now that good words cannot proceed from a bad heart, viz.
naturally (for on purpose, and artificially many evil-minded men, may speak
religiously, and men may have butter words, whose hearts are like swords) our
Savior proves from the common and even proverbial rule; A good man has a
good heart, and a good treasure, and so of this sweet fountain cannot come
bitter streams. But a bad man has an evil treasure in his heart, and so from
these thorns men cannot gather grapes, nor from these thistles figs; we see
here then a good man and a bad, diversified by that which is wholly hidden and
secret, not known to any, but God, till he discover it by words or actions. Now
this evil treasure in every man's heart is twofold,

1. That which is Natural, that which he comes into the world with, thus every
man has an inexhausted treasure of wickedness, which he spends upon all his
life time, and yet never comes to the bottom of it; And in this sense our
Divines do well prove, That no natural or unregenerate man is able to do any
thing, though never so little that is good, because he is a bad Tree, and being
also of the seed of Serpents, there cannot come any honey, or sweet thing from
him.

2. There is an acquired and increased treasure of sin, which a man storeth
up by daily custom in sin, so that he becomes to have two treasures of evil
in his soul, as if one were not enough, natural, and voluntary, innate, and
voluntarily contracted: For you must know, That original sin, though it be a
full fountain of poison, ready of it self to overflow, yet custom in sin does
strengthen, and enable it to be more vigorous and operative; we may put more
wood to this fire, and so make it more dreadful: Even as these Pharisees,
though they were by nature, the Serpents seed, yet because of their voluntary
and contracted malicious disposition in them, superadded to the former, our
Savior calls them, Generation of vipers. Now although the Pharisees had this
twofold evil heart, naturally, and voluntarily, yet I shall of the former
only, and so handle it not, as relating to the Pharisees, but as it is a
general Truth, to be affirmed of every one, till renewed by grace, that he has
an evil treasure, an evil heart within him; And from thence observe,

That original sin is the evil treasure that is in a man's heart. Sometimes
the heart it self is said to be evil, to be desperately wicked; but then it is
not taken physically, as it is a corpulent substance in a man; but morally or
theologically, as it is the seat and principle of all evil: For as the Sea has
all the Rivers in it, from which they come, and to which they return again; so
the heart is the fountain of all evil, and all evil is seated in it, coming
from the heart, and going back again to it.

But let us open this treasure, which is not like the opening of that
Alablaster Box, which perfumed the whole house; but like the opening of a
noisome Sepulcher or dunghill, from whence comes only what is loathsome;
Therefore it is not called a treasure in a good sense, as commonly the word is
used; for we do not use to treasure up vile and loathsome things; but because in
a treasure there is plenty and fullness, therefore is this evil heart, this
original pollution called a treasure, and that very properly, for these
resemblances.

SECT. II.
How Original Sin resembles a Treasure.
FIrst, A treasure has fullness and abundance. A poor man that has only money
enough to discharge his daily expenses, is not said to have a treasure, for
that denotes abundance, more than enough: Thus is original sin deservedly
called a treasure, because it is a fullness of wickedness: As in Christ the
treasures of wisdom are said to be in him, Col. 2. 3. So in every man, there is
a treasure of folly and wickedness; so that every man is rich enough to sin,
let him be never so poor, never so straightened, not a morsel of meat to eat, not
a farthing to buy any thing with, yet he has a rich heart, a full heart to
sin, he is never destitute of plenty and power to do that; which
consideration should greatly humble thee to think, in stead of that good
treasure, which God once put into my heart, being thoroughly furnished with
every grace; now there is a treasure of evil; now darkness is where all that
light was; evil, and nothing but evil, where all that good was; Though thou art
a rich man, and a great man, glorying in thy treasures of wealth, yet the
treasures of evil in thy heart, may make thee fear and tremble.

Secondly, Here is denoted in this expression, That all sin is potentially
and seminally in our hearts; For it is not said to be an evil heart in some
respect, and as to some actings, but indefinitely and generally, an evil
treasure of the heart. Hence Romans 3. 14, 15. There are in man by nature crimson
actual sins of the greatest guilt, viz. The poison of Asps is under their
tongues, their mouth is full of cursing, their feet are swift to shed blood,
etc. These sins which some few of mankind only, and those the worst of men, do
ordinarily commit, yet they are attributed to every man by nature; And why?
because there is the treasure of these in his heart; you cannot name the vilest
actions that are, though for the present like Hazael, thou would defy such
things, saying, Am I a dog, a devil, that I should do them? yet did not God
bind up this treasure of evil in thee, as he does the clouds, that are his
treasures of rain, thou would quickly be overwhelmed with them; what
trembling should this make in a man's heart, when he shall consider, there is
not the vilest and most profane atheistical man breathing, but thy heart would
carry thee out to do the like, did not God say to this sea of corruption within
thee, Hitherto thou shall go and no further? It is because of this, that David
and other eminent godly men, have fallen into such gross and loathsome sins,
that you would have thought they had not been in the least danger of, that they
were as far from, as the East from the West, yet how quickly could these
materials for sin in their hearts ripen, and break out into a flame? How
quickly did even the green Tree burn? What then would the dry Tree do? Look
then upon thy self, as the vilest sinner in the world, in respect of thy
principles, and propencity to all sin; Say, it is not because I have a better
nature, I have less original sin in me, but because God is pleased to put a
restraint upon me! Certainly, if this will not make us like Job, abhor our
selves, as it were, upon the dunghill, what will?

Thirdly, In that original sin is compared to a treasure, there is denoted
the inexhausted nature of it, though we sin never so much, yet the stock of
sin is not quite spent. As God, because he has a treasure of mercy, and
therefore said to be rich in grace; though he shows never so much mercy, and
vouchsafes never so much grace, yet his treasure is not impoverished thereby,
he is as fully able to bestow fresh grace, and new mercy to thee, as if this
were the first time that ever he began to be merciful: Thus, though with great
disproportion, it is with a man that has this evil treasure in his heart;
Though he sin all the day long, though from this abundance his mind thinks,
his tongue speaks, his hand acts that which is evil, yet still his
corruption is not abated, yea it is the more strenghned and increased: As it is
with poisonous creatures, though they vent never so much poison, yet they
cannot cast out the root and cause of it as long as they live: So though a
natural man be all the day long sending forth nothing but sin and folly, yet
his heart is as full as ever, this fountain is not dried up; Therefore although
it may fall out, that many bodily sins cannot be any longer committed,
because the body grows old and infirm, yet this original sin is never
weakened, while a man is unregenerated, but in a natural man, though an hundred
years old, yet it is as vigorous and active, as in youthful sins. It is
reported of a liberal Emperor, who was much in free munificence, that he would
say, (...) Draw from me, as from the River Nilus, meaning, that he would never
be weary, that he was like a fountain, of which all travelers might drink, yet
he be as full as ever: Thus it is with this treasure of original sin, all the
sins that have come from it to this day, have not at all diminished the
fountain, it is as full and as overflowing as ever, yea as sudden showrs make
the rivers fuller, causing a flood; Thus do all actual and customary sins, they
make this original corruption like Nebuchadnezzar's furnace seven times hotter
than it was before.

Fourthly, In that it is called a treasure, we thereby see the delight and
pleasure that we naturally take in what is sinful. Our Savior says, Where a
man's treasure is, there his heart is also; how much more when this treasure is
his heart, when his heart and treasure is all one? Therefore this expression
does denote the futable and pleasing nature of sin to us; it shows, that
what water is to the hydropical man, as Job 15. so is sin to a man by nature:
Hence Heb. 11. they are called, The pleasures of sin; Who would think so? you
would rather think we might as well say, The pleasures of hell, and the
pleasures of damnation, that a man would be as willing to be damned, as to
sin; But thus sweet and pleasing is sin to every man by nature, because his
heart is upon it, it is a treasure to him; That as the godly account Gods will
sweeter than the honeycomb, so do they the will and lusts of sin; Do ye not
pity such, who are so distempered in their palate, that they cannot forbear
eating those things, which will be their death at last? How much more miserable
is man, to whom nothing is so pleasant, so much sought after, as that which
will prove his eternal damnation? And certainly, if sin be not such a delight
to thee naturally, how comes it about that no threatening, no fear of hell, all
the curses in the Law denounced against thee cannot make thee forbear? If you
regard sin in its own nature, so the Scripture represents it most irksom and
loathsome, comparing it to gall, to a bitter root, to mire, to vomit; And who
can desire to swallow down these things? But because original sin has
infected all, has made us like so many beasts, therefore what is in it self
abominable, to our corrupt natures is become exceeding pleasant.

Fifthly, Because it is a treasure, therefore it is that every day there comes
from us some new corruption or other, some new sin or other to be matter of
condemnation to us. That when we might think, if once we had got our hearts to
such a frame, if once we could subdue such a corruption, then, we hope we
should be at some ease; but no sooner have we obtained such desires, but this
treasure of evil pours out new matter of sorrow, corruptions rise fresh
again, when we began to hope all were dead; So that the soul begins to be even
hopeless, crying out, O Lord, how long? When shall this bloody flux be stopped?
When shall it once be that I may be quiet and free from this molesting enemy
within? But it is with thy heart as with the sea, when one wave is over,
presently there comes another, and again another, and it cannot be otherwise
as long as this treasure is in us, as Job says, Chap. 14. A Tree though the
boughs of it be cut, yet the root will spring again, and be as big as ever, if
suffered to grow: Thus original sin, though it may be mortified and crucified
in some measure, though there may be much stopping and abating the strength of
it by grace, yet because the root is there still, it will quickly sprout again:
Hence are the godly put upon those duties of crucifying and mortifying the
flesh, because they will have this work to do, as long as they live; there is a
treasure, and so out of this, as the good Scribe cut of his good treasure, Mat.
13. 52. does bring out new and old, thus does he old lusts and new.

Use. Of Instruction. Have we all by nature an evil treasure in our hearts,
then see, why it is that thou art always sinning, that thou art never weary,
that all the world cannot change thee, or make thee of another mind? Is it not
this evil treasure within? As it is a treasure of sin, so it is of wrath and
punishment, Romans 2. some are said, To treasure up to themselves wrath against
the day of wrath; and this is thy case, and never do thou flatter thy self,
because thou do not feel and perceive any such evil upon thee, for therein
art thou the more miserable; Treasures use to be hidden and secret, therefore
in the Scripture called hidden treasures, and thus is this treasure of evil in
thy heart, it is hidden from thee, thou do not know it, till God open thy
eyes, till he give a tender heart.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Name Body, given to Original Sin.
SECT. I.
ROMANS 8. 13. But if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body,
ye shall live.
I Come now to the last Name, I shall insist upon, that the Scripture gives
original sin, and that is a Body; For although the most famous, and notable
name is flesh, yet because that will most properly be considered, when we speak
of the Nature and Definition of it, I shall put it off till that time; Only we
must necessarily take notice of this Title given to it here, and elsewhere, (
viz.) a Body: Not that this word is to foment the Illyrican absurdity, That
original sin is not an accident, but a substance; but hereby is manifested
the real and powerful efficacy of it upon the whole man: For the coherence of
the words, the Apostle at verse. 12. from that glorious and precious Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, and also Sanctification begun in us, does infer
this Exhortation by way of Conclusion, That therefore we are not Debtors to the
Flesh, we have received such great and unspeakable favors from God, that we
owe all to him; as for sin, called here the Flesh, we owe nothing at all to
that, sin will not justify us, sin will not save us: Neither has the
Devil showed that love to us, which Christ has done.

By this then we see, That though Justification and Gospel-mercies be not for
any works or merits of ours, yet Believers are to study and abound in holiness,
as that which Christ aimed at by the work of Redemption, as well as our
Justification. Now for this reluctance against, and mortification of sin, the
Apostle uses several Arguments, as in the Text, the danger that will accrue
even to the godly, If they live after the flesh, they shall die, that is,
eternally; The godly need this goad to prick them forward, they must not please
themselves, as if because they were elected, justified, they may live as they
list, and walk after the flesh; No, if they do so, they shall surely be damned.

SECT. II.
What is implied by the word Mortify.
BUt on the contrary, If they mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit,
they shall live; where you have the duty supposed, to mortify; that implies,
it is not enough to forbear from the actings of sin, but they must kill it;
Sin may be left upon many considerations, yet not mortified; Look therefore
that sin be dead in thee, and not asleepy, or only restrained for a season.

Again, To mortify signifies the pain and renitency that is in the
unregenerate part against this Duty. A wicked man had almost as willingly be
killed, as leave his lusts. This shows how fast sin is rooted in us, more
than a tooth in the jaw, or the soul in the body; and if any of these are not
taken away without much pain and trouble, no wonder if the leaving of our
corruptions be so troublesome to us.

Lastly, This word supposes, It Is a constant work, we are always mortifying,
always crucifying; This is spoken to comfort the godly, that they should not
wholly be dejected, if they find some actings and stirrings of sin still
within them.

SECT. III.
SEcondly, There is the Object of this Duty, and that is The deeds of the body;
Many translate it, The deeds of the flesh, for that which was called (...)
before, is here called (...); Now this body is not only sin putting it self
forth in bodily actions, but it is the same with flesh, which is original
corruption defiling the whole man: So that the body here, as Beza does well
observe, is, The whole man in soul and body, while unregenerate; for the flesh,
the body here spoken of by the Apostle, is in the soul as well as body, it is
every thing that is opposite to God in a man, whether it be in his mind, or in
his flesh. So that Austin said, The Epicurean he says, Frui carne mea est
bonum, to enjoy the flesh is good; The Stock he says, Frui mente mea est
bonum, to enjoy my mind is good, but both are deceived, for to enjoy God only
is good, and both the body and the mind are all over defiled with sin.

SECT. IV.
LAstly, There is the Efficient Cause, by which we mortify the deeds of the
body, and that is the Spirit; It Is not our power, but Gods Spirit that
conquereth these lusts for us, Observe,

That original sin is a body in us. It is a body both in our soul and body;
it is called a body, not properly, as if it were a substance, but metaphorically
and allusively; So Romans 6. 6. it is called The body of sin; and certainly it
may as well be called so as flesh and the old man.

SECT. V.
Why Original Sin is called a Body.
BUt let us consider, Why it has such a name given to it. And

First, It is to show, That original sin does not lie latent in our breasts,
but puts it self forth visibly in all the operations of the body: That as
the Godhead is said to dwell in Christ boa^ly, and the Word was made flesh,
because the Divine Nature which is immaterial and invisible, did through the
body become as it were visible. Thus we may say, Original sin dwells in us
bodily, and that it is made our flesh, because in and through all bodily
actions, it does manifest it self both to our selves and others: It is then the
body of sin, because it makes it self outward visible, and does as it were
incarnate sin, hence it is called the outward man: Indeed it is disputed,
whether 2 Cor. 4. 16. where the Apostle says, Though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed daily; By outward man there is meant the body
only, or original sin in the bodily deeds thereof; Most do interpret it of
the body only, yet Paraeus understands it of original sin with the body, That
as the body and original corruptions with the effects thereof are constantly
dying, being mortified by the Spirit of God, so the inward man, which is the
work of grace, is daily more confirmed; Howsoever this be, yet it is plain,
Romans 7. 22. That the work of grace within us, being called the inward man, that
by opposition, original corruption must be the outward man, and therefore
called, The Law in our members. It is thought by Nerimbergius, that the Apostle
takes this distinction of an outward and inward man from Plato, out of whom he
quoteth a place, with some vicinity to Paul's expression. This is certain, That
original sin may well be called, a body, and the Law in our members, because
by these it does so palpably put forth its self: Insomuch that we may wonder
any will not believe there is original sin, for it is obvious to the sense,
they may behold the effects of it, that as you may know a man has a soul,
because he speaks and laugheth, though you cannot see the soul: Thus though
you cannot see original sin, yet because as soon as ever the child can speak
or do any thing, you see vanity and sin put forth it self, therefore you may
conclude there is original sin: Thou then, that wilt not be convinced of it
by Scripture, by reasons and several Authorities, we send thee to experience;
You cannot go from house to house, from Town to Town, from company to company,
but you may see the effects and actings of original sin: If you say, It Is
men's actual sins and custom therein, that makes them so vile; It is true; But
still we ask, Whence came the custom? Whence came they to have those actings?
Certainly, those streams could not have been polluted, if the fountain had not
been; and if original sin did not infect our natures, why should not men
generally as well act that which is good, and obtain a custom in that which is
commendable? Therefore experience, thy eyes, thy ears, may convince thee of
this bodily sin.

Secondly, The Apostle calls it a Body, to answer those other expressions
that he uses about it, for he often calls upon us to mortify, to kill, to
crucify this original sin: Now to mortify and crucify are properly
relating to a Body, we do not say properly accidents, or qualities are
crucified. To make therefore the expression harmonious, he calls it a Body;
Howsoever therefore it is with our natural body, that no man ever yet hated his
own flesh, we are to nourish and cherish that, and it would be murder to
mortify that body, yet this Body of sin is to be kept under, we are not to
spare it, but by the Spirit of God to be constantly crucifying of it; neither
let that discourage thee, because (as you heard) this will be painful and
grievous to flesh and blood; for you must conclude upon this, That the way to
Heaven is narrow and straight, there must be constant violence and opposition
to all natural inclinations: Every godly man may well be called a Martyr, for
though he may feel no pain in the killing of his natural body, yet he must and
will feel much exercise in killing the body of sin, but better endure some
grief here, than eternal torments hereafter. Our Savior speaks to this twice,
as it is mentioned by the Evangelist Matthew, Chap. 5. 30 and 18. 3. It is
better (says he) to go halt and blind into life, than with two hands and eyes
to be cast into everlasting fire: Think then, whether will be more burdensome to
leave the pleasures of sin here, or hereafter to be tormented to all eternity.

Thirdly, Original sin may be called a Body, To show the reality of it, that
it is not a mere fancy or humane figment, as some call it, or a non ens (as the
late Writer D. J. T. Answ. to a letter.) We know the Scripture, and so our use
of speech opposes a body to a shadow; The Legal Rites are called a shadow, and
Christ the body; Thus original sin, it is not the shadow, or the notion of a
sin, it lives and moves as well as actual, it provokes God, it curses and
damneth as well as actual sins; So that we are not to flight it, or to be
fearless of it, but rather to tremble under it, as the fountain of all our evil
and calamity. The word Body is sometimes taken for that which is substantial
and real, in which sense some have excused Tertullian and others, that
attributed a body to God and Angels, as if they intended nothing but a real
substance, as the a^iome of the Stoics was, Omne quod est, est corpus; Hence
they made Virtues and the Arts, Bodies: But whatsoever their intentions might
be, the expression is dangerous, for God is a Spirit; but there is no danger to
call original sin a Body, thereby to express the full and real nature of it,
and thus far Illyricus his intention was good, though his opinion was absurd,
to amplify those terms the Scripture gives to original sin in opposition to
Popery, wherein they speak so coldly and formally of it, only that he should
therefore make it to be more than an accident, even the substance of a man in a
theological consideration; hence he did overthrow all Philosophy and Divinity;
So that properly the Lutheran Poet cannot be excused, when he says, Ipse Deo
eoram sine Christo culpa scelumque,
Ipse ego peccatum sum, proprieque vocer.
In a figurative expression it may pass, but he intended Flaccianism; hence
Contzen speaks of Illyricus by scorn, Cujus vel substantia est peccatum. Yet
thus much we must take notice of, That the Scripture does not in vain use such
substantive names about our natural defilement, for hereby it does aggravate
it, and would have us also know the greatness and vileness of it; For how few
are there, till sanctified and enlightened by the Spirit of God, that do bewail
this as an heavy burden? They can complain of the pains, the aches, the
troubles of their natural body, but do not at all regard this body of sin,
whereas to a spiritual tender heart, this body of sin is far more grievous
than any bodily diseases, or death it self, yea death is therefore welcome to
them, because that alone will free from this body of sin, so that they shall
never be molested with it more.

Fourthly, Original sin is called the Body of sin, Because it is a mass of
sin, a lump of all evil: It is not one sin, but all sin seminally: And this
seems to be the most formal and express reason, why the Apostle gives it
this name, calling it a Body, and attributing members to it; for as a body is
not one member, or one part, but the whole compounded of all; Thus is original
sin, it is not the defilement, or pollution in one part of the soul, but it
diffuseth it self through all. It is a body of sin, and herein it does exceed
all actual transgressions, and for this reason, we ought the more to grieve and
mourn under it; The body is heavier than one part, why are actual sins a load
upon thee, but this which is the cause of all, and comprehends all, thou art
never affected with? O pray more for the Spirit of conviction by the Word! Look
oftener into the pure glass of the Law! Compare thy universal deformity with
that exact purity! It is for want of this the pharisaical and the natural man
is so self-confident, trusts so much in his own heart, does so easily
persuade himself of Gods love, whereas if we come to a Christian like Paul,
complaining of this Law of sin within him, finding it captivating and haling
of him whither he would not, then we have much a do to comfort such an one, all
our work is to make him have any hope in Christ, he thinks none are so bad as
he, that the very devils have not worse in them, than he feels in himself;
and all this is, because original sin is such a loathsome dunghill in his
breast, that as those who have putrified arms, or other parts of their body,
they cannot endure themselves, they would fly from themselves: Thus it is with
them, because of this original pollution.

Fifthly, Original sin may be called a Body, Because it inclines only to
carnal, earthly and bodily things, not at all savouring the things of God and
his Spirit. Hence it is called so often the flesh, because it only carries a
man to fleshly things, being contrary to God, and full of enmity to his will,
as Romans 8. And does not experience confirm this? Take any man, till renewed by
grace, and all the bent and impulse of his soul, are to such things alone, that
are earthy and sensual, Jam. 3. 17. The Apostle James does there excellently
describe the nature of all natural wisdom, It is earthy, sensual and devilish;
Every one by nature is both beastly and devilish; This body of sin presses
him down to the earth and hell: Insomuch that you may as soon see a worm flying
in the air like a bird, as a man abiding in this natural pollution, having his
conversation in heaven; So that being made thus bodily and carnal, all the
spiritual things of God are both above our apprehension, and contrary to our
affections. Now this very particular, if there were no more, is as deep as the
Sea, and contains unspeakable matter of humiliation, viz. That by this
natural pollution, we are destitute of Gods Spirit; Spiritual things are no
more apprehended by us, than melody by the deaf ear: Do ye not see wise men,
learned men, yea great Scholars, when you come to discourse with them about
spiritual things, they are very fools, and are as blind as moles that live
wholly in the earth? But of this more in the effects of original sin.

Lastly, In the Scripture, Body is used sometimes for the strength and power of
a thing; And thus original sin is the body, as that which gives life and
motion to all actual sins.

Let the Use be greatly to humble thee under this notion Gods word gives
original sin, This sinful body; It troubles thee thou have a mortal body, a
corruptible body, but above all this body of sin should be a burden to thee;
What shall God give all these names to it, to make thee afraid, and to groan
under it, yet shall thy heart continue still like the rock and adamant?

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Privative Part of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
Of Adam's begetting Seth in his own likeness,
GENESIS 5. 3. And Adam -- begat a son in his own likeness, and after his Image,
and called his name Seth.
MOses in this Chapter gives a brief and summary capitulation of the Lives and
Deaths of the Patriarchs unto Noah, mentioning these heads:

1. That God made man.

2. That he made him in time.

3. After his own Image.

4. Male and Female.

5. He blessed them.

6. The imposition of the name Adam to Eve, as well as to Adam; And this he
calls, The Book of the generations of Adam, viz. His succession, with all his
acts of his Life, and also his Death, otherwise Adam had no generation, but was
created by God.

The Hebrew word, though sometimes it signifies a Book or Epistle, yet in the
general it is no more than a Catalogue or Rehearsal, as it is here, and so is
to be interpreted in some other places, the neglect whereof has in part made
an occasion of dispute, Whether any Canonical Books be lost or no, as Numb. 21.
14. whereas the word there is not to be taken for an Historical Volume, but the
Enumeration or Rehearsal of the ways of the Lord?

In the next place, he proceeds to Seth, not but that Adam had other sons,
only he mentions him, as the future head of humane posterity upon the
drowning of the world: Now concerning him, we have his name, he was called
Seth. There were Heretics called Sethiani, who attributed unto him more than
a man, but the holy Ghost does antidote against that opinion, by informing of
us, that he was begotten in a sinful, mortal estate.

2. Of whom he was begotten, and that is of Adam.

3. How, or in what manner? and that is, After Adams Image, in his own likeness.

Adam was created after the Image and likeness of God, that is, in a most
perfect and complete resemblance; for Image and likeness do not differ, though
the Schoolmen attempt to difference them, but it is an Hebraism, putting two
Substantives together for aggravation sake, and it is as much here, as an Image
exceeding like.

Thus Adam was made in respect of his soul qualified with holiness like God;
but in the Text Seth is said to be begotten of Adam, in Adam's Image, not in
Gods, that is, in a corrupt, miserable and mortal estate: For whereas Adam was
by Nature a man; by Condition, the Lord and Chief, in whom humane Posterity was
to be reckoned of; As also in respect of corruption, now polluted having lost
Gods Image. Seth was after Adam 's own likeness, in all these three
particulars: That he was a man like him, none can doubt; That he was like Adam,
in respect of his Headship to his Posterity, is plain, because Abel was dead,
and Cain with his Posterity was to be destroyed in the flood. Not that this is
the whole Image or likeness here spoken of; That as Adam was the first Head of
mankind, so Seth was to be of those, who should be preserved in the flood, as
some would have it; For such a resemblance would have been more eminently in
Noah, who in the Ark seemed to be the common Parent of mankind.

Therefore in the third place, This Image or likeness, to Adam is mentioned
eppositely to that Image of God, which Adam was created in; And if you object,
Why is it not as Well said of Abel or Cain, that Adam begat them after his own
Image as well as Seth?

The Answer is plain, Moses in this Historical Capitulation, does not mention
all in a Family, but such who were only by a direct Line to descend to their
Posterity, and to be an Head to that. Now not Abel or Cain, but Seth was
appointed by God in this place; And that we might know in what manner all
Generations are to descend from him, the Scripture does here inform us, That we
must not think, that Seth had from Adam the Image of God, or would propagate it
to others; but now he and we are as Adam after his fall, sinful and mortal:
For although the Church has generally thought of Adam, that he did repent and
was saved; for we do not read afterward of any gross sin he committed,
and God made the glorious Promise of a Savior to him, yet he did not beget
Seth, as he was regenerated, but as a man; and so being fallen from that
Covenant, he was first placed in, his personal grace afterward could not be
conveyed to his Posterity, as his sin, while a common Parent was. We see
then, though Adam was godly, and Seth was likewise holy, yet for all that he
was born without the Image of God, and in a polluted estate.

Besides therefore in this place is a seasonable mentioning of the likeness
and Image Adam begat Seth in, because Moses being here to capitulate their
several Generations, which does imply their mortality, does opportunely give
the cause of it: So that Snecanin (Method. Distri. Cause. Sol. and dam. cap.
3.) his opinion, which he offers to the learned to judge, Whether by Adam's
Image be not meant his repaired Image with the corrupted one, being now assumed
unto Gods favor, seems directly to oppose the Text, which calls it Adam's
own Image, not Gods.

SECT. II.
What Original Sin is.
SEeing therefore we have handled the Quid nominis of Original sin, what the
chief Names are which the Scripture gives unto it; We come to consider the
Quid Rei, the Nature and Definition of it; And whereas some make it it consist
only in the mere privation of Gods Image; Others in a positive inclination
unto all evil; We shall take in both; for although, as Calvin well says, He
that affirms Original sin to be the privation of Gods Image, speaks the
whole Nature of it; Yet because that does not so fully and particularly
represent the loathsomeness of it, therefore it is necessary with the Scripture,
to consider both the Privative and Positive part of original sin.

I shall begin with the Privative part, That original sin is the privation
of that original Righteousness, and glorious Image of God, which was at first
put into us: And this the holy Ghost means, when he says, Adam begat Seth
after his own likeness and Image. From whence observe,

That we are by nature without the Image of God we were created in, and this is
a great part of our original sin. This truth of the loss of Gods Image in
us, is of very great concernment, and therefore to be improved both Doctrinally
and Practically. It is the greatest loss that ever besell mankind, and oh our
carnal and dull hearts, which can bewail the loss of health, of wealth, of any
outward comfort, but this which is the greatest loss of all, viz. the Image of
God, which we should bewail all our life time, that we are no ways sensible of!

I shall not at large in this place treat, De Imagine Dei, of the Image of God
in man, I shall say only so much as will make us the better discover the
Nature of original sin. And

First, We are to know, That howsoever there be hot and fervent Disputes about
this Image of God, what it is, wherein it does consist, (and according as they
take it more largely or strictly, so they conclude the Image of God is lost, or
not lost) yet we may by Scripture Light make it to consist in these things.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the making Man after Gods Image did consist.
SECT. I.
FIrst, In the soul, as it is endowed with reason and understanding: For herein
man did transcend all other visible creatures, that God made him with a
rational soul, investing him with reason and free will, and in this respect the
Image of God is not totally lost; For though by it we have lost all our power
and understanding in holy things, yet we have not lost our souls, and the
natural faculties thereof; we are not made bruit beasts, we are men still;
Hence it is that still the reason holds, Why a man should not kill another,
Genesis 9. 6. For in the image of God made he man; If there were not yet the Image
of God in some respect, the reason would not be so forcible; For what weight
would it carry to say, Thou shall not kill a man, because once he had the Image
of God, but now he has lost it? God speaks of what he will require of every
man that has slain another, and that because in the Image of God he made him:
Thus Jame. 3. 9. aggravateth the sin of cursing any man, because man is made
after the similitude of God; To this we may appropriate that of the Poet,
confirmed ( Act. 17.) by the Apostle himself, We are his off spring: We will
grant then, That the Image of God, so far as it consists in the soul, and the
natural faculties, is not lost, though in regard of the actings thereof even
about natural things, they are made infirm and weak.

Secondly, The Image of God did consist in that holiness and righteousness,
which God did adorn the soul with: And this indeed is the most noble and
principal part of Gods Image, to be made like God in righteousness and
holiness; Therefore Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4, 24. we read the Image of God is said
to be in righteousness and true holiness: Insomuch that many learned Divines
do make this the only Image of God, though not so probably; This indeed is the
principal and chief, the other is but remote and secundary, for the later
abides even in the Devils and the damned in hell; They have reason and
understanding, yet they cannot do the least good action, no not for a moment,
although they have so much light in them. This holiness and righteousness
then in the whole man, was the chiefest resemblance of God, he being holy as
God was holy, not by equality, but similitude. But alas, who is able to
apprehend aright of this? Who can now tell, being plunged into all evil and
sin, what it is to be altogether holy, what it is to be without any blemish
or spot? Yet in such a glorious and admirable manner we were created.

Thirdly, The Image of God did not only comprehend this holiness actually
dwelling in us, but a power and strength also to persevere in this holiness;
for if God had been never so bountiful in one, yet if he had denied the other,
he would have made us happy, that thereby we might become more miserable. But
this is not to be thought of that God, who showed so much love and bounty in
our first Creation; Adam therefore had the Law of God written in his heart,
having strength and ability from within to withstand all temptations, and to
perform any holy auty; so that we cannot instance in any holy action, which he
had not power to perform Indeed to believe in Christ as a Savior, to repent of
sin, he could not actually do them, because they do necessarily imply the
subject sinful, and in a miserable estate and condition, but eminently and
transcendently these things were in his power; yea, this power of his did
extend to keep all the Commandments of God, and that without any imperfection;
Insomuch that being under the Covenant of works, he might have obtained
justification by them, though not meritoriousty; This glory did God at first
put upon us, who now have nothing but a cursed slavery unto sin, and an utter
impotency to any thing that is holy: As for resisting any temptation, he had
strength and ability enough to gainsay it, though it had been in many degrees
more violent, than that which (...) him: It is true, he was overcome by a
temptation, and in that which might have easily been repulsed, as we would
judge; but this was to show, That although he was created holy, yet he was also
mutable; Though he had power to persevere, yet he had not that grace which did
make him actually to persevere, as the confirmed Angels have: So that what
Historians say of the Marsi in Italy, and the (...) in Africa, That they had
such a temper of body, that no Serpents could hurt them, or poison them; Such
an admitable temperament was Adams soul in, that the Serpent would not have
deceived them had not they given consent; For, if while we are in this
corrupted estate, yet the Devil cannot force us to sin, be cannot make us
sin, whether we will or no, but it is lust within us, that betrayeth all to
him: No wonder then, if in that state of integrity, there was no (...) to
sin, either from within or without.

Fourthly, This Image of God in the holiness of it, was not only in the mind
and the will, with a clear knowledge of God, and love of him, but it did extend
also to the affections, so that they were made with a regular subordination to
the rule of holiness within a man. These wild horses (for our possions are no
better) were then all tamed, and as much subject to man's will, as the winds and
tempells were to Christ's: Anger, grief, love and desire, these did not rise or
continue in our soul any longer, or otherwise, but as they were conducted by
the light of God shining in the mind: This must necessarily be comprehended in
that expression, Eccles. 7. when God is said to make man right, rectitude is an
universal harmony and congruity of all the parts of the soul unto the rule.
Austin did once wonder at that disobedience which now man finds in himself,
Superat animu corperi etc. ( Confess. lib. 8. cap. 9.) The soul commands the
body, and presently it obeys, but (says he) Imperat sibi ipsi, it commands
it self, and then there is rebellion, but it was not thus from the beginning:
Therefore the Papists and Socinians they do blaspheme in some sense God our
holy Maker, whale they affirm, That the repugnancy and rebellion of the
sensitive appetite to the reason, arises from the very internal constitution
of a man; And therefore the Papists they make original righteousness to be the
bridle only to curb this appetite, or an antidore to prevent this infection.
And as for the Socinian, he denies, that Adam had any such righteousness at
all, and therefore they say he sinned, Because his sensitive appetite did
prevail against the rational: Thus they make man, even while he was in honor,
and before his fall, to be like the beast that perishes, and to have no
understanding comparatively even in that place of Paradise; But this error is
so dangerous, that we are not to give place to it, no not for a moment. In that
holy estate the soul commanded the body, and all the affections; They did go,
when he bade them go, and stood still, when they were commanded: Oh but now,
in what a war, in what a confusion and distraction are we plunged? now we
cannot be angry, but we sin; now we cannot grieve, or love, but we sin;
Thou that deniest original sin, let the exorbitancy of thy passions, the
inordinacy of thy affections convince thee: Is thy heart in thy own power?
Can thou have every thing stir and move in thy soul, how, and when thou
please? Can thou say in respect of thy heart, and all the stirrings of thy
soul, as the Centurion did of his servants that were at his command? How is
experience a mistress of us fools in this particular? Wherein does our
weakness, our sinfulness more appear than in our passions and affections? As
Alexander when his flatterers exalted him as a God, he derided at it, when he
saw blood come from his body. Thus when men cry up free will, power to do what
is good, deny original sin, and make us in our birth free from all evil, With
what indignation may thou reject it, when thou see the Chaos and confusion
that is in thy soul, when thou find not any affection moving in thee, but it
overfloweth it is banks presently? Whereas original righteousness gave Adam as
much power over those, as he had over all the beasts of the field; but as the
ground has now thorns and thistles in stead of those pleasant herbs and plants
it would have produced of its own self; Thus also man now has all his heart
and affections grown wild and luxuriant, so that Solomon's observation in other
things in here made true, Servants ride on hors-back, and Princes go on foot.

Fifthly, This Image of God was partly in respect of the glory, honor and
immortality God created him in. Adam was made after the Image of God, not only
in holiness, but also in happiness; he was not subject to any fears or tears,
nothing from within, or from without could cause pain and grief to him; Hence
death, by which is meant all kind of evil and misery, was threatened unto him,
as a reward of his disobedience; but Adam did not beget Seth after this Image,
we are now made dust, and in a necessity of dying, which is the effect of our
original sin.

Lastly, The Image of God does consist by way of consequence in dominion and
superiority. The Socinians indeed, because when it is said, God made man after
his own Image, Genesis 1. 26. it is added, And let him have dominion over the
beasts of the field* etc. make it the only thing wherein it does consist; But
we are to believe the Apostle, Ephesians 4. Col. 3. expounding this Image of God
more than they, who applies it to righteousness and true holiness; yet it
cannot be denied, but from this Image of God, did flow that Dominion and
Sovereignty, which the woman also was created in; for though she was made in
subjection to her husband, and so is called, The Image of her husband, as the
husband is the Image of God, yet in respect of the creatures, so she had power
over them, and they were subject to Eve as well as to Adam. Thus you see what
this Image of God in a brief manner is, the next work is to amplify our loss
of it.

is taken away, both meritoriously and efficiently, meritoriously our Apostasy
deserved, that God of a Father and a friend, should become a Judge and an
Adversary to us; it deserved that we should be children of wrath by nauture,
who were children of love by Creation; What tongue of men and Angels can
express the dreadfulness of this condition, viz. of coming into the world under
Gods wrath and vengeance? God is not to us, what he was in the state of
integrity, not that any change is in God, but in us. Again, This friendship and
love of God is expelled efficiently, for fallen man has no suitableness and
fitness, no proportion or ability to have communion with God. Darkness cannot
delight in light, neither bitterness in sweetness: The swine cannot love pearl
and precious flowers; man corrupt cannot love or delight in the enjoyment of
God; so that the guilt of sin did presently make Adam afraid of God, so as to
run from him.

SECT. IV.
4. THis privation of Gods Image is more than like the spoiling of a man of his
clothes, or like the taking of a bridle from the horses mouth, or removing the
bonds and chains a man might be in, Which when taken off, he can walk well
enough. For the Popish party, though they grant, Man fallen has much hurt by
Adam, yet they make the privation of original righteousness, to be no more
than the spoiling of a man of his garments; so that as a man without his
clothes, is a man still, though naked, and exposed to many difficulties. Thus,
they say, man still has his naturals, though he has lost his supernaturals;
Original righteousness was like an antidote, or a bridle against the inferior
parts of the soul (they say) so that what man is deprived of, is only what was
supernatural and merely superadded to humane nature. By these subtilties of
theirs, a man's loss is made to be far less than indeed it is: Hence they do
so often apply that Parable of the man going to Jericho that was wounded, and
left half dead, to Adam fallen, to all mankind in him, as if we were but
dangerously wounded, and not thoroughly dead: But the scope of that Parable is
wholly to a different purpose; Original righteousness is not to be conceived,
as a supernatural excellency bestowed upon man after his Creation, but as a
concreated perfection in all the parts of his soul: So that the losing of this,
is not like the losing of some accidental glory and ornaments, but even those
concreated perfections in the soul are also lost. The misunderstanding of this
breeds a dangerous error, as if by original sin we only had lost these
superadded ornaments, but did retain our pure naturals still, as they call it,
which are indeed altogether impute, Eccl. 7. God made man right; Even as all
other creatures were exceeding good: Now God had made man the more noble
creature, worse than other creatures, if he had not created him with such
perfect and suitable qualifications, as would enable him to obtain true
blessedness, for every creature else had an implanted ability in it, to
accomplish his end, and why then should God do less bountifully with man, one
of the chiefest instances of his glorious workmanship? But of this I must
necessarily speak more, because of the Socinian, who calls this Doctrine of
original righteousness, Faetida fabula, an old stinking fable.

SECT. V.
5. ORiginal sin is a privation, not only of that righteousness which was a
natural perfection due to him upon supposition of his Creation for the
enjoyment of God, but also of whatsoever supernatural and gracious favor Adam
had. We do not say, That Adam had nothing supernatural in him, for assisting
and cooperating (...) supernatural, as also that prophetical light he had
concerning (...) God did superadde many glorious ornaments which were (...) and
which he did not absolutely need as means to make him (...), and such likewise
were those consequents of holiness mentioned before, (...) to be the Son of
God, and to be the Temple of the holy Ghost; Now all these gratuita are lost as
well as the naturalia, we are no more the children of God, or the Temple of
God, but our souls are possessed with Satan, and he rules in our hearts, as in
his proper possession* Some Divines call original righteousness the absolute
Image of God, and our sonship, and filial relation to God, for Adam is called
the Son of God, Luke 3. ult. the relative Image; now whether absolute or
relative Image, all is lost; and therefore that assisting grace, which was then
ready at hand for Adam to enjoy, that thereby he might b^^nabled to do any good
action, we are naturally without: Oh then the (...) and undone estate we are
in, being without inberent grace dwelling in us, and assisting grace from God
without us, without eyes, and the light of the Sun also! Who can think that God
at first made us such sinful, mortal and wretched creatures? It would be much
against the wisdom and goodness of God, he would then have done worse with man,
than with any fly or worm.

SECT. VI.
What are the most excellent and choice parts of that Original Righteousness
that we are deprived of.
BUt because the greatest part of the privative way of original corruption, is
in losing that Image of God, and concreated holiness, and we have only spokan
in the general of that, that we may be the more affected with it, and the loss
thereof may pierce to our very hearts; Let us consider, what are the most
excellent and choice parts of this original righteousness that we are deprived
of, that so we may not only see our loss in the bulk, but be able to account
of every particular in this, and that we have lost.

And the first particular to be insisted on, is that great dignity God put on
man, making him with a Free will to do what is holy. Free Will is a great
perfection, though the mutability in it, as in Adam was a negative
Imperfection, this was admirable in Adam, that he had power, if he willed to
do any holy action whatsoever: There was not in him any clog, any impediment
to stop the exercise of this Free will; but as he had dominion over all
creatures, so also over hi^ whole soul; and indeed if God had not created him
with this dominion over his actions, his obedience had not been so eminent, nor
his disobedience so culpable* But this flower is withered, this Crown is fallen
to the ground; Man has now no free will, no power to do any thing that is
holy; He has power to eat and drink, he has power to do civil and moral
actions, he has power to do actions externally religious, to come to the
Congregation, to hear; but for those things that are internally holy, to love
God, to believe on him, to repent of sin; This the Scripture does in many
places deny to him, making him to be dead in sin, and until born again by
the Spirit, unable to do any holy duty. This Raymundus (Theol. Nature. de lapsu
hominis) does well urge, That the soul as to spiritual actions, and in
reference to God, is wholly dead; so that as a dead man is not able to produce
any vital actions, so neither can any natural man spiritual actions; and
because man being dead is not sensible of this loss, therefore does the same
man compare him to a mad man, that knows not how it is with him; yea he much
pursues that similitude of wine degenerated into vinegar, saying, That as
vinegar retains nothing of the sweetness or goodness it had when it was
wine: Thus neither does man retain any thing of that light in his mind, or love
in his heart, which once he had: Man (says he) is not become of good wine bad,
which though bad, retains some taste, and has a little relish of the nature
of wine; but he is as when Wine is degenerated into vinegar, which has all
clean contrary to what is had when once wine. This comparison he the rather
urges, Because (says he) man does not, or cannot discern in himself the
difference between his created condition, and his fallen, therefore he must see
how it is with him in similitude by other things. We may add to this
similitude another of the body of man while living, and an instrument of the
soul, with it self when dead, and separated from it, that body then though
formerly never so beautiful and comely, never so lively and active, now is
loathsome, and has the clean contrary qualities; Such a thing is man now
fallen, if compared with his Creation.

SECT. VII.
A Second instance of a particular in this Image of God, which we have lost, is
Faith and dependence upon God as a Father. As God made Adam his son in
holiness, so Adam had a filial dependence and belief on him, resting alone in
Gods protection and preservation, and thereby was not subject to any fears,
grief, or troublesome dejections of mind about his soul or body; This was an
excellent pearl in that Crown of glory, which God set on man's head, but how
totally is this lost? Every man by this original sin may justly go up and
down trembling like a Cain, fearing that every thing should not only kill him,
but damn him; Yea, whence is it that the Sea is not fuller of monsters, than
thy heart is of unbelieving, doubting and diffident thoughts about God? Why art
thou so fearful, suspicious and despairing about God naturally? Is not this
because God and thy soul are separated? Does not thy conscience secretly
suggest to thee, that God is offended with thee? Is not this a plain discovery
of thy loss of God and his Image, that thou have naturally fears and doubts
within thy self? Thou think of God and art troubled, as Adam when he heard
Gods voice, ran and hid himself; All the natural tremblings and trepidations of
conscience about God, arise from this, because there is a secret persuasion
thou and God art at a distance, yea a contrariety one with another.

SECT. VIII.
A Third particular is, The loss of that love to God above all things which
was implanted in Adam 's heart. The moral Law being cograven in Adam, he loved
God with all his soul and might, and that above all creatures, yea above
himself; for seeing the debt and obligation upon Adam was to prefer God above
all creatures; yea Gods will, and Gods glory above his own will and glory; it
stood not with that integrity God made him in, to be defective in any of these;
but through Adam's apostasy now all is changed upside down; Self-love is that
which predominateth in every man a man's own will, own good, own pleasure and
honor, is the chiefest end aimed at; so that now Gods will and honor is
trampled under foot, and all to set up our own selves, insomuch that this
selflove may almost be called the original sin in a man.

SECT. IX.
FOurthly, Another particular which is lost is, That joy and delight which Adam
had in God, for as he loved God above all things, so enjoying of him, he did
infinitely delight and rejoice in him. Though God made the creatures for Adam's
delight; Paradise was a place of delight, yet these were but drops, God was the
Ocean; Adam did then perfectly say, which David did with some imperfection,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And whom in earth in comparison of thee? God
was all things unto him. But where is this divine delight? Does any natural man
find any sweetness in holy things? Is not all our joy, a carnal, a worldly, a
creature joy? Certainly our joy and delights do as much discover the loss of
Gods Images as any thing else; whereas Adam would have daily rejoiced in God,
and in the honor and glory of God, that he was magnified and exalted, we
naturally are not affected with these things.

CHAP. XI.
A further Consideration of Original Righteousness, proving the thing, and
answering Objections against it.
SECT. I.
THe Privative Part of Original Corruption, as it is the loss of Gods Image
has been treated of, both in the general and the particulars. Now that still
we may the more thoroughly possess our souls with this unspeakable loss, it is
necessary to say something of Gods Image, which man at first was created in:
For although I said, that I would not enter into a large Tractate of it, yet
something must be necessarily spoken to it; for if there be no such thing as
original righteousness, then there is no such thing as original sin; if
there be no such thing as light, there cannot be any such thing as darkness.
The Privation does necessarily suppose an habit; Hence the Socinians, as they
wholly deny this original sin we are treating of, so do they also reject this
original righteousness; calling it (as was said) Faetida fabula, an old
stinking Fable, an Idea feigned in men's brains, of which there is (...), not
the least Title in the Scripture ( Vide Pertium Harmon.) It behooves us
therefore the more diligently to search into this truth; For if Adam never had
such glory and holiness put upon him, then we his posterity could not lose it.

To inform our selves then herein, Let us consider,

First, That what Adam 's state of integrity was, we cannot any ways know, but
by the Scripture. We have now no experience of it, nor can any Philosophy or
humane reason, give us any direction therein Now there are two Rocks upon which
the Adversaries of this Truth do split themselves; The one is, Judging of
original righteousness, or of man in his Creation, according to the principles
of moral Philosophy; As if we were not to read Moses and Paul concerning this
righteousness of Adam, but Plato and Aristotle; for humane Philosophers, as
they were wholly ignorant of original sin, supposing the soul to come into
the world as an abrasa fabula, a mere blank, ready to receive good or evil, yet
inclining rather to good, as Aristotle says, so they were wholly ignorant
either of man's creation, or if that were acknowledged, of any imitation or
change made upon man by his Apostasy. Now this principle in effect the
Socinian imbibeth: For (he says) There is no righteousness to be conceived in
Adam, but what was actual, that there was no habitual infused into him, but
that he was created in a neutral and indifferent estate, neither good or bad,
but to be made either of these, as his free will should put it self forth into
action. Thus you see how truly Tertullian of old said, Philosophers were the
Patriarchs of Heretics; for both Papists and Secintans judge of Adams first
estate, by principles of moral Philosophy.

The second Rock upon which the erroneous party in this great Truth, destroys
themselves at, is, The judging of man in his first Creation, according to that
which we feel in our selves now, as if we should judge what wine is by the
vinegar it is degenerated into, as if we should determine of a living body,
according to what we see in a dead carcass; And truly we may say, that from
hence arises all Pelagianism, Popery and Socinianism: We pass a sentence upon
the state we were created in, by what we now feel in our selves, as if God had
not, or could not make us otherwise: As for instance, because we now in our
selves find the inferior appetitive part rebel in it is motions against the
rational, therefore they conclude, That this was at first in Adams Creation;
That this repugnancy is planted in our very constitution: Yea, a Remonstrant is
not afraid to say, It was in Christ himself, because a man, (and why not then
in the glorified Saints to all eternity, seeing they shall after the
Resurrection consist of soul and body also?) In this Position both Socinian,
Remonstrant and Papist do positively agree, viz. That the repugnancy and
rebellion, which is between the rational and sensitive part does arise from the
very constitution of man. It arises (says Bellarmine) not from God, but e
condition materiae, from the condition of that matter, of which God made him;
but does not this arise because we see such a repugnancy is now in every man,
because there is none that can live now upon the earth without this rebellion?
therefore we conclude it was not always so. If then we would sail by these
Rocks, if we would be guided into this Divine Truth, let us go out of our
selves, and out of all the traditions, which Ethical Philosophy has delivered
unto us, for that speaks only of what is acquired, not of any thing infused or
concreated with our natures, but rather think this Image of God is so glorious
a thing, that we know not how to speak of it, or to think of it, we never had
the actual enjoyment, or working of it. It is not with us, as with men, who
hold a rich and plentiful estate, but are now fallen into extreme poverty,
such can tell you by experience, what a plentiful life they once lived. Job
could tell us what honor once he had, and the abundance he enjoyed, even when
he sat scraping himself upon the dunghill, he could experimentally compare his
former estate, and that together, but so cannot we. Indeed those common (...),
or dictates of nature, whereby our consciences have some light to discern
between good and evil, may serve for some kind of conviction, that once God did
create us in a more knowing and holy estate, but what it was, and fully to
conceive of it, that we cannot do. Hence

In the second place, It Is a very necessary thing in all men, to be often
meditating upon these two states and conditions of man, his created state, and
his fallen estate, his primitive condition, and his present condition. To
compare the light men, with his darkness now, his holiness then with his
impurity now, his immortality then with his mortality now, his Communion with
God then, and his estrangement, or contrariety now, for hereby his heart will
be the more deeply humbled under his present miserable condition; Those that
make them both alike, or assign a very little difference, they neither duly
consider what a glorious thing Gods Image was, we were created in, nor how deep
and universal our pollution is: Oh how dishonorable and dblasphemous is it, to
think we come out of Gods hands as we are now, that at the first we had
inclinations to sin, that there was a rebellion in us to what is good! What
is this but to say, God made us at first the children of his wrath? Oh pray
that the scales may fall from thy eyes, that thou be not delivered up to
this dangerous error, which is the broad way to perdition.

In the third place, To understand the nature of that Image of God, man was
created in, you must take heed of the Socinian Position, who say, God made man
merely an innocent, even as a young child, that he had not in his creation any
holiness infused into him, but he was in a neutral and indifferent
disposition, to be actually good or wicked, as his free will did determine. But
this is to diminish the goodness of God who made man in such a distinguishing
character to all other creatures, except Angels, for Angels and men they only
were created after the Image of God; That Adam was not created in such a
negative frame of soul, appears, in that the Image of God is expressly said by
Paul to consist in righteousness and true holiness; Now righteousness is
more than a not being evil, it denotes an inherent positive perfection in the
soul; Hence Eccl 7. 30 God is there said, To make man righteous; The word
Jashar is generally used to signify as much as holy, clean and pure. It is not
therefore for us to contradict so plain Texts of Scripture; Hence the Psalmist,
Psalm. 8. 5. does admire the goodness of God, and his works to man, especially
in this, That he has made him but a little lower than Angels: Oh then admire
that glorious excellency God did at first put us into! We were at first made
but a little lower than those glorious Angels of God; Therefore Chrysostem
called Adam an earthly Angel; Now compare thy present estate with this of
Adams; Art thou like an Angel? Have Angels such blindness of mind, such
averseness to what is good, such rebellious and unmortified thoughts in them,
as thou have? Nay, Art thou not rather a Devil for pride, for malice, for
opposition to what is good? Was it thus with us from the beginning? They
therefore do most unthankfully rob God of all that glory and honor which is
due to him that will affirm, That God made him in such an indifferent neutral
state, neither righteous or unrighteous: Surely then God could not have looked
upon all the things that were made with that approbation, They were exceeding
god; For though other creatures might be good in their kind with a natural
goodness, yet Adam was in his kind with a moral goodness: Neither will the
Socinian evasion help, That by good there is meant convenient, beautiful and
proper for its end: For let no more be granted but that, it is enough, If Adam
was not created with holiness in his soul, he was not made good in their
sense, that is not suitable and sit for his end; For being created to know and
love God, and thereby to have a comfortable enjoyment of him, How could he do
this without wisdom in his mind, and holiness in his will? And certainly we
may not think, that God gave every creature a goodness in its kind, to obtain
its particular end, and not adorn man, the noblest of visible creatures, for
his peculiar end.

The Scripture then is clear, That man was at first made such an holy and
blessed creature; Let us consider what Reasons are objected against it by the
Socinian party. And

First, (say they) Adam could not be holy till he had done some actual
holiness, Obj
how could he be denominated righteous ( say they) till he had acted something
that was righteous?

But this argues great ignorance, Answ.
as if there were no righteousness, but what is acquired, as if there were no
infused habits of holiness, which denominate a man so, before he does that
which is holy; Were not the Angels made holy in their Creation before they
acted what was holiness? Is not Christ himself Luke 1. called the (...), the
holy thing, before he did actually that which was holy; yea the contrary is
true, therefore did Adam that which was actually holy, because he was
habitually holy: As the Tree is first good, and then the fruit good: Adam then
before his fall had both original and actual holiness, but the latter was an
effect of the former, and therefore he did one because he had the other.

Secondly, Object.
It is objected by them, That if Adam was made in the Image of God like him,
holy as he is holy, then Adam could not sin, he would be impeceable, even as
God is.

But this is a weak cavil, Answ.
For though man be made holy, as God is, yet that is not by equality, but
proportion only; Were not the Angels made holy, and yet for all that they
sinned? He then that is essentially and infinitely holy cannot sin; yea a
creature when confirmed in holiness by God cannot sin, as the elect Angels
and glorified Saints; but Adam though he was made holy, yet was in a mutable
and changeable estate, and therefore he might sin.

Quest. But you will say, Why did not this original Righteousness so far
defend him, that he did not withstand the Devil more strongly, he seemed to
have little or no grace, that was so easily ensnared by Satan, and that in such
a little matter when he enjoyed so much outward felicity?

Answ. But to this we may answer, That Adam and Eve, they did not at the very
first yield themselves up to the Devil, but they did repel the Devils
temptations awbile; neither was it the inordinate desire of the forbidden fruit
that was his first sin, but pride and unbelief; not believing the threatenings
of God, and affecting to be like God, and such sins do quickly and easily
penetrate into the best and noblest subjects, as you see in the Angels
themselves, those sublime and admirable spiritual substances, yet how quickly
did such kind of sins enter into them, and defile them all over; So that we
are to look to those spiritual secret sins, which did induce Adam to eat of
the forbidden fruit.

Lastly, Object.
It Is objected by them, and the same Argument also is improved by Bellarmine,
That man consisting of a soul, a spiritual substance, and of a body, which is a
sensible corporeal substance, when these two are united in one person, it is
impossible, but the spiritual part should incline one way, and the sensitive
another; The rational part that desires a spiritual good, and the sensitive
part that which is sensible, and these are contrary.

But the answer is, Answ.
that though these inclinations are diverse, yet they are not contrary, but
where sin has made an Ataxy. As God at first ordained the will, which is
appetitus rationalis, to follow the understanding, so he did also our
affections to follow both of them; so that there was an essential subordination
of the affectionate part to the rational; even as we see the members of the
body do readily move at the command of the soul, or as in perfect mixed bodies,
though there be contrary qualities, yet by the temperament of that body, their
contrariety is removed; and certainly, the Angels sinned, who yet had not any
sensitive appetite to rebel against the rational, therefore it was not from
this necessarily, that Adam did sin. Thus in Christ there was no repugnancy
between grace and nature; for when he said, Father, if it be possible, let this
Cup pass away; This was not an absolute desire of his humane nature, but a
conditional one, and still with submission; therefore he adds, Nevertheless
thy will be done; and the Saints in Heaven, when they shall have reassumed
their bodies, will not find any contrariety between the rational and sensitive
appetite. And thus you see that Adam was created in this holy estate.

Lastly, This holiness and righteousness in a well explained sense, was not
supernatural, but natural. The Remonstrants they make this dispute about
original righteousness, inepta and absurda, absurd and foolish; Therefore they
deny any infused or concreated habits also, and say, The rectitude of the
faculties was enough; But the Orthodox say, Adam could not be created without
such habits or principles of holiness within him, because he was created for
the enjoyment of God, and therefore they call it natural, not as flowing from
the principles of nature, but as a moral condition necessary to qualify him
for his end, and therefore it was given to whole mankind in Adam, and would
have been naturally propagated; and whereas the Remonstrants ask, To what
purpose or use is such original righteousness? For if it did not necessarily
and immutably determine Adams will to good, than this original righteousness,
did need another, and so in infinitum; or if it did then, How came it about
that Adam did sin? To this subtilty it is answered, That this original
righteousness was not to determine the will of Adam necessarily, but to
incline and sortifie Adams will the more strongly, and easily to do what was
good; So that although it did not absolutely take away Adams mutability and
liberty, yet it did heighten and raise up the faculties of his soul to what was
good, yet this was not a superadded grace to Adam, as actual confirmation in
holiness would have been, but a natural and due qualification preparing him for
communion with God; So that the discourse about man in his pure naturals
without this original righteousness, is an house that has not so much as a
sandy foundation, it being without any foundation at all, God having put his
Image into man, as Phydias did his into Minerva's shield, that none could take
that out, but he must also destroy that shield: Thus the Devil could not
prevail with Adam to sin, but by the loss of Gods Image.

CHAP. XII.
A further Consideration of the Image of God, which Man was created in; Showing
what particular Graces Adam's Soul was adorned with.
SECT. I.
WE are discovering the Nature of that Image God created us in at first, that
so we may see how great our loss is.

The last particular was, The naturality and supernaturality of it in diverse
respects: And this is the more to be observed, because while the Orthodox
oppose the Socinians, who affirm, Nothing but a natural and simple innocence in
Adam, without any infused or concreated habits of holiness, or any thing
supernatural in him; You would think they join with the Papists, who dogmatize,
That all the holiness Adam had was supernatural. Again, while the same
Orthodox oppose Papists, because of this opinion, one would think they joined
with the Socinians, who say, Adam had nothing in him, but what was natural,
whereas the truth consists between these; and therefore original righteousness
was supernatural to Adam; if you respect the principle from whence it did flow,
it was immediately from God, not from principles of nature, and this opposes
the Socinian; yet if you do consider Adam the subject of this righteousness,
and the end for which he was created, so it was a perfection due to him, and in
that respect called natural, otherwise had not God invested man's nature with
this and concreated this perfection with him, the noblest of visible creatures
had been dealt worst with.

SECT. II.
YEt in the second place, Though this Image of God was natural to Adam, yet we
must not say, that he had nothing supernatural, that there was nothing by way
of superadded grace to him. Even as in Adam, although we deny, that he was
created in pure naturals, yet we say, that Adam in some respect may be said in
Paradise to live an animal life, as well as he was created immortal; Adam was
made free from death, he had not any proxim or immediate cause of death, yet he
was not made immortal, as the glorified Saints in Heaven shall be, for their
bodies are made then spiritual, not animal, as the Apostle distinguishes,
whereas Adam's body was in this sense animal, that it did need meat and drink,
as also it was for generation, to procreate and propagate a posterity, which
argued the animality of Adams body, but not the mortality of it, as the
Socinians say, unless we mean such an immortality as our bodies shall have in
Heaven. Thus though Adam was created immortal upon supposition of his
obedience, yet that does not exclude wholly an animal life, or natural, as the
Apostle expressly says, 1 Cor. 15* 46. That was not first which is spiritual,
but that which is natural; Thus it is also in respect of Adams spirituals and
his soul, although all that holiness which was necessary to guide him to
happiness was natural, yet there were other things that might be of mere grace,
and superadded favor to him; And under this we may comprehend the grace of
God, which Adam needed, though qualified with original righteousness to do that
which is holy; as also the reward which God would give to Adams obedience, for
to be the Son of God in respect of a gracious enjoyment of God, and to have
received that life promised to him, if he did obey (though here be great
Disputes about it, what it would have been) yet it would not have been of
merit, though of works, but of grace, for works and that grace in that state
were consistent, though Evangelical grace and works do immediately oppose one
another; Adam then was not without some supernatural savors.

SECT. III.
IN the third place, that which will much tend to the magnifying of this Image
of God, is to consider the Integrity and universality of it; so that he was
made holy and righteous all over, with light and wisdom in his mind, with all
kind of holiness in his will and affections; so that Adam had both the
perfection of parts, and also of degree of grace within him: One single habit
was not sufficient to give perfection to all the active principles in a man,
yea there were several habits in every faculty of the soul; So that original
righteousness is an aggregation or collection of many habits. That Text
Eccless. 7. when Adam is said to be made right, infers so much; for he is
not right, rectu, that does want any essential or necessary part, and the very
expression of the Image of God denotes as much; an Image consisting not in
one, or some few parts, but in the harmonious composition of all; How admirable
was it then to have those commands of God, Thou shall not lust, and Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, with all thy heart and strength,
fulfilled perfectly and without any difficulty? If we do compare our sinful
and carnal hearts with this glorious temper, that are carried out to lust
inordinately all the day long, and love every thing before and above God, What
shame and confusion may it bring to us? But in that state of integrity, there
was no part of holiness, or degree of holiness wanting. It is true, if we speak
of the Image of God repaired in us: We find a godly man doing that now which
Adam could not do, as to repent, and to believe in a justifying manner in
Christ; for the actings of these graces were incompatible with that state, and
suppose an imperfection in the Subject, and therefore even now cannot be so
well called parts of the Image of God in a sanctified man; and indeed there is
some difference between that Imago Creationis, and Imago Recreationis, as
Bannez expresses it, or Imago constituta, and Imago restituta, the Image of
God in our Creation, and the Image of God in our Recreation or Renovation, when
we are made new creatures by the Spirit of God.

Now because Adam had not justifying faith in his glorious estate, it has
occasioned that dispute, Upon what terms, or with what justice God can require
of every man to believe in Christ, seeing he never gave the power to do this in
Adam? Therefore the Arminians plead from hence a necessity of a new universal
Covenant of grace, and this has been an hot dispute: The Orthodox, though they
easily grant, That Adam could not actually believe with justifying Faith, yet
they say) this was potentially and habitually in him, he had a power and habit
for many things, the acts and exercises whereof were yet inconsistent with that
present estate of felicity he was created in; and certainly we may gather good
and sound positions for this truth, out of some of the choicest Schoolmen; They
have laid down good Rules, by which we may see, that the firmament was not more
filled with innumerable stars, than Adam's soul with all choice graces.

SECT. IV.
FIrst, Those graces (the Schoolmen call them virtues) which do not import any
imperfection, these were in Adam both habitually and actually, as to love God,
to be thankful to God, to delight in God; For these graces will always
continue, even in Heaven it self, and therefore were no ways repugnant, but
necessarily required to Adam in that state of felicity.

Secondly, Those graces which denote some kind of imperfection, which yet were
not repugnant to that state he was created in, were also in Adam, both
according to the habit, and also the act, such are faith and hope. By faith we
do not mean, the particular act of relying on Christ, as a Mediator, but the
general assenting unto every thing as true, which God spoke or promised unto
him, and according to this faith; so also Adam had hope depending upon God, and
expecting such things as God had promised. Now these graces of faith and hope,
even in the general nature of them, have some imperfection, if compared with
vision and fruition; Faith is opposed to vision, and hope to fruition, as the
Apostle plainly argues, 2 Cor. 5. 7. Romans 8. 24. But this imperfection did not
repugn that state Adam was created in; For although we say, Adam was made right
and perfect, yet that is not to be understood absolutely, as if he were as
perfect as God, nor comparatively in this sense neither, as if he could not be
made more perfect, or as if he had such perfection, as the glorified Saints in
Heaven shall have, but he was thus far perfect, that he wanted nothing for
that state and condition God made him in.

A third Rule is, Those graces which import an imperfection repugnant to the
state Adam was in; They were in him habitually, but not actually; They instance
in the virtues of mercy and repentance; Besides others, we may also add, the
grace of justifying Faith; So that although the Arminians judge such a position
as this absurd, yet almost the common current of Schoolmen go this way; And if
the grace of mercy, of liberality, of fortitude and patience were in Adam
habitually, why not of justifying Faith? Neither is it any Argument at all, to
say, That these habits are given for their acts, but the acts are inconsistent
with that state he was made in, for these habits were bestowed by way of
perfection and ornament to man's nature in the general, and the want of the
habits of them would have been an imperfection: Even as Adam's knowledge did
extend to the medicinal virtue in herbs and plants, which yet could not in that
state of integrity be put in practice: So that those habits, though not
reducible into acts, yet were not in vain, because they were for the perfection
of humane nature. When therefore Adam after his fall did repent and believe in
Christ, the seed of the woman promised; He did not put forth those acts from
the habits of faith and repentance he was created in, as some have said; but
the whole Image of God being lost, every gracious habit or act, was then
supernatural to him, which before was natural Yet Suarez in his Disputations
concerning the Creation of man, says, That even the habits of repentance and
mercy were in the state of integrity reducible into some acts, though not into
all; as if I should sin, I would abhor it, and bewail it; if there were any
miserable, I would relieve him, which (says he) are not mere conditional acts
in the understanding, but presuppose a purpose in the will. Again (says he)
Adam from those habits had a complacency in his mind, and an approbation of
such acts, when they could be performed by him in a suitable state; But I press
not these things.

Now although the habit of justifying Faith and Repentance were in Adam, yet we
cannot say, They were in the Angels, or in Christ, because these were in a
condition that did repugne the very habit of such acts, as well as the acts
themselves. Thus by these Rules we see, there is no kind of grace imaginable,
but Adam's soul was adorned with it one way or other: Oh then take up bitter
lamentation, and like Rachel refuse to be comforted, because our loss is
unspeakably greater than hers! There remains not one grace of those glorious
ones mentioned, now in us: and in stead of a power to any thing that was good,
we have an utter impotency thereunto, and a proneness unto evil.

But you may ask, Object.
How can original six be said to consist in this privation of original
righteousness, seeing that seems to be Gods act, to deprive us of it, and
not ours?

To this the Answer is, Answ.
That we are not to conceive of God taking away this righteousness from us, as
if one man should spoil another of his garments; but man by sinning did exclude
and shut it out from his soul; and having thus provoked God, then God does not
continue and vouchsafe that grace to him, which Adam had thus repelled; so that
God is not as an efficient, infusing wickedness into Adam's heart, but he
denies that holiness to him, which by sin was repelled; as if a man should
shut out the light from him, and keep himself in the dark: But I have spoken
more fully already to this Objection.

CHAP. XIII.
Reason to prove, That the Privation of Original Righteousness is truly and
properly a Sin in us.
SECT. I.
I Shall add that there are four Reasons, why this Privation of Original
Righteousness is truly and properly a sin in us. And

First, Because the soul is a Subject fit and prepared for to receive this
Righteousness. This rectitude you heard, was a moral perfection necessarily
required in man: The soul of a man cannot be in a neutral condition, it must
either have holiness, or sin in it; As the air does necessarily receive
either light or darkness; The body is either sick or well; if then the soul be
such a fit and capable subject of holiness; when it is deprived of it, it wants
that which is suitable and connatural to it: Insomuch that for the soul to be
without this holiness, it is against the nature of it; Why should such a spot
and a blemish be in so glorious a creature? How came spots in this Sun? As
Idolaters are condemned, because they turned the glory of God into the Image of
a beast that eats hay: No less is done by Adam's Apostasy upon us all, for
we who were made Gods Image, are now become like beast without understanding,
and yet this consideration will not debase and humble us.

Secondly, This Privation is a sin, Because it is against the Law of God
which requires habitual holiness in us. It requires the continuance in that
state, which God created us in. This Definition of original sin, that it is a
Privation of that rectitude which ought to be in us, was first assigned by
Anselme, and Occham thought it insufficient, unless there was added (...) the
Description, a Privation arising from the sin of another, Because (says he)
Adam upon his sin lost this Righteousness, which ought to be in him, yet we
cannot say, he had original sin, because it did not arise from a sin of
another, but from his own transgression. This is a needless subtilty, for it
was original sin in Adam, yea and in Eve, though they did not derive it from
one another, because they did actively communicate this unto all their
Posterity. This Privation then of all glorious holiness being against the Law
of God, as we have formerly showed, therefore it makes a man truly sinful.

Thirdly, It is a sin, Because Adam our Head and common Trustes once had this
Righteousness; So that it is a Righteousness, which we were once actually
possessed of in our Head; God did not only say, Let us make man after our
Image, but he did put it into execution, he did make him after his image; So
that it is a righteousness that we once had, which now we have lost.

Lastly, It is a sin, Because by Adam our Head we were deprived of it. The
Apostle says positively, Romans 5 That by one, sin came upon all, inasmuch as
all have sinned, viz. in him, and by him: Hence it is, That his losing of this
Image is our losing of it, as really, as if we had actually and personally
deprived our selves of it. And thus much shall suffice for the Doctrinal part
of it; but because it is good to have our affections wrought upon, as well as
our judgments informed. The next work shall be to give the Aggravations of
this loss, that so we may make a full improvement of this Truth.

CHAP. XIV.
The Aggravations of our Loss of GODS Image.
SECT. I.
I Shall conclude this Text, with that particular Observation about it, that
relates to the privative part in original corruption; for we have abbreviated
that vast and large Subject of original righteousness into a little compass,
briefly informing concerning the Nature of it. For howsoever Epiphanius (as
Pererius and Suarez say) thought that it was impossible for any to determine,
wherein the Image of God does consist; yet Paul does sufficiently explain Moses
in this particular; So that we need not run to those forced expositions of
some, who will have man in respect of his bodily constitution to bear the Image
of God. Therefore (some say) God did assume an humane shape, and in that did
make man, whereby man in a bodily manner was made after his Image. Others, That
it was so said, Let us make man after our own Image, in reference to the
Incarnation of Christ, who was in time to be made man: For we have already
heard, that it was righteousness and holiness in the soul, which made man to
be after Gods Image; So that the Image of God was not in the body, but as in
sign, a sign and demonstration of that Image in the soul. It is true, Christ
is the Image of God, but as he is the second Person in the Trinity in respect
of the Father, but that is adequately and essentially so, we are not the image
of God but in great imperfection, because we do not essentially participate of
it. Christ in respect of the Divine Nature is the Image of God, but never said
in Scripture to be made after it, for that would be an imperfection; yet if we
speak of the humane nature of Christ, we may say, that it is created after Gods
Image, because God filled it with holiness. Hence some ( Durat. de Imag. Dei,
lib. 1. page 7.) expound that Ephesians. 4. of putting on the new man, to be meant
of Christ; Christ (say they) is the new man, paralleling it with Romans 13. where
we are exhorted to put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Now howsoever some of the
Ancients have made it very dangerous to say, Adam, and in him all mankind lost
the Image of God, yet that has its truth no further, than if we limit the
Image of God to the essentials of man's soul, as endowed with intelligence and
immortality; for it we take it in respect of gracious qualifications, so it
cannot be denied, but that Adam was not more naked bodily in his Creation, than
after his fall, his soul was made naked of all righteousness, only Adam did
blush and was ashamed after his sin at his nakedness, running from God,
because afraid; whereas at our soul-poverty and nakedness, we have no sad and
grievous thoughts, thinking with our selves, How shall we come in our spiritual
nakedness unto the most great and holy God? That therefore we may be the more
affectionately possessed in our thoughts about this loss, Let us consider the
several aggravations of it.

SECT. II.
The Ends for which God made Man, lost by the loss of Original Righteousness.
FIrst, The loss of this righteousness does deprive us of the end for which
God made us: So that whereas before sin God looked on Adam, and saw he was
exceeding good, after his fall he sees him to be exceeding evil, and full of
sin: Let us instance in some choice ends for which God made man in his own
Image thus with righteousness and holiness. As

1. Therefore was he made thus holy, To have communion with, and enjoyment of
so holy a God. When God had made all the creatures, yet he says, There was not
a meet help and comfort for him, one in his own Image and likeness; therefore
he makes a woman of the same nature with him; yet still among all creatures,
though we add Angels to them, there was not an adequate and sufficient object
to fill his heart with delight, therefore God was his utmost end: So that
although he had Paradise, a place of delight to live in; Though his state was
not capable of any misery or fear from the creature, yet that which was Adam's
happiness was to enjoy God in these: Now who can bewail our loss in this
respect? We are now propense to the contrary end of our Creation; we wholly
descend downwards, who were made to ascend upwards; Adam found the favor of
God in all the creatures: It was not this or that comfort, but God in and by
them that did draw out his heart: But oh the misery and captivity we are in to
self-love, to the love of the creature! Neither are we able by nature to lift
up the heart above them to God in them, no more than the worm can fly like an
Eagle toward Heaven: Oh groan under this, and say, My heart was not once such
a lump of earth, such an heavy stone, as now I find it: There was not then any
such complaints heard; Lord, I can love Paradise, I can love my wife, but I
cannot love thee, but the clean contrary! I love them, because I love thee, and
I could not love them, but because I love thee! This Captivity and bondage our
souls are in to the creature, should make us mourn more grievously than ever
the Israelites did under the Egyptians oppression: What a shame is it to have a
body that looks upward to Heaven, and a soul that looks downward to earth?
How does the constitution of thy body agree with the condition of thy soul? Thy
face is upward, Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri. But thy soul, that is
pressed down in all its propensions and affections to the creatures, and how
contrary then are we to the end of our Creation, which is the enjoying of God?
Adam had that which Alexander so ambitiously desired, viz. the dominion over
the whole world, and yet he had as great dominion also over his own heart, so
that God was all in all to him. If David, though of the corrupted posterity of
Adam, but regenerated, could say, Whom have I in haven but thee, and there is
none in earth in comparison of thee? How much more could Adam in that glorious
state of integrity?

2. Another end in Adam's Creation after the Image of God, was to be is the
glory and praise of Gods Name: For as the Angels, who also were made after Gods
Image, their constant work was to praise and glorify God: Thus Adam being made
like another Angel, was made full of holiness, that upon the Earth, he might,
as the Angels do in Heaven, sing holy, holy, holy unto the Lord: As some great
Kings of the Earth, when they have built some great City or Town, they cause
their Image or Picture to be set up in some eminent place, for the monument of
themselves, who were such great Benefactors: Thus God, when he had made this
great and glorious world, he puts man into it as his Image, that thereby his
praise and goodness should be constantly declared; but since Adam his fall, all
mankind is now a reproach and dishonor to God; Their thoughts, their
affections, their lives, are so many dishonorable and reproachful passages
against him; God does not look upon us now as his workmanship, but as the
devils; he feeth not his Image, but the Devils in us: Moses says, that when
God saw how all men had corrupted themselves, it repented him that be made man,
and it grieved him at his heart, Genesis 6. 6. What a wonderful expression is
this? God cannot repent or grieve at any thing properly, but the Scripture
speaks thus after the manner of men, to show how exceedingly displeasing and
offensive man's fall was, that it had been better he had never been created,
than prove such an Apostate. It is true, God knew how to work a greater good
out of sin, than sin could be an evil, but this no thank to Adam's sin and
disobedience; The good wrought thereby comes wholly from the gracious power of
God; so that Adam's sin of it self, did disanull the end of his Creation, and
brought all things into confusion. Take every man by nature, what a beast and
devil is he, what an enemy to God, what an adversary to every thing of God; so
that whereas he was made to glorify and honor God, all his whole work and
life is now to dishonor him, and reproach his holy Name: Herein then lies the
misery of this loss of the Image of God, that we are fallen from our end, we
are of our selves salt that has lost its favourinesse, we are fit for nothing
but eternal torments.

SECT. III.
The Harmony and Subordination in Man's Nature dissolved, by the loss of Gods
Image.
IN the second place. This loss is to be aggravated, because of the Nature of
it, which is the deordination and dissolution of all that Harmony and
Subordination which was in man's nature. That admirable and composed order which
was in the whole man, is now wholly broken; so that the mind and will is
against God, and the affections and passions against them. A threefold
Subordination there was in man.

The first, of the intellectual and rational part unto God, The mind clearly
knowing him, and the will readily submitting unto him.

The second was, A regular Subordination of all the passions and affections
unto the mind, so that there did not from the sensible part arise any thing
that was unbeseeming and contrary to the rational: Hence it was that the
Scripture takes notice of Adam and Eve in their privitive Condition, that
though naked, yet they were not ashamed; There being a full purity and
simplicity in their natures, whereby nothing could arise to disturb all those
superior operations. At sin expresses it well; Even (says he) as Paradise
the place wherein Adam was created, had neither heat or cold, but an excellent
temperament excluding the hurtful excess of either; so also the soul of Adam
was without any excessive passion, or inordinate motion, but all things did
sweetly and amicably concur in obedience to the mind.

The third and last Subordination was of the body, both to the rational and
sensitive principles; There was a preparedness in the body of Adam, as there
was in Christ, whereby he did readily do the Will of God, and sound the body
not obstructing or weighing of it down. Now let us consider this threefold
cord, which did bind Adam's whole man unto that which is good, which was easily
broken; and then, as when the floodgates are open, the streams of water
violently rush forth, hurrying all away: Thus it is with mankind; This order
being dissolved, the whole heart of man is as unruly as the Sea; and whereas
that has its natural bounds, Hitherto it shall go, and no further; The heart
of man is boundless, and has no stops of it self, only the infinite God of
Heaven he rules and orders it as he pleases. Consider the first breach, and
mourn under that: Is it nothing to have the mind of man, which has as many
thoughts almost as there are sands upon the Sea shore, and yet not to have one
of these rise in the soul with subordination to God? What a sad bondage is
this, that our thoughts are no more under our command, than the flying birds in
the air? Do not either sinful thoughts, or if good, come in so unseasonably
upon thee, that they carry away thy soul prisoner? Oh this loss of the
obedience of the mind to Gods Law, in all the thoughts thereof, ought to be no
mean matter of debasement! Not to find one good thought of all those Iliades,
Chiliades and Myriades of thoughts which thou have, but to have rebellion in
them against God: What sad impression should it make on thee? In the will also
those motion and incomplete velleities, yea acts of consent in the will, which
arise in the soul, as so many swarms of flies in the air, Are not these also so
many armies of lusts against God, whereas in the state of integrity, there
would not have risen the least distemper?

The second breach, Is not that also as terrible and powerful? For are not all
our affections and passions like so many dogs to Action, like so many Locusts
and Caterpillars in Egypt, like so many flies and hornets, till by grace they
are crucified? What man is there, in whom if God should let any one passion or
affection have dominion over him, that it would not immediately destroy him? So
that the power of original corruption is more manifested in the affections and
passions, than any subject else.

Lastly, The disorder which is in the body, in respect of its instrumental
serviceablenesse unto God can never be enough lamented; Do not pains and
diseases in the body much indispose in holy things? Do not dullness,
drowsiness and weariness hinder a man, so that when he would religiously
serve the Lord, this body will not let him? Now all this evil and misery is
come upon us, because we have lost the Image of God; As God in nature does not
suffer any vocuum or redundans, so neither did he in respect of the frame of
the soul at the first; There was nothing defective, and nothing excessive.

SECT. IV.
The Properties of this Loss.
THirdly, This loss by original corruption of Gods Image, is exceeding great
in the properties of it. For,

1. It is a spiritual loss, principally and chiefly; The loss of Gods favor,
of all holiness, is wholly spiritual, and did tend to make a man spiritually
happy; So that if you should compare all the temporal losses that ever have
been in the world, with this first and spiritual one, it would be but as the
molehill to an high mountain: If then our eyes were opened, if we were able
rightly to judge or losses, for this we should mourn more than for any evil
that ever befell us or others; (...) messengers that came with such sad tidings
one upon another, is nothing to this message that we bring thee, But who will
believe this report?

2. As it is a spiritual loss, so it is an universal loss. The whole world is
in a lost state, by losing this Image of God; Every creature has lost in this
universal loss; The earth has lost its fruitfulness, yea the whole Creation
groaneth, and is in bondage, subject to vanity, because of this. Thus all the
creatures they lose by it, yea every thing in man loses; The mind its light,
the will its holiness, the affections their order, and the body its soundness
and immortality; If all the creatures were turned into tongues, they would
proclaim the loss of their primitive glory, and beauty, because of this sin.

3. It Is not only universal, But it is the cause of all the temporal losses that
we have: For death (in which is comprehended all kind of evil) came in upon the
loss of this Image; So that if we are sensible of any temporal loss, How much
more of this spiritual one, which is the cause and root of all? Therefore is
the body pained, therefore it dies, because this Image of God is lost,
therefore do we loose parents and children, therefore is the whole world a
valley of tears, because of this loss; If then any private loss be so bitter
unto thee, how much more ought this to be, which puts a sting into all?

Lastly, This loss is incurable as to any humane or angelical power. The image
of God is so lost, as that by our own power we are never able to recover it
again: Insomuch that when God does repair it in us, it is a new Creation, and a
spiritual Resurrection; we could not further it in the least degree.

Let the Use then be, deeply to humble us, to break our hearts far this, and
yet still to break them more and more. When Tamar was defloured, she went with
ashes upon her head, weeping and saying, I, whither shall I go? Oh do thou much
rather mourn, and sigh, and pray! We, oh wretched we! Whither shall we go? What
shall we do? Call to the Angels, they cannot help you: Cry to the mountains,
they cannot hide you from Gods wrath: Shall Saul seek for his lost Asses, the
woman for her lost Groat, Micha for his lost gods, and wilt nor thou bitterly
lament the loss of the true God, and his Image in thee?

CHAP. XV.
Of the Positive Part of Original Corruption.
SECT. I.
JOH. 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh.
THe Privative Part of original corruption being largely discovered, we come
now to the Positive Part of it: For although many of the Papists deny it,
laying the whole nature of it in a mere want of original righteousness, yet not
only the Protestants generally, but Aquinas and some who follow him, do plead
for this Positive Part in original corruption as well as the Privative, and is
therefore called Flesh, as here in the Text, and in other places lust; Of which
in its due time. We are not then to conceive of this birth-sinne, as a mere
privation of the Image of God, but as including also therewith, a propensity
and inclination to all evil.

To the discovery of this Truth, we shall find this Text pitched upon will be
very subservient; and herein we are to take notice, That it is part of that
famous Colloquy and Conference Christ had with Nicodemus, a Master in Israel;
wherein several things in the general are briefly obserable: As

First, The Mercy that is to the Church in having this Discourse upon Record;
For by Nicodemus his carnal cavillings, we see the necessity of Regeneration;
our Savior is the more powerful in his asseverations, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, etc. that hereby every one may see, that though he be great, rich,
wise, learned, ingenious, yet he must be born again

Secondly, We may take notice of our Saviors wisdom, that pitcheth upon this
Subject rather than another to treat upon; for herein Nicodemus did grossly
err, Nicodemus had learning enough, knew the Law of God and the Scriptures,
but was wholly ignorant of Regeneration.

Thirdly, We therefore see, That the work of Regeneration is a mystery, even to
wise and learned men; Twice or thrice, says that great Doctor, How can this
be? What poor and childish Objections does he make against it, and all, because
this is a thing spiritually discerned?

Lastly, The great cause why Nicodemus did not know what Regeneration was, or
see the necessary of it, was, Because of his blindness about original sin:
Had he believed how carnal and sinful every one was born, he would presently
have bewailed his condition, and said, O Lord, it is true, I am all over
polluted, I find nothing of thy Spirit in me, I am all over flesh, and do
therefore need thy Spirit to regenerate and quicken me! But this was the root
of his destruction, from hence did arise that gross miscarriage about a
new birth, because was so senseless and unacquainted with the pollution he was
born in.

So that the Text is an Argument to prove the Doctrine of Regeneration, and the
necessity of it, which Nicodemus did so carnally cavil against: For although
our Savior did so vehemently assert the truth of it in these expressions,
twice geminated, Verily, verily, I say into thee, etc. Yet because Nicodemus
still asks, How can this be? therefore our Savior discovers to him the
root and fundamental cause of the necessity of this birth, and that not of
Nicodemus only, but of every man; Therefore he speaks generally, Unless a man
be borne again, etc.

The fundamental cause therefore of the necessity of Regeneration is from that
universal Proposition laid down in the Text, That which is born of the flesh is
flesh, which is also illustrated by the contrary, That which is born of the
Spirit is spirit; The strength of the Argument lies in this, Every thing
resembles that it is produced of; from a Serpent, there comes a Serpent; from
a Toad, a Toad; so from a Dove, a Dove; a Sheep, a Lamb; There being therefore
two contrary effective principles in us, The flesh and the Spirit; The flesh,
that produces what is flesh, the Spirit, what is spirit.

In the first Proposition, we have the emphatical expression of this defilement:

1. In the Universality of the Subject of Predication, That which is born of
the flesh is flesh; There Is none exempted, great men, noble men; Even Kings and
Emperors they are flesh of flesh.

2. There is the Universality of the Subject of Inhesion; All is flesh, that
comes of flesh; so that not only the body, but the soul also is flesh in this
sense; for by flesh here, as in other places, is meant, The whole man
consisting of soul and body, as he is unclean and impure, and this appears by
the opposition, which is the Spirit of God, and the effects thereof.

Another emphatical expression is, In using the abstract for the concrete, is
flesh, that is fleshly, is spirit, that is, spiritual. We see then here a
Proposition affirmed concerning all mankind born in a natural way, which no
humane Philosophy could ever inform us in, yea to which it is wholly contrary,
viz. That we all by nature both in soul and body are nothing but flesh; for
flesh is here put for the vicious and sinful quality that is in us, and so the
mind, the intellictual and choicest parts of the soul are thus condemned, as
well as the more gross and sensitive, as in time is to be showed.

This is a clear Text to prove our universal contagion by sin, yet upon what
weak and poor grounds would the Remonstrants oppose it; They therefore by flesh
understand, Man simply as man, flesh and blood, begotten in a fleshly and
bodily manner, not as sinful and corrupted; as if our Saviors Argument had
been, as what is born of man is man, so what is born of the Spirit is
spiritual: But this is very unsound: For what Argument would this be to prove
Regeneration? Must a man be new born merely because he is a man? Certainly had
Adam continued in the state of integrity, there would have been procreation of
children, yet then there would not have been a necessity of Regeneration: Our
Savior therefore is giving a reason, why there must be a new birth, and that
is from the sinful pollution every one is born in: And whereas the reason they
give, why by flesh cannot be meant, wholly sinful, Because (say they) then in
the opposition, by Spirit, would be meant wholly spiritual, whereas the
Orthodox do acknowledge a conflict with the Spirit, and the flesh abiding in
every regenerate man: But to this the Answer is, That the abstract is put for
the concrete, spirit for spiritual, so that the Subject in the Proposition
[Born of the Spirit] Spirit is the holy Spirit of God; and the Predicate [is
made spirit] Spirit is to be understood of that spiritual and heavenly nature
wrought in us by him; And although he who is made thus spiritual, is not purely
and absolutely so, yet the Spirit will in time subdue and wholly conquer the
flesh, in which sense Gal. 5. They that are Christ's are said to have crucified
the flesh with the lusts thereof; Although there be the relics and remainders
of it still in the most holy.

The Text then being thus vindicated, the Observation is,

That all men born in a natural way, are not only without the Image of God, but
thereby also are positively polluted, and made all over flesh and sinful.

SECT. II.
Of the use of the word Flesh in Scripture; And why Original Corruption is
called by that name.
TO discover this, in the first place, It is good to take notice of the use of
the word [Flesh] in Scripture; for the misunderstanding or mis-applying of it,
has brought in a world of mischief. The Papists by Flesh (I mean some of them)
understanding only the brutish and sensitive part, as if sin were only
resident there, and the rational part were free and pure; but this is a very
great error; For besides the general use of the word Flesh in the Scripture,
there is two more pertinent to our purpose.

1. Flesh is sometimes taken for that which is weak and frail, Isa. 31. Their
horses are flesh and not spirit. Psalm. 78. He remembered they were but flesh. And

2. It is often taken for sinfulness and corruption; Thus Gal. 5. The works of
the flesh are opposite to the works of the Spirit; and men who are in the
Flesh, Romans 8. cannot please God. Gal. 3. Who having begun in the Spirit, will
ye end in the flesh? To be in the flesh and in the Spirit are made two opposite
beings by the Apostle; Insomuch that we may make it a sure Rule, That
wheresoever flesh is opposed to the Spirit of God, or its spiritual operations,
that then flesh is used for that which is evil and sinful; and thus it is in
the Text. The true notion therefore of the word Flesh being retained, Let us
consider, Why original sin is thus called Flesh. And

First, It is called so, Because of its opposition to what is spiritual.
Whatsoever the Spirit of God reveals to be believed, or commands to be
obeyed, it is wholly contradicted by man, while abiding in the flesh. Thus the
Apostle Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God; You see here is
not only a mere privation of what is spiritual, but a positive enmity and
frowardness against God, and therefore we do not speak enough to describe the
fullness of our natural evil, when we say, that we came naked into the world
without the Image of God, and his Spirit; for original sin has a contrariety
in it against God, it puts a man upon hatred of whatsoever is holy, therefore
the Apostle adds, Romans 8. 5. It is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be: Oh then that God would make our hearts more of flesh in the
Prophet Ezekiels sense, viz. tender, and melting under considerations of how
much flesh is in both mind and heart in the Apostles sense! Would thy
self-righteousness, thy self-love, thy self-fulness continue any longer, if
thou did thus judge and believe concerning thy self? Oh what a noisome
carcass, what a loathsome monster would thou be in thy own eyes, if thou did
consider the positive frowardness and opposition which is in thee to what is
holy! And therefore even in the regenerate, Gal. 5. 17. The Flesh is said to
lust against the spirit; Search then into thy heart, and say, From whence does
arise these gainsayings and oppositions which are in me, to what is holy: Why
should not heavenly and spiritual things be as welcome, pleasing and
delightful to me, as sinful and wordly objects? Is not all this, because thou
art Flesh? Certainly, there is a thousand times more reason for thee to embrace
spiritual objects than earthly; They have more real, excellent and enduring
good in them, then all the pleasures of sin if put together, but it is
because thou art flesh, that thy heart is naturally so full of enmity against
whatsoever is spiritual; And although this natural enmity be increased in thee
by voluntary wickedness, yet that which cleaves to thee, as soon as thou have
a being is enough to make thee refuse the word of God, the Ministry inviting of
thee, and to slight every Sermon thou hear, or every affliction God lays
upon thee for thy sin, mourn then under this enmity, this Law of sin that
rebelleth against the Spirit of God: This may sensibly and evidently teach
thee, that thy natural corruption is more than a mere want of the Image of God.

Secondly, In that original corruption is called flesh, is manifested, That
even the whole intellectual and sublimer parts of a man are become sinful. We
see our Savior says, That which is born of flesh is flesh, nothing is
excepted; so that whereas some would have it the rational part; The mind and
understanding not to be comprehended under this flesh; we say the contrary
according to Scripture, That in the soul and faculties thereof there is
originally sin chiefly seated There is the spring and fountain from whence
issue all the streams of sin into the lower parts of the soul: Thus when the
Apostle reckons up the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20. There are Idolatry
and Heresies numbered with the rest, which must needs be sins of the mind, How
often does the Scripture speak of darkness, ignorance, folly and blindness in
the minds of all men by nature? Col. 2. 18. There it is called a fleshly mind;
and certainly if the mind must be renewed, as the Scripture speaks, Romans 12. 2.
Col. 3. Ephesians. 4. 23. it necessarily follows, that it is fleshly and sinful.
Behold then, what a fountain of evil and misery springs out from us in this
respect, which may overwhelm us? For though the inferior parts of the soul had
been thoroughly infected with this Leprosy, yet if the superior and chief
parts had not been contaminated, there would have been hopes, that those
Sunbeams would have dispelled such misty clouds; but seeing that the eye is
become dark, How great is our darkness, and salt it self having lost its
seasoning, all must become loathsome and unprofitable? Not only thy eyes, thy
ears, not only thy affections and passions of love, fear, anger, etc. which are
the lower region of thy soul; but thy will, thy mind, thy conscience, these
also are become flesh, and are wholly corrupted, so that in thee by nature,
there remains no good thing at all.

SECT. III.
How carnal the Soul is in its actings about Spiritual Objects.
3. IN that it is called Flesh, there is discovered that a man in all the
workings of his soul in religious things, is carnal and merely carried out
wholly by the principle and instigation of flesh within him, the Image of God
was so glorious and efficacious in Adam, that all his bodily and natural
actions were thereby made spiritual, his flesh was spirit (as I may so say) the
body and bodily affections did not move inordinately against Gods will, but
having a divine and holy stamp upon them, they were thereby made divine and
spiritual: But since this original corruption, the clean contrary is now to be
seen in us; for even the spiritual workings of the soul are thereby made carnal
and fleshly, Adam's body was made spiritual, and now our souls are made carnal:
Oh the said debasing and vilifying of us that is by this means! If an Angel
should become a worm, it is not so much dishonor as for righteous Adam to
become an apostate sinner.

Let us take notice how our souls do put themselves forth about spiritual
objects, and you shall find they are wholly carnal and fleshly in such
approaches; insomuch that in their highest devotions, and religious duties they
are only carnal and fleshly all the while. As

First, In the mysteries of Religion, which are revealed unto in by a
supernatural light; The mind of man, because it cannot comprehend of them in a
carnal, or bodily manner, much more if not by natural reason (though that be
corrupt) is ready to despise and reject all; What was the reason, that Christ
crucified is such a foolish Doctrine to be believed by the learned Grecian, but
because it was not agreeable to natural reason? When Peter made that Confession
concerning Christ, That he was the Son of the living God; Christ tells him,
Flesh and blood had not revealed that to him, Mat. 16. 17. And does not this
fleshly mind still effectually move in Atheists and Heretics? Is not this the
bane of Socinan persons, that they will make reason a judge of divine
Mysteries, whereas that it s^lt is corrupt, and is it self to be judged by the
word of God? So that the power of original sin, as it is flesh, manifests it
self about all the supernatual Doctrines and Truths revealed in the Gospel. We
that are Pigmies think to measure these Pyramides, we think to receive the
whole Ocean in our little shell: Hence it is that Paul, 2 Cor. 8. 5, 6. will
have all our imaginations, every high thought brought into captivity.

Thus you see, That whatsoever a man does in reference to God, he is wholly
carnal and fleshly in it, he is not carried out with a suitable principle of the
Spirit, to that which is spiritual, and this may be discovered in many
branches; it is also very useful and profitable; for hereby they shall see,
that the only things which they rely upon, as religious worship of God, and
the evidences of their salvation, are so far from being a true stay to them,
that like thorns they will pierce their hands: If a man's spirituals be carnals,
How great are his carnals? If his Religion, if his devotion, if the matters of
his God, be thus altogether flashly, What will his sins and corruptions appear
to be? We have already instanced in one particular, viz. The Doctrine to be
believed, and declared, how carnal a man is in that. We proceed further to
illustrate this necessary Truth, and therefore.

Secondly, Every natural man in his religious worship, is wholly carnal, as
well as in his Doctrine to be believed. For if we consult the Scripture, and
observe what was the cause of all that Idolatry and spiritual abomination, for
which God did so severely punish the children of Israel, was it not from a
carnal fleshly mind within? Therefore you heard, Gal. 5. Idolatry is made a
work of the flesh, when they changed the glory of God into the similitude of an
Ox, that eats bay; Was not this to please the eye? And so their goodly
Altars, their goodly Images, which the Prophet mentions, Were not all these,
because of their sutableness to a carnal mind? We need not instance in Pagans
or Heathens, who are wholly in darkness, without any supernatural light; But if
we take notice of the Christian Church in all the successive Ages thereof, How
potent and predominant have carnal principles been in all their Devotions? And
is not Popery to this day a full demonstration of this Truth? So that that
notable expression of our Savior, Joh. 4. 23, 24. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth; Yea, that the Father
seeks such to worship him, has seldom had its due observation. Whereas then
Campian would prove, All Monuments, all Churches, all Windows and Pictures
therein, to be a demonstration of their Religion. This proves indeed the
superstition and carnality of it, not the spirituality and truth of it; and oh
the dishonor done to God by this means! This fleshly wisdom in Gods worship,
has been one chief cause of most of the calamities which have fallen upon it,
Col. 2. 18. The Apostle attributes the worshipping of Angels to a fleshly
wisdom in men.

Thirdly, A man is naturaly carnal in religious Ordinances. Because he is apt
to put trust in them, to think he merits at Gods hands, or makes satisfaction
for his ^ispasses. This is not to be spiritual, but carnal; We have low, carnal
apprehensions of God. when we think that by our righteousness, though it were
ten thousand times more perfect than it is, that we are able to profit God
therewith. Thus those false Teachers with their followers, they are said to
make a fair show in the flesh, Gal 6. 12. and Phil. 3. 3. to have confidence in
the flesh; To worship God in the Spirit, and to have no confidence in the
flesh, are two opposite things; Now by flesh there is meant circumcision, and
all other Church Priviledges, which Paul did eminently enjoy, and while a
Pharisee, he wholly rested in them, but when once the son of God was revealed
to him, then he renounced all confidence in these things, judging himself to be
only carnal in them; But now little was Paul, while a Pharisee, and so exactly
diligent in the discharge of them, persuaded that all he did was rejected by
God, that he abhorred all, that he was only carnal in those things? It is
therefore of great consquence to be spiritual in the particular, for this is a
secret sweet poison, that is apt to undo us; Therefore the Particular, the
formal the devout man, who is ignorant of Regeneration, while he abhors all
bodily flesh-sinnes, he may be highly guilty of soul flesh sins: So that
there is little cause for a Pharisee to boast, saying, He was not a profane
gross sinner like a Publican, he did not wallow in bodily sins of the flesh,
for he was dangerously diseased with soul sins; The flesh there made him
abominable in the eyes of God, for that which they did so highly exalt, it was
(...) before God; What an heavy and sad deceit will this prove, when thou shall
find that wherein thou blessest thy self, and applaudest thy self in, will be
thy condemnation, as Christ told the Pharisees, Moses in whom ye trust, he will
condemn you? Oh that this Truth might be like a sword piercing into the secrets
of your heart! How will thou be overwhelmed, when that which thou hopest will
save thee, that will damn thee? There is a carnal Religion, there is a fleshly
devotion, in which men putting their confidence, may thereby be condemned, as
well as by gross profaneness: Certainly this confidence in what religious
duties we perform (as some at the last day will plead, Have not we prophesied,
and wrought miracles in thy Name?) does insensibly and incurably damn the
greatest part of formal Christians, and it is very hard to make them discern or
judge themselves carnal in this, To trust in the arm of flesh, they will
acknowledge quickly to be a sin, but to trust, and rest in the holy duties
they have performed, out of this sin no sons of Boanerges can awaken them.

Fourthly, A man is naturally carnal in all his religious performances, Because
when he d^h them, it is not out of any love to God, to exalt and honor him,
but out of love to himself, thinking thereby to avei^ some judgment or other.
It is true, we deny not but it is lawful to serve God, to be humbled for sin
with respect to our own good, that we may escape temporal evil, but yet we are
not to do it principally and chiefly for this, we are not to uti Deo, and frui
Creaturis, to enjoy the creatures for themselves, as the utmost end, and make
use of God only for our outward help, as John 6. 26. our Savior told the
multitude that followed him, That they did seek him only because they did eat
of the loaves and were siled: This is a fundamental principle of flesh in every
man by nature not to love himself subordinately to God, but God subordinately
to himself, which is a sin of a very high nature, and immediately opposing
the great majesty of God; They worship God upon no other reason, then what some
Heathens did sacrifice to the Devils, Tantum ne noceant, That they might do
them no hurt: I (...) not then out of any love to God, or desire to magnify
him, but wholly for their own ends; and hence it is, that they alter, and
change the worship and ways of God, as they please, and as it serves for any
political interest, as you see in Jeroboam, and other wicked Kings, Whence is
all this? but because they make themselves, the Alpha and Omega, Et Deus non
erit Dens nisi homini placuerit; How could men thus break the statutes and
ordinances of God? but because they make their own advantages, the supreme Law,
as if God were for them, and they not for him: Hence it is also that the
Scripture complains so much of men, Walking in their own Imaginations; And
Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. 33. is branded for this, that he set up such a worship
and Ministry, that he had devised of his own heart; This then is a sure
demonstration of our fleshly minds, that in our worship and duties, we regard
not divine Institutions and Gods Rule, but attend only to what is subservient
to our purpose: Now the foundation of all this is, because we do not look upon
God as supreme, to whom all our senses should bow, but refer him and his
glory to our selves. The Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 16. speaks of knowing Christ after
the flesh, and so there is also a knowing of God after the flesh, which is,
when we do not things purely and sincerely out of respect to his Name, but for
our own profit and benefit: Take heed then of this fleshly frame in thy
approaches to God.

Fifthly, The fleshly mind of a man is seen in his spiritual transactions
between God and himself, In that he does wholly conceive and imagine such a
God, and Christ, not as the Scripture represents, but as he would have, and
does most suit with his carnal disposition. This is greatly to be observed, for
because of this, though they hear never so much of God and Christ, yet because
they think them to be such, as they would have a God of their own making, a
Christ of their own making, therefore they never truly repent, or turn unto
God; for concerning God, they conceive him as altogether merciful; They never
think he is a just and holy God; They attend not to the sury and vengeance
which the Scripture says is in him against obstinate and impenitent sinners,
but apprehend him to be one that loves them, and will save them, though they
go on in all rebellious ways against him; The Psalmist does notably speak to
this purpose, Psalm. 50. 21. where having spoken of such hypocrites, that will
come and worship God, though they retain their old lusts, and live in all
impurity, he adds, Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self;
They thought God was not provoked with such abominations, they thought God
would not be angry with them, as if he were like themselves: And does not this
still continue true in most profane men? Why is it that they do not tremble
under the name and thoughts of God? Why is it that they roar not out with fear,
lest God should damn them? Is it not because they make a God like themselves?
They love themselves, and acquit themselves, they easily think well of
themselves, and therefore they think God will do so also, and thus they do
likewise with Christ; They represent him to be a Savior, and a Savior only;
They consider not that he died to conquer the Devil, to make us a peculiar
people, zealous of good works; They attend not to the purifying and cleansing
power of Christ's death from the strength and power of lusts within, as well as
from the guilt and damnation by it, which being so, they can trust in Christ,
and put their whole hope in Christ, although they live in all disobedience at
the same time, and therefore whereas we might wonder, how profane men can live
as they do? Where are their thoughts of God and Christ? Why are they not
stricken with astonishment, when they hear of them? Alas, you may cease to
wonder, for the Scripture God, the Scripture-Christ, in the Scriptureway they
do not think of, but a God and a Christ, which is a mere Idol in their own
hearts set up by themselves.

Sixthly, The fleshly mind of a man is seen in running into extremes, and so
never submitting themselves to Gods word, which is always the same: So that
whereas in some the fleshly mind of man runs out into superstitious and
excessive ways of devotion, which God never required so in others again it
acts the clean contrary way pretending to Enthusiasts, Revelations, and
strange raptures and impulses of soul, and herein they think they are the only
spiritual men, and that all others are in the flesh, but strong delusions under
the pretense of Revelations, Apparitions and visions have been no new thing in
the Church of God; neither are we to stagger in our says, because of these
things; for the flesh excited by the Devil, may vent it self in these ecstasies
and raptures, as well as in superstitions; yea which is further to be observed,
a man may be altogether fleshly, while he pretends to an high spiritual way of
subduing and keeping down the flesh, Col. 2. 23. Those who were puffed up in
their fleshly minds about Angelworship, yet are said to have a show of humility
in not sparing the body, and this we may say to those deluded Papists, who
macerate and excruciate the flesh of the body, it would be better, if they did
cast out at the same time, their fleshly mind.

Seventhly, A natural man in his most religious deportment, is only fleshly,
Because whatsoever he does in these things, he is furthered only by natural
strength: For being without the grace of God, either in his understanding, or
his will, hence it is that he can rise no higher, than natural reason, natural
conscience, and natural will, does enable him unto; and these being altogether
polluted by sin, in stead of furthering, they are an hindrance and opposition
to him: If therefore you ask, From what principles, and by what strength does a
natural man draw nigh to God? The answer is only by that power which he has of
himself; The grace of God which alone can elevate the soul to God, that he is
wholly destitute of: And although it must be granted that there are some common
principles and dictates in all about God, and moral good things, yet these are
never improved any otherwise, but from carnal principles, and to carnal ends.
And thus much may suffice for this branch, viz. The carnality of a man, by
original sin in his most religious offices and duties.

In the last general place, Man may justly be said to be all over sinful and
flesh only, Because all his care, his thoughts are only for his body and
sensible things, in the mean while neglecting God, and his immortal soul. I
shall conclude with this, because all else comprehended in this name, will come
in at some other seasonable time. By nature we are in the flesh, we walk after
it, we make provision for it; so that we willingly lose God and our souls, to
save and preserve that; Who is there that will believe our Savior, saying,
What will it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat.
16. 26. What complaints and accusations may the soul make against us, when the
body has said, Feed me, Cloth me, you have done it? But when the soul has
famished, and been perishing, you have not heard the cries of it: Oh men only
flesh and utterly devoid of all spiritual power!

CHAP. XVI.
Reasons demonstrating the Positive Part of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
HItherto we have been informed out of this Text, what is comprehended in the
word [Flesh] attributed to every one that is in a natural way born of mankind.
We now proceed to that Truth, for which it was designedly pitched upon, viz.
That Original sin is not only a Privation of Gods Image, but does cannote also
a Positive inclination, and an impetuous propensity to every thing that is
evil. For this Question is agitated between some Papists, and the Protestants;
They asserting, That the whole nature of original sin lies in the privation
of Gods Image: But the Orthodox, they say, That although original sin is
privative, yet it is not merely privative, but does include in it, as the
materiale, that habitual crookedness and perverseness, which is in all the
faculties of the soul; And thus the Protestants do almost in effect say the
same with Aquinas, who calls original corruption a corrupt habit, not a mere
privation, for privations are of two sorts, either simple, that imply only a
privation, as blindness and death, or compounded and mixed, which besides the
mere privation, do denote some materiale or substratum with it. Thus Aquinas
compares original sin to a sickness or disease, which does not only signify
a privation of health, but also the humors excessively overflowing, and
thereby dissolving the due temperament of the body: Such a privation is
original sin, a mixed, or compounded privation, that besides the absence of
what righteousness is due, denotes also a propensity and violent inclination
unto that which is evil. It is true indeed, if we come punctually to examine,
how the will is disobedient, and how the affections are so disorderly, we
cannot resolve into any thing, but this privation, the understanding is
therefore darkness and erroneous, because without its primitive light; The will
is crooked and perverse, because without its primitive rectitude: So that
Calvin says well, He that calls it the privation of Gods Image, says the whole
nature of it, yet when we speak of the privative part of it only, we do not so
fully and significantly express the dreadful pollution of it: Even as
concerning vicious habits in morality, intemperance, injustice, it is not
enough to say, they are the privation of those virtues, which are immediately
contrary to them, but they do denote also such an inclination in a man, that
thereby he is carried out to those vicious of such habits constantly, and with
delight.

SECT. II.
Why Divines make Original Sin to have its Positive as well as Privative Part.
THe Reason, why our Divines make original sin to have its Positive as well
as Privative part, is to obviate that error of the Papists, who supposing
original righteousness to be only by way of a bridle in Adam to curb and
subjugate the inferior part to the superior of the soul, when Adam lost this,
they conceive mankind, has not any further pollution upon it, but that mere
loss; Insomuch that they say, Man is now as if God had created him in his pure
naturals without any supernaturals. The Socinians likewise, they deny any such
pollution, and make us to be born in the same condition Adam was created in
(death as a punishment only accepted) merely without either sin or
righteousness, like Aristotle's, Obrasa Tabula, in a neutral indifferent way.
Now to confront such dangerous opinions, we say, That by our birth-sinne, we
are not only deprived of Gods Image, but are in an habitual inclination to all
evil, which is also active and repugnant to all good.

SECT. III.
Reasons to evince the Positive part of Original Sin.
NOw that we are to judge of it thus, will appear from Scripture, upon these
grounds:

First, The names that the Scripture attributes to it, compel us to think of
it, as more than a m^er bare simple privation, for in the Text it is called
Flesh, in other places Lust, the Old man, the Body of sin, which emphatical
expressions are for this end to make us conceive of the deep and most real
pollution it brings upon us: Insomuch that we are not to extenuate and
diminish the nature of it, but as the scope of the Scripture is to aggravate it
under the most substantial and powerful names that are, so we also are
accordingly to judge of it. It is true, Illyricus out of a vehement opposition
to Papists and Synergists, did wring the Scripture till blood came out of it in
stead of milk; for he would understand these places mentioned about original
sin almost literally, as if sin were our very substance and essence,
whereas if he had gone no further, then to say, that the Scripture by these
names does intend not only the mere privation of good by this original
pollution, but also a positive pronenese, and a continual activity unto all
evil, than he had hit the mark. The Scripture Names then are only considerable,
for the holy Ghost does not use them in vain, but thereby would startle and
amaze us, that we may consider that we are without, and what evil does abide in
us.

Secondly, This is proved from Scripture-affirmation, about the state of all
men. It does not only describe man privatively, that he is without God,
without Christ, but also pesitively, that he is an enemy to God, and cannot be
subject to him, Romans 3, 10, 11. to the 18. verse. The holy Apostle applying
several passages out of the old Scripture to all men by nature, instanceth both
in privatives and positives also; Privatives, There is none that understands,
there is none that seeks God, there is none that does good, there is no fear
of God before their eyes: But is this all? No, he adds, Their throat is an
open Sepulcher, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, their feet are swift
to shed blood, etc. Here you see, the nature of every man is abominable,
loathsome and ready to commit the foulest sins, if he be not stopped; yea the
Scripture is more oftener expressing this Positive part of original sin then
the Privative, Genes. 5. Genes. 8. 21. The imagination of a man's heart is said
to be only evil, and that from his youth. Eliphaz also in Job 15. says, How
abominable is man who, drinks down iniquity like water? Thus you see the
Scripture represents us in a far more loathsome vile and poisonous nature
than we are apt to believe concerning our selves. When Austine maintained this
Doctrine, Pelagius would say, This was to accuse man's nature ( Lib. 1. de
Natura and Gratia.) But this is indeed the only way to set up the grace of
Christ our Physician, for the whole need not a Physicias, Neither (says
Austin) are we so to exalt God a Creator, as to make a Savior wholly
superfluous. It is true therefore, which the same Author says, That when we
have to do with such who deny the necessity of grace by Christ, making free
will of it self, sufficient to what is holy, and all because they deny any such
thing as original sin, we are not so much (says he) to deal in Disputations
with them, as prayers for them, that their eyes might be opened to know
themselves, and that the stony heart may be taken from them, for if once they
had the sense and feeling of this, they would quickly confess both original
sin, and Christ's grace.

Thirdly, Original sin is positive, Because the Scripture attributes positive
and efficatious actions to it, which mere and bare privations are not capable
of. The seventh Chapter of the Romans speaks fully to this, what expressions,
and that in allusion to military affairs, does the Apostle use concerning this
sin inhabiting in him? For verse. 23. he complains of this Law of sin,
that it does war against him, and bring him into captivity, which phrases
denote, That this original sin is not a sluggish, idle privation, but withal
it connoteth an impetuous repugnancy to any thing that is holy; This also the
Apostle confirms, Gal. 5. 17. where the flesh is said to lust against the
Spirit, shall we think then, that the holy Ghost speaks of this activity and
working of sin in us, that we should apprehend no more than the absence of
Gods Image within us. Let us then aggravate the hainnousnesse of it, as we see
the Scripture does, and deeply humble our selves under it: Shall it be a small
thing to have such an impetuous active principle in us against what is holy?
That which we should embrace and close with as the most excellent, that we fly
from, and are most averse to, as if it were the greatest evil, and would be to
our utter undoing.

Fourthly, If vicious habits that are acquired by customary practice of evil.
are not mere and simple privations, but do also include in them a propensity to
evil, then it follows, that original sin likewise is not a mere privation;
For we are to conceive of original sin, as an innate and imbred habit, as the
other are acquired: Now it is plain, That all vicious moral habits, they are not
a mere negation, or absence of such virtues, but do^ also incline and dispose
the subject to vicious actions, easily and with delight; So that we must needs
attribute as much Postivenesse, if not more to original sin, then to vicious
acquired habits; And the truth is, This is a closer Leprosy infecting of us,
then such habits, for this we have as soon as we are born, this is twisted
within our bowels; this can never be wholly shaken off, whereas accustomed
sins, they are perfectly overcome by the work of Regeneration. For this is
the difference between acquired habits of sin, and original corruption: In
Regeneration, seeing the Image of God is put into us, which is the substance of
all holy habits, the contrary habits are presently excluded, and the sins the
godly afterwords commit, are not from their former habits of sin, but from
the relics of original corruption, whatsoever the Remonstrants say to the
contrary; But Regeneration does not totally exclude original sin, only
diminishes the strength of it: So that this original corruption will abide in
some measure in us, even while we carry this mortal body about with us: And if
the Prophet made it such an impossible thing for men habituated in sin to be
converted, as when he says, If a Leopard can change his skin, then may you
learn to do well, who are accustomed to do evil, Jerem. 13. 23. What then
shall he said of us who are borne in evil? Customary sins are but the
Leopards skin, original sin is like the Leopards nature.

Lastly, This positive inclination does necessarily follow from the privation
of this Image of God; if the due summetry and excellent Harmony which was at
first in the soul be taken away, then all the faculties and powers of the soul
must necessarily move sinfully and inordinately. The soul of a man is always
working one way or other, if then it has lost original righteousness, it
cannot but be hurried on to what is evil; as if you take away the pillar on
which a stone liethh, presently that will fall to the ground; If you spoil the
strings of musical instruments, immediately they make a jarre and ungrateful
noise upon every moving of them: The soul of a man is a subject immediately
susceptible of righteousness or corruption, and if it lose its righteousness,
then by natural necessity corruption comes in the room of it, and so when the
understanding acts, it acts sinfully, when the will moves, it moves
sinfully; So that we may well say with Austin to the Pelagian, demanding, How
this corruption could come into us, for God was good, and nature good, Quid
quaeris latentem rimum, cum habes apertam jannam? Not a cranny, but a gate or
door is open for this corruption to seize upon us.

SECT. IV.
Application.
BEfore we come to answer the Objections, Let us affect our hearts with it, and
labor to be humbled under the consideration of this positivenesse and efficacy
of it.

For first, Hereby we see, that if it be not restrained and stopped by God, we
know not where we should stay in any sin; What Cain's, what Judas's would we
not prove? Who can say, Hitherto I will go in sin, and no further, for there
is a fountain within thee, that would quickly overflow all? This active root of
bitterness, this four leaven within thee, would quickly make thy life, like
Job's body, full of ulcers and noisome sores: If thou art not plunged in the
same mire and filth, as others are, do not say, Thou have less of this
corruption than they; Thou art borne more innocent than they, only God stops
thee, as he did Balaam from doing such wickedness, as thy heart is forward
enough unto; No Serpent is fuller of poison, no Toad of venom, than thou art
of sin, which thou would be constantly committing, were not some stop put
in the way.

Secondly, In that sin is thus positive and inclining thee, thou art the more
to admire the grace of God, if that work a contrary inclination and propensity
in thee; If thou art brought with Paul, To delight in the Law of God in the
inward man; If thy heart pants after God, as the Heart after the waters, which
once delighted in sin, which once longed after nothing, but the satisfying of
the flesh: Oh admire this gracious, miraculous work of God upon thy soul, who
has made thee to differ thus from thy self! The time was once, when thou
rejoycedst in those sins, that are now matter of shame and trembling to thee.
The time was when thy heart was affected with no other good than that of the
creature; Thou did know no other, desire no other but that, but now God has
made iron to swim, he has made the Blackmoor white: Oh bless God for the
least desires and affections, which thou have at any time for that which is
good, for this comes not from thee; it is put into thee by the grace of God.

Lastly, Consider that this positivenesse of sin in thee, does not only
manifest it self in an impetuous inclination to all evil, but also a violent
resistance of whatsoever is good: The Apostle ( Romans 8.) calls it, Enmity
against God; and Romans 7. he complains of it, as warring and fighting against
the Law of his mind; And certainly this is a very great aggravation, not only
to be without what is good, but to be a desperate enemy, and a violent opposer
of it, both in others, as also to that which the Spirit of God by the Word
would work in our own hearts, not only without the remedy, but full of enmity
against it; Does not this make our condition unspeakably wretched? Certainly,
this is the highest aggravation in original sin, that we are not only unable
to what is good, but we are with anger and rage carried out against it, as if
good were the only evil, and sweetness the only bitterness.

CHAP. XVII.
Objections against the Positive Part of Original Sin answered.
SECT. I.
Cautions Premised.
THere remain only some Objections against this Truth, but before we answer
them, take notice,

First, That although we say original sin is more than a privation of that
Righteousness which ought to be in man, yet We do not make it to be like some
infecting corporeal quality in the body, that hereby should vitiate the soul,
and as it were poison that. Lombard and some others, especially Ariminensis
(Distinct. 30.) They seem to deliver their opinion so, as rejecting Anselm's
definition of original sin, making it to be want of that original
righteousness which ought to be in us, and do declare it to be a morbida
qualitas, some kind of pestilential and infecting quality abiding in the body,
and thereby affecting the soul; As when the body is in some phrenetical and mad
distempers, the soul is thereby disturbed in all its operations; so that these
make the want of original righteousness to be the effect of original sin, not
the nature of it, saying upon Adam's sin, Man becoming thus defiled, God
refused to continue this righteousness to him any longer. But if these
Schoolmen be further questioned, How such a diseased pestilential quality
should be in the body? Some say, it was from the forbidden fruit that that had
such a noxious effect with it; but that is rejected, because that was made of
God, and all was exceeding good: Arimine^sis therefore following as he thinks
Austin, makes this venomous quality in a man's body to have its original, from
the hissing and breath, as it were of the Serpent; he conceives, that by their
discourse with the Serpent, there came from it such an infectious air, as might
contaminate the whole body, and he says Austin speaks of some, who from the
very hissing and air from Serpents have been poisoned.

But the Protestants they do not hold it any positive quality in this sense;
for this is to make the body, the first and chiefest subject of original sin,
and so to convey it to the soul, whereas indeed the soul is primarily and
principally the seat of original sin; We therefore reject this, as coming too
near Manicheism, as if there were some evil and infectious qualities in the
very nature and substance of a man.

Secondly, It must be remembered, what has been said before, That when we come
to give a particular reason why the understanding or will are propense to any
evil; We can assign only a privative cause, viz. Because it wants that
rectitude which would regulate it; as if a ship (it is Anselm's comparison) were
without Pilot and Governor of tacklings let loose into the whole Ocean, it
would be violently hurried up and down till it be destroyed. Thus man without
this Image of God would be tossed up and down by every lust, never resting till
he had hurled himself into hell; yet though we cannot give any more than a
privative cause, there is also a positive propensity to all evil connoted: As
in a wicked action of murder or drunkenness, if you go to give a reason, why
such actions are sins; we must say from the (...) that is in them, that want
of order which the Law requires; There is a privation of that rectitude the
Law commands, yet those sins do imply also the material and substrate acts,
as well as the obliquity: In every sin of commission, there is that which is
positive as well as privative; Though the ratio formalis of the sin be a
privation; and thus it is in original sin, the whole nature of it comprehends
both a want of Gods Image, and a constant inclination to all impiety. Though
the privative be the cause of the positive Indeed Rolloc (De vocatione cap. 25.
de peccat. orig.) makes a threefold matter, and a threefold form in original
sin: The threefold matter he assigns to be a defection from God, a want of
original righteousness, and a positive quality, which succeeds in the room of
holiness: To which threefold matter he attributes a three fold form or
(...), in which the nature of sin consists. Now these material parts of
original sin, are so many entities, being good in themselves, and coming from
God the Author of nature, but how Apostasy and want of original righteousness
can be positive entities, and good of themselves, I cannot understand, or how
carentia justitiae originalis, should have the (...) for its form when that it
self is the (...), and so a form have a form seems irrational to conceive.

SECT. II.
THese two things thus premised, the plain and obvious Objection is, That if
original sin be positive, then it is good, and so of God, because omne ens est
bonum, every being is good, and then as Austin, Omne bonum est vel Deus, vel a
Deo, all good is either God himself, or of God Would it not then be blasphemy
to make God the Author of it, and if it have a positive being, then certainly
it must come from God the Author of all being?

But to this several Answers may be returned:

First, That though original sin should be granted to be positive, yet for
all that God would not be made the Author of sin, Because as it is sin, it
does arise from man. There are some great Schoolmen, as Cajetan and others,
that hold sins of commission have a positive real being, as sins; They deny
that the nature of such sins lies formally in a privation. but in a positive
relative contrariety to the Law of God; and when urged with this Argument, That
then such sins have their being immediately from God, as all other created
beings have: They will answer, That God is indeed the efficient of every being,
but not of every modus, or relative respect of that being: As for example, when
a man eats and drinks, this eating and drinking they are from God, but then
take them under this relative respect, as they are vital and formal actions of
man, so they cannot be attributed to God, for then we might say, God does eat
and drink, yea in those gracious acts when we do believe and repent, God is the
efficient cause of them, yet as they do formally and vitally flow from us, so
they are not to be attributed to God, for God does not repent or believe. Thus
it may be said, That though God be efficiently the cause of all positive being,
yet as some being has a relative respect to the second cause working, so it
cannot be attributed to God, neither is this any imperfection, but a perfection
in God, because Deus non potest supplers vicem materialis, aut formalis causae:
Therefore says Curiel a positive Doctor for the positive nature of sins of
Commission ( Lectur. 6. in Thom. page 300.) That it may be granted, the will is
prima moralis causa peccati, as we may say a man is the first cause of sight,
per modum videntis, because he is not subordinate to any other cause, which
does produce this sight, viz. formally, a sight; and (says he) the like is in
all other vital actions. But I need not run into this thorny thicket to hide my
self from the force of this Objection.

Secondly, There are some learned Protestants, that do distinguish of ens, or
being; That ens is either created, as the works of the six days, or generated,
as mankind, and the animate creatures, or made as artificial things, or
prepared, as Heaven and Hell, or introduced, as sin; for it is said of sin,
that it is (...); So that upon this distinction they will say, That God is the
cause of all made, and created beings, but not of introduced beings, such as
sin is, because that came in by Satan's temptation, and man's disobedience. But
this distinction has scarce so much as a sandy foundation; for though it be an
introduced being, yet because a being, it is a creature, and so must come from
God the chief being, according to that of the Evangelist, John 1. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made: For
that which is ens only by participation, must be reduced to that which is ens
per essentiam. Therefore

In the third place, We must speak of original sin, as we do of vicious
habits, and of actual sins; The material and substrate of them, being a good
of nature is of God, but the vitiosity and obliquity that is of man, when a man
moves his tongue to curse and swear, or his hand to murder another: As they
are actions they are of God, For in him we live, and move, and have our being;
but as evil adhereth to them, so they are of man: Thus it is in original sin,
when we say, there is a positive inclination in man's heart to all evil; The
meaning is, That the understanding and will, as they are faculties, and as they
do act, thus far they are of God, but as they cannot but act sinfully, and
offend in every motion, so it is of Adam's disobedience, to understand then, to
think, to will, to love, these are of God, but to love what is evil and
contrary to Gods Word, or to love excessively and immoderately that which we
are to do in subordination only, this is of our selves.

A second Objection is, That if original sin be like a vicious habit in a
man, then it cannot be transmitted unto posterity, for habits ( they say) are
personal things: No father does communicate to his child any habits, either
virtuous or vicious.

But to this it is answered, That original sin is not an acquired habit of
sin, but an innate and imbred one in us; So that as if Adam had stood,
original righteousness, which was like a concreated habit in man, would have
been communicated to all his posterity, thus it is no wonder, if original
sin, which does so tenaciously and inwardly adhere to all natures be
transmitted to every one born in a natural way.

The last Objection is, That there is no necessity of supposing such an
habitual vitiosity in a man; It Is enough ( say they) that a man be deprived of
the Image of God, and when that is lost, of it is own self man's nature is prone
to evil; It needs no habitual inclination to weigh him down; as if a wild beast
be tied in cords and chains, lose him, unty him, and of himself he will run
into wild and untamed actions.

But to answer this:

First, The Papists, they cannot consequentially to their principles say thus;
For they hold, That if this Image of God be removed, he does continue in his
pure naturals, there is no sin inhering in him, upon the mere loss of that;
For they confess, That although by acting from his pure naturals he could not
deserve Heaven, or love God as a supernatural end, yet in an inferior way, as
the ultimate natural end, so he might love God, and that above all other things.

But secondly, That is granted, This positive inclination to all evil,
follows necessarily from the removal of this Image of God from us; If the
Sun be removed, then necessarily darkness does cover the face of the soul;
If the loco-motive faculty be interrupted, then there is nothing but halting
and lamenesse: Disturb the harmony, and good temperament of the humors, and
then immediately diseases and pains do surprise the whole man; It cannot
therefore be avoided, that when this disorder is come upon the soul, but that
our lusts break out as at a flood-gate, and we are in a spiritual deluge all
over covered with the waters of sin; but then here is a positive as well as a
privative.

Besides, It is not for us to be curious in giving a reason of such positive
corruption in a man by nature; it is enough that Gods word is so clear and full
in the discovery of it, that he must needs wilfully shut his eyes, that will
not be convinced by the light of Gods word herein: And this may suffice to
dispel that darkness, which some would have covered this Truth with, and as
for what knowledge about this positivenesse of original corruption is further
necessary; We shall then take notice of it, when we speak of original sin, as
it is called lust or concupiscence.

SECT. III.
LEt therefore the Use from the former Doctrine delivered, be, To affectus, and
wound us at the very heart, that we are thus all over covered with sin, that we
have not an understanding, but to sin, a will but to sin, an heart but to sin;
May not this be like a two edged sword within thee? What will fire thee out of
all thy self-confidence, thy self-righteousnesse, if this do not? What
delight, what comfort can thou take by beholding thy self, by looking on thy
self thus corrupted and depraved? And the rather let this consideration go to
the very bottom of thy soul. Because

First, Thy propensity and inclination is to that only which God only hates,
which God only loatheth, and has decreed to punish with his utmost wrath to
all eternity. Consider that sin is the greatest evil; All the temporal evils
in the world are but the effect of it, that is the cause. Now can it ever
humble thee enough to think, that the whole bent, and constant tendency of thy
soul is unto that which is the most abominable in the eyes of God? Thou can
not do that which is more destructive to thy own soul, and more dishonouring
unto God, then by committing sin, and yet thou can do nothing else, thou
delightest in nothing else; Thy heart will not let thee do any thing else: Look
over thy whole life, take notice how many years thou have lived, and yet if not
regenerated and delivered in some measure from the power of original
corruption, thou have done nothing but sinned; Every thought has been a sin,
every motion a sin within thee, and yet sin is the greatest evil, and that
alone which God hates.

Secondly, If yet thy heart be hard, and nothing will enter, take a second
nail, or wedge to drive into thee, and that is, being thus all over carried
out to sin, not the least good able to rise in thy heart, that hereby the
very plain Image of the Devil is drawn over thee: Hence it is, that wicked men
are said to be of their Father the Devil; and he is said to rule in the hearts
of the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. What a woeful change is this, to be
turned from a Son of God, to become a Devil? While Adam retained the Image of
God, God abode with him, and in him, there was a near union with God, but upon
his Apostasy, the Devil takes possession of all, and so now man is in a near
union with the Devil: Every man's soul is now the Devils Castle, his proper
habitation; The Spirit of God is chaced away, and now thy heart is made an
habitation for these Satyrs; Thy soul is become like an howling wilderness,
wherein lodge all beastly lusts whatsoever; Thou that would account it
horrible injury to be called beast and Devil, yet thy original sin makes
thee no less.

Thirdly, This further may break thy heart, if it be not yet broken enough,
that hereby thou art utterly impotent and unable to help thy self out of this
lost condition; For how can a dead man help himself to live again? How can thy
crooked heart be ever made straight, unless a greater power than that subdue
it; If thou did judge thy condition an hopeless one, as to all humane
considerations, then thou would tremble, and have no rest in thy self, till
God had delivered thee out of it?

Lastly, Let this also further work to thy Humiliation, that being thus
positively inclined to all evil, not only proper and suitable temptations draw
out thy sins, but even all holy and godly remedies appointed by God, they do
increase this corruption the more, And is not that man miserable, whose very
remedies make him more miserable? Does not the Apostle complain sadly of that
Law of sin in him, even in this respect, that by this means, the Law wrought
in him all evil? The more holy and spiritual the Law was, the more carnal and
sinful was he thereby occasioned to be: Oh then! What will thou do, when good
things make thee evil, spiritual things make thee more carnal?

CHAP. XVIII.
A second Text (to prove Original Sin to be Positive) opened and vindicated.
SECT. I.
ROMANS 7. 7. For I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet.
WE are discovering the Nature of original sin in the Positive part of it;
For although Corvinus the Remonstrant cavilleth at the Division of original
sin into two parts, therein gratifying the Papists (as it were, yet we see
the Scripture speaking of it fully, as having these two parts; And whereas he
says, The Positive inclination to evil, must be the effect of the privation of
original righteousness, and so not a part of original, because an effect
cannot be a part of its cause.

It Is answered first, That sometimes there is a division of a common thing, as
into two parts, when yet one is the effect of the other; as when malum is
divided into malum culpae, and malum poena, the evil of punishment is
necessarily the effect of the evil of sin. But

Secondly, Though an inclination to evil may be the effect of the privation of
original righteousness, yet for all that it may be part of original sin,
which is the whole consisting of both these: Even as according to some learned
Divines, Remission of sin is part of Justification, although it be an effect
of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, which is also another part of our
Justification.

SECT. II.
The word Lust expounded.
HAving therefore considered this Title or Name given to original sin ( viz.
Flesh.) which does denote the Positivenesse of it: I come to a second, which
shall also be the last, and that is the word lust or concupiscence, which both
in the Scripture, and in the writings of several Authors is attributed to it;
For which purpose the Text pitched upon is very useful.

To understand which, consider that the Apostle having asserted some things,
which in an outward appearance did seem to dishonor the Law, he makes this
Objection to himself, Is the Law sin? A cause of sin, and so sin, and God
the Lawgiver a commander of sin; To which he answers, (...), by defiance,
God forbid, and in the next place gives a reason, why the Law cannot be the
cause of sin, because that does discover and detect sin, that judges and
damneth it, therefore it cannot be the cause of sin; and that the Law is the
manifester and reprover of sin, he instanceth in himself, and his own
experience, I had not known lust to be sin, except the Law had said, Thou
shall not covet.

Now ere we can understand this Text, we must answer some Questions. And

First, It Is demanded, What is meant by the Law here? Some say, the Law of
Nature, which is not so probable; Others, the written Law of Moses, and this is
most probable by the whole context. But yet some, though they understand it of
the Law of Moses, yet they do not mean any particular command, but the Law in
the general, saying, the Apostle uses (...) and (...) for all one; As if the
meaning were, The Law in general did not only forbid sinful actions, but also
inward lust, and motions of the soul thereunto, as our Savior fully expounds
it, Matthew. 5. Others they understand this Law of a particular Commandment, viz.
the tenth; and therefore Beza observes the Article (...), by this, or by that
Commandment in particular; And this seems most probable, because they are the
very words of the tenth Commandment.

But secondly, If the Apostle allege that command, Why does he instance only
in the sin forbidden, not mentioning the objects that are specified in the
command, Thy neighbors Ox or his Ass, etc?

The Answer is, that is not material, for the Apostle speaking of lusts in the
heart, what latent and unknown sins they were without the light of the Law, it
was enough to name the sin it self, seeing the objects about which they are
conversant are of all sorts, and can hardly be numbered.

In the third place, It Is doubted how the Apostle could say, that he did not
know lust to be sin, but by the Law of Moses, seeing that by the very Law of
nature, even Heathens have condemned inward lusts, and unjust thoughts and
plots, though but in the soul, and never put into practice. Aquinas makes the
meaning of it, as if Paul's sense was, He did not know lust to be sin, as it
was an offense to God, and a dishonor to him, because the Law of Moses
represents the sinfulness of these lusts in a more divine and dreadful way,
then the Law of nature does. Grotius makes the sense thus, Paul did not know
lust, but by Gods Law, because the Laws of men punish nothing but sinful
actions, never at all meddling with the thoughts and purposes of the heart. Beza
expounds the expression comparatively, I had not known lust to be sin, viz.
so evidently, so fully, so unquestionably, as I did when I understood the Law.
But the general Interpretation is, That the Apostle speaks here of his
thoughts and knowledge, while he was a Pharisee, and it is plain by our Saviors
correcting of pharisaical glosses about the Law, Matthew. 5. That they thought
the Law did only require external obedience, and whatsoever thoughts or
sinful lusts men had, so that they did not break out into the practice of
them, they were not guilty of sin, He did not then know lust to be sin,
following the traditional exposition of his Masters, till he came to understand
the Law aright.

Another Question of greater consequence is, What is meant by lust? Thou shall
not covet, for the word (...), though in Exodus 20. there be the same Hebrew
word (...) yet Deuteronomy. 5. 21. There is another Hebrew expression, which is (...),
which because in Hithpael, and so of a reciprocal signification, they translate
fecit se concupiscere, to stir up a man's self to desire, and thereby say,
such lusts are only forbidden that a man nourishes, and yields himself up
unto, but that rule is not a general one, see Prove. 23. 3. Some limit this
Commandment too much, as it did only command contentation of spirit, and that
we should not sinfully desire, that which others have. But the Apostle does
plainly extend it further than so. The Papists they likewise limit it too much,
making only those lusts andmotions of sin, which we consent to to be
forbidden, denying that those motions to evil, which arise antecedently to our
reason and will, to be truly sins; hence is their Rule concerning them, Non
sensus, but consensus is that which does damn, which in a good sense, we also
will acknowledge to be true. But we are not to limit Scripture, where it has
not limited it self, and therefore we conclude, That the command does forbid a
threefold concupiscence or lust.

First, That lust which is actually consented to, though not breaking forth
into act, and if this were all, the Law of God would hereby be exlted above all
humane Laws, which reach no further than external actions, And how many are
ignorant of, at least not affected, with the spiriruality of this Law in this
particular? Would they dare to entertain such heart-sinnes as they do, could
they make their souls cages of unclean, unjust and ungodly thoughts, as they
do?

Secondly, The Law goes higher, and does not only forbid those lusts in thy
heart, which thou yeeldest consent unto; but all those suggestions and sudden
surreptitious motions, which do suddenly arise in thy soul, though thou do
not consent to them, yea though thou do resist them, hate them, and pray
against them, for of such lusts Paul does especially speak in this Chapter, and
the Law of nature did never condemn these for sins in any Heathens, whereas
the Apostle does chiefly complain of these, and that as sins properly so
called, for to be mortified and crucified, as being contrary to the holy Law of
God.

Lastly, By lust is meant original sin, as being the fountain, the root of
all these lusts, that hot furnace, from which those sparks of sinful motions
do continually arise, and that by lust is meant at least secondarily, and by
contequent original corruption is plain, because this lust is the same with the
Law of the members, the Law of sin, and the sin dwelling in him. It is
true, he says, this sin he complains of, wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence or lust. But then we must distinguish between lust habitual, and
lust actual; Lust habitual is original sin, and that is the cause of lusts
actual; And if you say, Why does the Apostle call original sin lust, as if it
were an actual sin? The reason is (as is further to be insisted on) because
it is a fountain always running over; Its not a sluggish dull habit, but is
continually venting it self forth into all poisonous and sinful acts. So that
by lust forbidden in the Text is meant.

1. Lusts consented to, though not accomplished in act.

2. Lusts arising in the soul, but rejected and striven against.

Lastly, Original sin, as the root of all; In which sense the Apostle James
Chap. 1. 14. calls it likewise lust. Some learned men there are, that do not
like it should be said original sin is forbidden by the Law of God, (as
Molineus, Rivet. in Expos. Dec. Martinius in Exposit. Decal) although they
grant the Law does damn it and judge it. But surely their meaning is no more,
as Martinius does expressly afterward affirm, than that original sin is not
primarily and directly forbidden, but secondarily and by consequent; As also
that it is thus forbidden, that we should not obey but resist it, as Rivet. But
whereas they reason, That a prohibition is not of those things that already are
present in us, but of what is future or may be, that is no ways solid, because
past sins and present actual sins, are truly forbidden by the Law, although the
sin past cannot but be past, and the sin present cannot but be present,
because quicquid est, quando est, necesse est esse. Other learned men, though
they grant original sin is truly and properly forbidden by the Law of God,
yet they say, It is not in this Commandment, partly because it is forbidden in
every Commandment, for where any branch of sin is forbidden, there the root
also is forbidden, and where pure streams of holiness are required, there also
a pure fountain of holiness; Original righteousness is commanded, and that
partly because this tenth Commandment does belong to the second Table only,
whereas original sin is not only the cause of evil lusts toward man, but
also toward God. Now in this we shall not much disagree; For it must be
granted, That seeing an holy heart is required in every particular command, it
follows, That an evil sinful heart is forbidden in every command; and for
the later we grant also, That original sin is not forbidden in this last
Commandment in the universal latitude and utmost extent of it, but so far as
it does break out in sinful lusts toward man.

SECT. III.
THese things being thus necessarily premised for the opening and vindication
of the Text, I proceed to the Doctrine, which is

That original sin is truly and properly concupiscence or lust in a man. This
name does plainly denote more than a mere privation, for it evidently
discovers the nature of it, to be in the carrying out of the soul in all its
motions sinfully, and inordinately, as also that from this as a corrupted
fountain do all those poisonous streams of actual lustings in the soul flow, as
Jam. 1. 14. where you have notably the rise of all actual sin described, how
it comes about that any one is enticed to do that which is wicked, he cannot
accuse God or the Devil, but this lust within him: But of that famous and
excellent Text, we are in time to speak. This great Truth, That original sin
is Lust, or Concupiscence, does first deserve diligent and clear illustration,
and then practical amplification.

SECT. IV.
IN the first place consider, That concupiscence or lust may be taken two
ways, as was formerly hinted, habitually and radically, or actually, the
mother and the daughter, the root and the fruit. Now original sin is lust,
not actually, but radically; It is that from which all actual lusts and desires
have their immediate rise; and in this sense it is commonly called the flesh,
and lusts are the sinful issue of it. Thus Gal. 5. 16. You shall not fulfill
(...), The lust of the flesh. And again, They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the lusts thereof. So Ephesians. 2. 3. here flesh and its lusts, is
original sin with the immediate motions and outgoings thereof. At other
times, original sin is called sin in the general, to declare the emphatical
sinfulness of it, and then there are ascribed several lusts likewise to it,
Romans 6. 12. Sin must not reign in us, that we should obey the lust thereof;
And Romans 7. 8. Sin wrought in me, (...) all manner of concupiscence. So that
you see, there is lust the cause, and lust the effect, lust the root, and lust
the branches; the former is original sin, called excellently by the Apostle
Jam. 1. 15. (...), lust conceiving, implying, it is like the womb, wherein all
wickedness is first conceived, and such a womb that like the grave never has
enough, we may call it the Sheol in a man. The Rabbius say well, That
concupiscentia does aedificare inferos; This lust in the several actings of it,
is that which makes hell; Though God never said* Increase and multiply to it,
yet it fills earth and hell, with the effects thereof.

SECT. V.
SEcondly, We are to understand, that (...) in the general, To desire in the
abstract is indifferent, neither good or bad, but as diversified by the object.
In the Hebrew there are these words for concupiscence (...), and that
properperly signnifieth Lust, as we take it in our common-English sense, for
the lusts of the body in an unclean manner, Eccles. 12. 5. the word is there
used, but translated by the Septnagint (...), which has exercised Critics;
The root of the Hebrew word is (...) from whence is Ebion, poor, needy, from
thence some Heretics were called so, as being destitute of understanding.
Another is (...), which signifies desire in the general, and is used in a good
sense, Psalm. 132. 13. in a bad sense Numb. 11. 4. There is also the word (...),
which is many times applied to the object desired, as wives, children, houses,
etc. Lastly, there is (...), and the Hebrews do commonly call evil
concupiscence (...): But to return to the Greek word (...). Col. 3. 5. There is
(...), Evil Concupiscence: Though the English word Lust seems to be
ordinarily taken in an ill sense, yet Gal. 5. 17. our Translators render it,
The Spirit lusts against the flesh; Hence in the Scripture we may observe a
threefold lust or desire:

1. That which is natural flowing from the appetite of nature: Thus it is said
of Lazarus, Luke 15. 16. he did (...), desire to be satisfied with the crumbs of
the rich man's table.

2. There is in the Scripture mention of a good concupiscence, or coveting, and
that is, when a godly man does earnestly desire to do or suffer the will of God:
Thus Mat. 3 17. righteous men are said to desire to see those things; which
were to be seen in Christ's days: So Luke 22. 15. Christ is there said, (...),
greatly and earnestly to desire to eat the Passover with them. The godly then
have a holy coveting, an holy desiring after the things of God, as carnal men
have lusts after their sinful objects, and therefore they ought to nourish and
cherish those affectionate desires; They cannot go beyond their bounds and
limits in this case, the modus is sine m^de.

But then lastly, There are evil covetings and desires, sinful lustings; In
which sense we read often of the (...), The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, 1 John 2. 16. The lust of the world, 1 John 2. 17. And men are said, To
walk after their lusts, to be delivered up to their lusts; There is then a
natural concupiscence, a good concupiscence, and a sinful wicked one; And this
again is two fold, either when we desire such objects as are absolutely and
simply sinful: Or secondly, when the objects are lawful and good, yet we
desire them excessively, and for sinful, unlawful ends.

SECT. VI.
A Threefold Appetite in Man.
THe third particular necessary for the understanding of this Doctrine, viz.
That original sin is lust or concupiscence in a man, is, To take notice of a
three fold appetite, Natural, Animal and Rational: Even inanimate bodies, the
stone and the fire have a kind of an appetite, to descend, the one downward,
the other upward. In a man there is a natural appetite of eating or drinking.

2. There is the animal or sensitive appetite, whereby the sensitive faculties
do desire their suitable objects.

Lastly, There is the Rational Appetite, whereby a man is carried out to desire
those good things that are judged to be so by reason: Now if we take these
appetites substantially, as it were, or physically, so they are good, and the
actions that flow from them are good; but then take them Ethically and Morally
with that Ataxy and Inordinacy that does cleave to them, as they are in man,
and so they do become polluted, and defiled: Insomuch that a man does sin
till regenerated in all these things; his eating and drinking became sin, and
all other his actions, because the principles from which they flow are all
vitiated; So that whatsoever principle we have of any action, it being
destitute of that original rectitude, which adhered to it; therefore it is that
it moves to every object sinfully; So that this consideration may take off
that calumny which the adversaries of original sin would fasten upon the
Orthodox herein, as if we made man to be nothing but opus Diaboli, the work of
the Devil, as if he were not the good creature of God. Vide August. lib. 2do,
de nuptiis and concupiscentia, where the Pelagian says, Qui originale peccatum
defendit perfect Manichaeus est, ne vocentur Haeretici fiunt Manichai, as also
this freeth them from the aspersion of ^^ccianism. though Cortzen the Jesuit
says, The Calvinists by their principles cannot avoid it, Necessario concedere
coguntur substantiam esse peccatum, qui concupiscentiam affirmant, (Com. 5. ad
Rom.) but very absurdly. For we say, take these faculties of the soul, as they
are naturally planted in the soul, so they are good and of God. The
understanding, the will, the affections, these are in themselves good, but man
having sinned away original righteousness, which would have habitually
disposed them to their due objects, in a due manner, for a due end, hereby it
is, that they are only for sin, which were at first only for good.

SECT. VII.
4. When we say, That original sin is habitual lust, we must not take lust
strictly, but most largely, as it comprehends any part of the soul in its
motions to their respective objects. Our English word lust is by custom almost
limited to unclean desires, as if those corporal burnings were only lust: Even
as the Latin word libido, though originally signifying quicquid libet, any
thing that pleased a man is for the most part also restrained to fleshly
lusting, but we told you that the word lust (...), is in the Scripture used
only largely in a good sense, in a bad sense, and a neutral indifferent one.
Therefore in the affections there is this lust, in the will there is this lust,
yea in the understanding and fancy, which are apprehensive faculties only,
there is this lust: For although Aquinas says, That we cannot properly in the
understanding say, there is motus ad objectum, because a passive faculty, yet
in a large sense, all faculties of the soul have their inclination and motion
to their objects, and so this original lust diffuseth it self through them all,
and therefore they also limit this concupiscence too much, which confiae it
only to the sensitive part, the inferior region of the soul; For the more
acute Papists do ingeniously confess, That Heresies, Idolatries are sins of
the mind, and yet flow from this concupiscence, so that this habitual lust is
diffused and extended, as far as the soul has any power or motion: Oh but
how few are there that do regard lust any further than bodily or sensible? The
spiritual, the intellectual lustings of the soul are not apprehended as an
heavy load or burden: So that original sin has its upper-springs, and its
nether-springs, the corporal chanel, and the spiritual, in which its filth
runs down; In the gross profane man, there is original sin acting
carnally and bodily; in the heretic, in the proud Scholar, there is original
sin acting mentally and intellectually: So that as man does consist of two
parts, one visible, and the other invisible, so also does original sin, as it
were, consist of two ingredients, the bodily part, and the soul part, and from
the soul does this poison fall to all the inferior parts; Therefore do not
only complain of sin and lust in thy material and sensitive part, but look
upon the strength and chief power of it, as in thy immaterial and soul part,
for in all these, this original lust, this Law of sin does constantly dwell.
The Schoolmen they call this Fomes peccati, because it does fovere; it is like
the cinders and ashes that keep alive the fire of sin within a man, and the
more dangerous and damnable it is, by how much the more close and latent it is.

SECT. VIII.
A Consideration of this Concupiscence in reference to the fourfold Estate of
man.
5. WE are to consider this concupiscence or concupiscibili'y ( for we speak
of the principle of lusting, not actual lusting) according to several states
that man may be looked upon in: AS

First, There was his Natura instituta, his instituted nature at first, and
that was right and holy; There was concupiscence and desiring of the several
powers of his soul, but in a good and orderly way; It was not then as now, the
Superiora did not turpiter servire inferioribus, or the inferiora contumaciter,
rebel against the superior parts, as is to be showed in the next place; In
Adam there was no concupiscence in this sense; The inferior parts, though they
did desire a sensible object, yet it was wholly in subordination, and under the
command of the superior. It Is true indeed Eve did look upon the forbidden
fruit, and saw it was good and pleasant, whereupon she was tempted to eat of
it, but this did not arise from any original lust in her, but from the
mutability of her will, being not confirmed in what was good: Even as we see
the Angels before their Apostasy, had sinful desires in their will, through
pride and affectation to be higher than they were, yet this did not arise from
original lust in them. Although therefore both Socinians and some Papists, do
acknowledge man made with such a repugnancy of the sensitive appetite to the
rational; yea, the former making it to be in Christ himself, yet this is highly
to dishonor God in the Creation of man: Oh happy and blessed estate, when
there was such an universal harmony and due proportion in all the powers of the
soul, but miserum est illud verbum snisse, may all mankind cry out in this
particular.

Secondly, There is Natura infecta and destituta, infected Nature, stripped and
denuded of all former holiness and excellency, and here concupiscence is not
only in us, but it does reign and predominate over the whole man; The harmony
is totally dissolved, and now the choice and sublime parts of the foul, are
made prostrate to the affectionate part, as loathsome and abominable, as when
the Law forbids to lie with a beast. Now the mind and understanding is
wholly set on work to dispute and argue for the carnal part: Now the motions of
the soul begin in the carnal part, and end in the intellectual, whereas in
the state of integrity, the beginning and rise would first have been in the
intellectual, and so have descended to the sensitive part. The motions thereof
antecede all deliberation in the mind, and a rectified choice in the will; Thus
the feet they guide the head, and in this little world of man, the earth
moves, and the Heavens they stand still, as some fancied in the great world;
now lust is by way of a Law ruling and commanding all things: This is the
unspeakable misery and bondage we are now plunged into.

Thirdly, There is Natura restituta, repaired nature by grace, which the
regenerate attain unto, and these, though they have not obtained concerning
lust, ne sit, yet that ne regnet in them, as Austin expresses it, though they
cannot perfectly fulfill that command ne concupiscas, yet they obey another,
post concupiscentias ne ^as; hence it is because of the actings and workings of
original sin still in the godly, they are in a continual conflict, they
cannot do any thing perfectly, they feel a clogge pressing them down, when they
are elevating themselves, as Paul, Rom 7. does abundantly manifest, The good he
would do he cannot do. Original sin is like that Tree in Daniel, Chap. 4. 23.
Though there was a watcher from Heaven coming down to cut it down, yet the
stumps and root of the Tree were left with a band of iron and brass, to denote
the firm and immovable abiding of it: Thus though the grace of God be still
mortifying and subduing the lusts of the flesh, yet the stumps seem to be bound
with brass and iron to us, we are never able in this life wholly to extinguish
it.

Lastly, If you consider the perfected and glorified estate of the godly in
Heaven, then there will be a full and utter extirpation of this original sin.
The glorified bodies in Heaven, though naked, shall not be subject to shame and
confusion, as Adam and Eve were after their fall; And among other reasons,
therefore does the Lord suffer these relics of corruption to abide in the
most holy, that so we may the more ardently and zealously long after that
kingdom of glory, when we shall be delivered from this sinful soul and mortal
body; Then this command Thou shall not lust, will be perfectly accomplished,
whereas in this life it is a perpetual hand writing against us; The Papists
indeed do confess our lusts to be against this command, but not ut
praecipienti, but ut indicanti, as if God did not so much command us what we
should do, as by Doctrine inform what is good and excellent in it self. Thus
rather than they will be found guilty by this Law, they will make it no Law,
and turn it from a precept into a mere doctrinal information: But seeing one
end of the Law is to convince us, and aggravate our sinfulness, to make us see
our desperate, diseased estate, that thereby we may fly to Christ, as the
malefactor to the City of refuge; let it be far from us to extenuate or to
lessen our sinfulness: The Pharisees of old, and all their successors in
endeavoring to establish a righteousness by the Law, have split themselves on
this rock, as if the Law had not holiness enough to command them, but they were
able to do more than that required: But whence does this Blind presumption
arise? Even from the ignorance of the power of original siane in us.

SECT. IX.
6 FRom these things concluded on, we may see, that the Scripture gives us a
better discovery of our selves, than ever the light of nature, or moral
Philosophy could acquaint us with. Aristotle teaches us out of his School
clean contrary Doctrine to this, That we come into the world without virtue or
vice: Even as Pelagius said of old, and the Schoolmen, though they hold
original sin, yet most of them by cleaving to Aristole's principles, and so
leaving the Scripture have advanced nature, to the dispraise of grace:
Aristotle he makes the reason in a man, always to incline to the best things;
and as for the sensitive appetite, that he divides into concupiscible and
irascible, not acknowledging any corruption in these principles of humane
actions, viz. the mind, the will and sensitive appetite by nature, but by
voluntary actions. We must therefore renounce all Heathen Schools, whether of
Plato or Aristotle, when we come to be auditors of this Doctrine, yet (as in
time may be showed) some of the Heathens had a confused apprehension about such
a natural defilement.

SECT. X.
Why Original Sin is called Concupiscence or Lust.
THese things thus premised, to understand this Truth, viz. That original sin
is habitual lust. Let us in the next place consider, why we call it so. And
First, It may well be called concupiscence or lust, Because the appetitive and
active powers of the soul are chief in a man, and they being corrupted and
polluted, it is no wonder if the whole man be ^urried headlong to hell. The
Schoolmen make it a Question, Why original sin should not be called
ignorantia, as well as concupiscentia? But first, We may call it ignorance
also; It Is ignorance and blindness in the apprehensive powers of the soul, but
lust and concupiscence in the appetitive; especially the will being horribly
corrupted, which is said to be the appetitus universalis, and is to all other
inferior parts of the soul, as the primum mobile, to the other orbs, which
carries all about with its motion; It Is no wonder that it be called lust, as
infecting and perverting the will, which is the whole of a man; for if a man
know evil, yet if he do not will it, it is no sin; God himself knows all
the sin that is committed in the world, and there is difference between
Cogitatio mali, the thought about evil, and cogitatio mala, an evil thought;
but the will cannot be carried out to evil, but presently it is an evil will.
The understanding by knowing evil is not polluted, but the will is by willing
of it, because the understanding receives the object intentionally into it
self, and so is abstracted from its existency; but the will that goes to the
object in it self, and as it does really exist, but this occasionally only.
Original sin may well be called lust, because the acting and working parts of
the soul, whereof the will is the supreme and chief, being polluted by it, the
vigor and efficacy of it is most discovered by them, and this is that which
makes grace so admirable and wonderful, that it can bind the strong ones of
the soul, yea that it can turn sinful lustings into glorious, heavenly and
holy lustings; Thus it is mavelous in the eyes of the godly.

Secondly, Original sin may well be called Lust, Because it is general to
every sin; Every actual sin is a lust in some sense: So that although
Aquinas (upon the Text says,) That original sin is, Commune malum non
communitate generis aut speciei, sed causalitatis, not by a community of genus,
but of cause, yet in some sense we may say, that concupiscence has a generical
community, because as a genus it is included in every sin: So that if we do
take notice of any sin, this is in the general nature of it, that there is a
sinful desire or appetite; What is covetousness but an inordinate desire of
wealth? What is ambition but an inordinate desire of honor, and so of every
sin? But to be sure, it is a common sin by way of causality. The Apostle
James informs us, Chap. 1. 14. That every man, when he sins is tempted
aside by that lust which is in him: So that all the sinful thoughts, words and
actions, which all the men of the world, since Adam's fall till the end of the
world shall commit, and be guilty of, do arise from this fountain, yet how
little do we affect our hearts with the hainousness and dreadfulness of it?

Lastly, It may well be called Lust, Because it is always an acting vigorous
principle within us. Whatsoever we are doing, eating, drinking, working, this
lust is moving in us; yea in sleep, in frantic mad men, in children and
infants in some sense (as is to be showed) This lust is putting forth it self;
we may as well keep the wind within our fists, as make this original lust lie
still; So that by this we may evidently see, the greatest part of our evil
lies Inwardly and secretly in the soul; our actual and outward impieties, they
are but the least part of that sin, which cleaves to us; Pray therefore to
know and understand this mystery more: Look upon thy self in all thy external
righteousness, but as a painted Sepulcher, full of loathsome and noisome
thoughts and lusts: Neither be thou afraid to look into this vile dungeon, do
not turn thy eyes from seeing this monster, for this is the only way to drive
thee to that full and dear esteem of the Lord Christ as a Savior, which is
absolutely necessary.

CHAP. XIX.
The Definition of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
FRom the Commandment in this Text, we have heard forbidden actual lust
consented unto, actual lust, though not yielded unto, and original lust the
mother of all, all which Austin thought was prayed against in three Petitions
in the Lords Prayer, Lust consented unto, when we pray for the forgiveness of
sins committed; Lusts tempting and ensnaring, but not owned by us, when we
pray not to be lead in temptation, and lastly, when we say, But deliver us from
evil, that is aufer concupiscentiam ne sit, take away the very root, and
fountain of all evil in us, ( Ad Marcell^num, lib. 20) Ignosce nobis ea in
quibus sumus abstracti a concupiscentia, adjuvane abstrahamur a concupiscentia
aufer a nobis concupiscentiam.

So that in this command we have seen the positive nature of original sin in
being called concupiscence, we shall therefore from the former Discourse
treating of original sin in the privative nature of it, and this later of the
positive, enquire into the definition of it, what it is, for it is not enough to
know that it is, and that there are such sad and bitter effects of it, but also
to be assured what it is. As it is not enough for a man to be persuaded, that
he is diseased, but he must search into the nature of it, what it is, if so be
he would be cured. Before Austin's time, there was not a public known
definition of it: The Ancients before him thinking it enough to believe there
was such a thing, and that we do daily feel the horrible effects thereof.
Pighius in his Discourse of original sin, says, That even to his time the
Church had not peremptorily defined what it was, and therefore all are left to
their liberty to believe what it is: So that they grant there is such a thing,
but as if Ignoti nulla cupido, so nullum odium, of an unknown thing there is no
love, and also no hatred: So that if we do not know how loathsome and vile this
sin is, we are never able to bewail it, and to humble our selves under it.

There are many Descriptions of it given by several Authors, but that we may in
a large and popular way comprehend all things in one Description, that is
necessary to understand the full nature of it; we may take this delineation of
it.

SECT. II.
ORiginal sin is an horrid depravation and defilement of the whole man,
caused by the Devils temptation, and our first Parents obedience thereunto, and
from them descending by propagation to all his Posterity, being stripped of Gods
glorious Image, whereby they are prone to all evil, and so are under the
bondage of the Devil, and obnoxious to eternal wrath. It is not my purpose in
making this draught of it, to attend unto the exact rules of Logic, but so to
compose it, that every thing considerable to give the true knowledge of it, may
be comprised therein. And

First, We say, It Is a depravation and defilement, which implies the
sinfulness of it, that it is truly and properly a sin; And therefore sin is
truly and univocally divided into original and actual; so that they who make it
only to be guilt without any inward contagion, they do wholly err from the
Scripture, they say not enough. It is true, Adam's sin in the guilt of it is
imputed unto us, which made Ambrose of old say, as Austin alleges him against
the ^elagians, Morinus sum in Adamo, ejectus sum in Paradiso in Adamo etc. I am
dead in Adam, I am cast out of Paradise in Adam: But we are not disputing of
original imputed sin, but original inhering; Therefore original inherent
sin is truly and properly a defilement upon us against the Law of God, and
this sinful estate of all by nature, should be far more terrible unto us,
then our miserable and mortal estate. Again, When we call it a defilement, we
oppose their opinion, who make it only morbus, and not truly a sin; As also
those who say, It is the substance of a man, for if so, then Christ could not
have taken our nature without sin, neither could there be glorified bodies in
Heaven without sin, for all these have the humane nature of a man. Further we
say, It Is an horrid depravation: This Epithete is necessary to be added to
awaken pharisaical and self-righteous persons, it being so dreadful an evil,
that we are never able to go to the depth of it: Never therefore think of speak
of original sin, but let thy heart tremble, and let horror and amazement
take hold of thee, because of it; and this is put in the Description to obviate
those opinions that make it the least of all sins. Some complain, That we are
too severe and tragical in the aggravation of it; but enough has been already
spoken out of Scripture, to show, that neither heart can conceive, or tongue
express the foulness of it. This is the general part of the Description.

Secondly, You have the Subject of it, and because the Subject thereof is
twofold, of Inhesion, and of Predication. In this part, we have the Subject
wherein it is, and that is totus homo, and totum hominis, the whole man, and
the whole of man, there being no part free from this contagion; so that it is
repletively and diffusively in all the parts of soul and body, though eminently
and principally in the mind and will, and the whole heart. It Is true, sin is
not properly seated in the body, the eyes or hand, or in the sensitive part,
yet participatively and subordinately, as they are instruments to the soul in
its actings, so they are said to be sinful: Thus there are lustful eyes,
cursing tongues, unclean bodies; There are sinful imaginations and fancies,
because these are the organs by which the soul puts forth its wickedness: So
that the body is like a broken, spoiled instrument of music, and the soul,
like an unskilful Artificer playing on it, which causes horrid and harsh
sounds for pleasant melody. But as God is every where, yet in Heaven after a
more glorious and signal manifestation of himself: So on the contrary, though
original sin be a Leprosy infecting the whole man, yet it is most principally
in the intellectual and immaterial parts of the soul. It Is horrible darkness
in the mind, averseness in the will to all that is good, and contumacy in the
heart to whatsoever is holy; And this part does directly oppose all those who
grant indeed original sin, but yet grant it wholly in the inferior and
sensitive part, as if our reason and mind were like the Heavens of a
quintessential frame in respect of any unholy contagion, whereas indeed because
these eyes of the soul are dark, therefore is the whole body dark: Because the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, as it were, of this little world of man, are
turned into blood, therefore every part else is also become blood, defiled and
loathsome; and this is the reason, why so few do either believe, or know this
natural corruption, because it benummeth us, yea it takes away all spiritual
life, so that we cannot discern of it. The declaration of the cause of it,
follows in this description, where we have the external efficient cause, and
the internal; The external was the Devil; after his all and apostasy, he
endeavored, being a murderer from the beginning, to destroy man also, and
accordingly he did prevail, and thus by the Devil sin came into the world;
yet he is the external cause only, he could not force or compel our first
parents to sin, he did only persuade and entice them; Therefore the internal
cause was the freedom of their will, God created them in, whereby they might
either embrace good, or choose evil, which mutability was the cause of their
apostasy. It is true, the dispute is very curious, How Adam being created
perfect could yield to sin? Whether did the defect arise in his will or
understanding first? But seeing it is clear by Scripture, that he did sin, and
we feel the woeful effect of it: Let us not busy our heads in metaphysical
curiosities, although I see the soundest Authors make the beginning of his
sin to be in inadvertency, for his soul being finite, while he earnestly
intended to one thing, he did not attend to another, and so sin was
inchoatively first in his understanding, not by error or ignorance, for Adam's
understanding was free from that, but by not attendency to all considerations
and arguments, as he ought to do. Although it must be confessed, that the root
and foundation of his sin, was the vertibility of his will, for as he might not
sin, so also he might sin, he had then a posse peccare in him, and so a
defectibility from the Rule. Thus although efficient causes use not to be put
into exact definitions, neither has sin so properly efficient, as deficient
causes, yet in large descriptions, it is very useful to name them, for hereby
God is wholly cleared, although he created man, and fore-knew he would fall,
yea permitted him to fall, yet he was no cause of his fall; neither did God
make Adam, that he might sin, as some would calumniate the Orthodox Doctrine
with such consequences: Even as Austin's adversaries said, he did Sub nomine
gratiae asserere fatum, because we do not make God an idle Spectator, as it
were, of Adam's fall, or make it wholly uncertain and casual, as it were, to
God, but acknowledge his permission and ordination of Adam's evil to a better
good than his evil, could be evil, therefore it is that some do so
paratragediate. Take we heed then, that in the acknowledging of this Doctrine,
we have no froward or foolish though ^s rising against God; Adam's destruction,
and of all his posterity, was of and through himself.

The next thing considerable in the Description, is the propagating and
communicating of it to all his posterity that naturally descend from our first
Parents. This also is very material to open the nature of this sin, that it is
by propagation Adam's sin was not personal, as ours are, but common to the
whole nature; Therefore the Apostle Romans 5. puts it upon one sin, or
offense, and that by one man. The Pelagians were vehement opposers of this, and
therefore called the Orthodox Traduciani, because they hold the traduction of
this original sin, Adam being a common person, and he as our Head being in
Covenant with God, when he became a Covenant-breaker, then we all forfeited all
in and by him; So that it is the Covenant of God that is the foundation of
communicating original sin, as far as sin can be communicated to all
mankind, yet natural generation is the medium, or way of conveying it; But of
this more in it is time.

It follows in the Description, That this original sin, as it is by
propagation, so to all and every one of mankind, who were in his loins, for
Christ was not properly in Adam 's loins, and so his sin could not be imputed
to Christ because Adam was not in Covenant for him, otherwise not the Virgin
Mary or any other is exempted from this universal pollution. So that here we
have the Subjectum praedicationis, as formerly inhaesonis, that subject of whom
this sin may be predicated, and that is every Infant new born, as soon as he
has a being, so soon does he become thus all over stained and abominable; and
this should make Parents have sad and serious thoughts about their children,
there is that corruption planted in their souls, which no instruction, no
discipline can eradicate, nay the grace of God sanctifying does not wholly
expel in this life; Although the grace of God in some Obed-Edoms and Timothies
appear in them from the youth, yet these were by nature dead in sin, and
children of wrath, only Gods grace was very wonderfully conveyed unto them in
their youth or infancy. Do not therefore think, that because thou have a more
ingenuous, civil and moral nature, that therefore original sin is not in
thee, yea many times the actings, and workings of it are more mortiferous and
pestilential than in gross sinners. But let us proceed to the parts, as it
were essential and intrinsecally constituent of this depravation, and that is
said to be the loss of Gods glorious Image, and thereby a proneness to all
evil; we need not say more to explicate these particulars: As in hell there is
a privative part, the loss of the enjoying of God, and then a positive
punishment through the torments of hell fire. Thus in original sin we are
without the Image of God. There is not that light or holiness he created us in,
and withal an impetuous inclination to whatsoever is evil; So that now all the
powers of the soul they move inordinately, and with great precipitancy, as
Seneca says of old men, because of their feebleness, Dum ambulare volunt,
currunt, they do not walk but run; Thus our affections, our will, they do not
so much go, as tumble headlong to their objects. Hence Tanrellus (Tryumphus
Philos. page 18.) makes original sin to be nothing but impotentia naturam
cohibendi, that we cannot stop nature in the impetuous motions thereof to
sin, no more than we can the violent torrents and streams of water in
excessive floods. In these two things then lies the whole venom and poison of
this natural filthiness, we are without all good, and under the dominion of all
evil, and this is to speak all the misery that possibly a man can be capable of.

In the last part we add in the description a twofold effect of this natural
defilement, which although they are to be treated of in a more large manner,
with all the particular effects of this sin, or some of them at least, yet in
the general something is to be said, that we may affect our souls with them. And

First, Hereby we are made obnoxious to the curse and wrath of God: Even before
any actual sin is ever committed, for this Infants dying immediately upon their
birth, may justly be damned to all eternity; This is that which carnal reason
strometh at; This is that which the nature of man will hardly yield to;
Therefore the position of many have been, That there is nothing damnable in
Infants; And although some would not admit them into the Kingdom of Heaven, yet
freed them from the place of the damned, but we must submit our humane reason,
and our humane affections to the Scripture, if so be that Gods word says, We
are by nature children of wrath; If Jesus Christ be a Savior to Infants as
well as to men; if he came to redeem them as well as actual sinners, then of
themselves their condition was damnable, for Christ came to seek that which was
lost, and the whole need not the Physician, but the sick: Oh then let us all
humble our selves under this sentence of condemnation passed upon us. God might
say of every Infant, In the day thou art born, thou shall be damned, and it is
the mere gracious favor of God, that deferreth the execution of this sentence,
for till a man be in Christ, he is not freed from this curse, only God in much
patience does put off the execution.

The second effect is, To be under the power and dominion of the Devil, Ephesians. 2.
The Devil is said to rule in the hearts of men, and is therefore called, The
Prince of this world regeneration is not only subduing of corruption in us, not
only repairing the glorious Image of God which we have lost, but also a
dispossessing of the devil, who had a throne in every man's soul. By nature
therefore because thus polluted, we are vassals and bondslaves to Satan, we are
of him, we do his works; The bodily possessed by Satan were not more miserably
agitated by him, then our souls are spiritually by him; what he tempts us to,
we obey; what he suggests to us, we entertain: Insomuch that every man by
nature may say, he no longer lives, but sin in him, and the Devil in him;
Hereby thy heart may be called hell, yea and Legion, because many Devils do
rule in thee: Oh that God would make this Truth like a two-edged sword in our
hearts, that we may not rest day or night, till God has delivered us from this
wretched estate! Pray for it, groan for it, all the day long.

CHAP. XX.
A clear and full Knowledge of Original Sin can be obtained only by Scripture
Light.
SECT. I.
A Full and large information concerning the whole Nature of original sin,
both in the Privative and Positive part thereof, has been delivered, to which
this Text has been very useful. There remains one thing more in it, which
is very considerable, and that is the way or means, how Paul comes to be thus
convinced of that sinfulness, which he did not acknowledge before, and that is
said to be by the Law. In what sense Paul said, He knew not lust to be sin,
has already been declared.

There remains therefore this Doctrine to be observed, viz. That original
sin in the immediate effect thereof, is truly and fully known only by the
light of Gods word. None are ever clearly, and thoroughly persuaded of such an
universal horrid defilement, but those who look into the pure glass of Gods
word. This Paul acknowledges in himself, and yet no Heathen, he lived under
the light of the Word, but following traditional expositions from his fathers,
and wanting the Spirit of God to enlighten him, therefore he was wholly stupid
and senseless in this matter, as therefore the Doctrine of Christ, and
Evangelical grace is a mystery, so is also this Doctrine about original sin.

SECT. II.
Whether the wisest Heathens had any Knowledge of this Pollution.
BUt because this matter is under Debate and Question, let us further enquire
into it, examining, Whether the wisest Heathens had any knowledge of this
natural pollution the Word does so fully inform us in? And

First, As for that original sin called originans, viz. Adam's actual
transgression made ours by Gods will and appointment, through imputation, that
is, wholly known by revelation, so that no Heathens by the highest improvement
and cultivage of nature could ever discern such things. That God made Adam
righteous, giving him a command of trial in obedience, or disobedience, whereof
all his posterity should be involved, this they had not the least him of, and
the reason is, Because the truth of such things lies not in nature, neither
have second causes the least demonstration of this, but it is wholly discovered
as a matter of fact by the Scripture; So that we Christians ought the more to
bless God for the sight of his Word, seeing thereby a very Idiot amongst us may
know more, then the wisest Aristotle or Plato amongst the Heathens.

Secondly, As for original inherent sin, it must necessarily be granted, That
even the Heathens had some general confused knowledge about a man's natural
defilement: Hence was their custom of a solemn washing, and lustration of their
Infants in a religious way, implying hereby, that they came into the world
polluted, and needed the propitious savor of their gods. This solemn religious
custom of theirs, was some general confession of original sin; but as for the
Philosophers, who were the wisest and most learned of them, some do speak more
congruously to this point than others. That noble and learned Pless^us in his
Book of the Truth of the Christian Religion, Page 377. which he endeavors to
prove even from Heathinish Authors, especially the Platonists, does allege
some things pertinently to our subject; For Plato holding, That the soul was
put into the body, as into a prison and a dungeon, for former sins committed,
through he grossly erred in the foundation, thinking souls pre-existent before
the body, and for faults committed then adjudged to the body as a place of
prison, which was an absurd error, yet there was some truth he did take notice
of, for observing that the soul which should rule and command the body, was yet
mancipated, and enslaved to it, he concluded there was some foregoing crime
deserving this, though he was wholly ignorant of Adam's fall: Hence he says,
That the soul has lost and broken her wings, which she had at first, and
thereby does only creep and crawl upon the ground. The^phrastus also
Aristotle's Scholar, was wont to say, That the soul pays a very dear rent for
the house of her body, the body is such a clog and impediment to it. The
Platonists do seem to acknowledge more truth herein, then Aristotls, for
Aristotle does expressly deny, That either virtue or vice is in us by nature,
the very same thing which Pelagin afterward did use to say: Therefore the
Schoolmen, though enslaved to Aristotle, yet when urging this Argument, That
there cannot be a sin by birth in a man, because no man is to be reproved or
beaten, for that which he has by nature, but rather to be pitied, it is not
his sin but misery; Which speech (if true) does utterly contradict that of
the Apostle, We are by nature the children of wrath. The Schoolmen (I say)
though (...) vasalized to Aristotle, and alleging him oftener than Paul, do
answer that Argument thus, It is no matter what Aristotle says in this case,
because he knew nothing of original sin. Thus you see they are forced to
leave him in this point, and therefore Aristotle is more to be renounced in
this point, then any other Philosopher. Grotius also ( Comment. in 2d. Luc. v.
21. alleges several Hethenish Authors, who lay down this for a Position, that
(...), it is implanted and ingraffed into man to sin. Tully (lib. 3. Tusc.)
does speak so fully to this purpose, as if he had read what Moses speaks of
man by nature, Simul ac editi sumus in lucem and suscepti in omni continue
pravitate versamur, etc. as soon as ever we are born, we are presently
exercised in all manner of evil, Vt poene in lacte nutricis errorem suxisse
videamur, as if we sucked down error with the nurses milk; Here you see he
speaks something like to Moses, when he says, Genesis 6. That the imagination
of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil and that continually; Although at
the same time he seems to attribute this propensity to evil to wicked manner,
and depraved opinions, for there he says, Nature has given us of honesty
parvulos igniculos, and that there are ingeniis nostris semina innata virtutum.
But although some of their wisest men have confessed such a misery and
infirmity upon us, yet it may be doubted, Whether they looked upon this, as
truly and properly sin, deserving punishment either from God or man; They
rather thought all sin must be voluntary: Hence Seneca, Erras si existimas
nobiscum nasci vitia supervenerunt ingesta sunt. Indeed in their sad complaints
concerning man's birth, and all misery accompanying him, as Austin said, they
did rem scire, but causam nescire, they evidently saw we were miserable, but
they knew not the cause of it, whereas original sin, according to Scripture
light, though not personally voluntary, yet is truly a sin, and makes a man
in a damnable estate; Therefore the word original, when we divide sin into
original and actual, is not terminus restrictivus, or diminuens, as when we did
divide ens into ens reale, and rationis, but terminus specificans, as when
animal is divided into rationale and irrationale, both properly partaking of
the general nature of sin; So that whatsoever apprehensions they had, and
complaints they made about man, yet they did not believe he was born in sin,
though experience told them, he was in misery. The Persians (as Plesseus in the
abovementioned place says) had every year a solemn Feast, wherein they did
kill all the Serpents and wild beasts they could get, and this Feast they
called vi^iorum interitum, the slaying of their vices. By which it does appear,
that they had a guiltiness about their sinful ways, and that none were
exempted from being sinful. Yea Casaub. (Ex^rcit. 16. ad Annal. Bar. page
391.) speaking of the sacred mysteries among the Grecians, the discharging
whereof was called (...), affirms, That therefore they called the scope of
those holy actions (...), because it was (as they thought) a perduction of the
soul to that state in which it was, before it descended into the body, which he
interprets of the state of perfection from which we fell in the old Adam, so
that even in this error there was some truth, which made Tertullian say, Omnia
adversus veritatem de ipsa veritate constructa esse operantibus aemulationem
istam spiritibus erroris. Thus you see how the wisest of the Heathens have been
divided in this point, Some making the soul of a man to come without vice or
virtue, as a blank fit to receive either. Others acknowledging a disease, and
an infirmity upon the soul, yet ignorant of the cause of it, neither
acknowledging it to be a sin, and so deserving punishment.

In the second place, Although the Heathens did not see this sin, nor could
truly bewail it, yet so far many of them were convinced, that if they had any
sinful desires or lusting in the soul, or any wicked thoughts in their hearts
to which they gave consent, that these were sins, and wholly to be abstained
from, though they did not break forth into act. Grotius in his Comment upon the
10th Commandment, shows out of several Heathenish Writers, That all secret
lustings of the soul with consent thereunto were were wholly unlawful; Yea, as
one of them is there said to express it, they are not so much as to covet a
needle, the least thing. And as for Seneca, he has high assertions about the
governing of our thoughts, and ordering the inward affections of our souls so,
as that the gods, as well as men may approve us. Tully says, That an honest
man would do no evil, or unjust thing, though he could have Gyges his ring,
which they feigned made a man invisible; And this is the rather to be observed,
because herein they surpassed the Pharisees, who though brought up under the
Law, and had constantly the word of God to guide them, yet they did not think
any covetings or lustings in the heart to be a transgression of the Law, as
appears by our Saviors information, and exposition he gave them, Matthew. 5.
And Josephus is said to deride Polybius the great Historian for making the gods
to punish a King, merely because he had a purpose and an intent to commit some
enormious iniquity: Yea, This principle of the Heathens may make many
Christians ashamed, and be greatly confounded, who live, as if their thoughts
were free, and their hearts were their own, so that they might suffer any
poisonous evil, and malicious actings of soul to be within them, and to put to
check or control upon them: As they matter not original sin, so neither the
immediate effects and working thereof. Though their hearts be a den of theevish
lusts, and their souls like Peter's sheet, wherein were a company of
innumerable unclean creeping lusts, yet so as their lives are unblameable, they
wholly justify themselves; but you are to know, that the strength of sin
lies in your hearts. The least part of your evil is that which is visible in
your lives.

SECT. III.
THirdly, We see that original sin is so hardly discernable, that though men
do enjoy the light of Gods Word, yea and read it over and over again, yet for
all that they are not convinced of this native pollution. We see in all the
Heretics that have been in all ages, who have denied this original sin,
they were summoned to answer the Word of God, Scripture upon Scripture was
brought to convince them, but a veil was upon their eyes, they would wrest and
pervert the meaning of it, rather than retract their error, so that
Scripture Light objectively shining therein, is not enough Paul is a clear
instance in this, he was most exact and strict about the Law, yet wholly
ignorant of this fundamental truth before he was converted, he knew the
Commandment, Thou shall not covet, yet he did not fully and thoroughly attend
thereunto Hence

In the fourth place, To have a full and clear understanding of this native
defilement, we are to implore the light of Gods Spirit. The light of the Word
is not enough, unless the Spirit of God be efficacious to remove all error,
and impediments, as also to prepare and fit the soul to receive it; Hence it is
made the work of Gods Spirit to lead into all truth, if into all, then into
this, while the eyes remain blind, the Sun with all its luster can do no
good. It is true, Gods Word is compared to a light, and to a lamp, but that is
only objective without us, there must be something subjectively within us, that
shall make a sutableness between the object and the faculty. To be made then
Orthodox, and to have a sound judgment herein, it must be wholly from the
Spirit of God; For why is it that when one hears and reads those Texts, We
are by nature the children of wrath; Who can bring a clean thing out of
unclean? He adoreth the fullness of these Texts, he is convinced of such
heart-pollution, and blesses God for the knowledge of this truth: But another
he cavilleth at the Texts, he derideth and scorneth at such a truth, Is not
this because the Spirit of God leads one into the truth, and leaves the
other to his pride and blindness of mind.

SECT. IV.
FOurthly, It is not enough to know this sin in an orthodox speculative
manner, to acknowledge it so, But we are also in a practical, experimental
manner to feel and bewail the power and burden of it. And happily this may be
part of Paul's meaning, when he says, He did not know lust to be sin, that
is, not so clearly, so fully, so experimentally, as now he did since the grace
of God had both enlightened and sanctified him; How many have with great
orthodoxy maintained this Truth against Pelagians, and all the enemies of Gods
grace shrouding themselves under the praise of nature, but it is rare to see
those that do not only theoretically believe it, but practically walk with
broken and contrite hearts under it. Examine then thy self, Do thou believe
this is Gods Truth, that thou came into the world all over polluted? Do
thou think that thou as well as any other, though never so civil and
unblameable in respect of actual sins, art by nature a child of the Devil,
prepared fuel for the eternal flames of Hell? And do thou not only believe
this to be thy particular case, but withal thou art so affected with an holy
fear and trembling, thou have no quietness or rest in thy soul, because of it,
then thou art come to a true and right knowledge of it? For the end of our
preaching on this Subject, is not only to establish your minds in this Truth
against all errors therein, but also to mollify and soften your hearts, that
you may all your life time loath your self, and advance the fullness of Christ:
And seeing that natural light is dim and confused in this matter, keep close
to the Word, and not only so, but implore the Spirit of God, that in and
through the Word, this Truth may enter like a two-edged sword into thy bowels,
knowing that without this foundation laid, there cannot be any esteem of Christ.

CHAP. XXI.
That Reason when once enlightened by the Scripture, may be very powerful to
convince us of this Natural Pollution.
SECT. I.
A Clear and full knowledge of original sin can be obtained only by
Scripture light; Although (as you heard) some Heathens have had a confused
apprehension about it. My work at this time shall be, to show, That even
Reason, where once enlightened by the Scripture, may be very powerful to
convince us of this natural pollution. So that when Scripture, Reason and
Experience shall come in to confirm this Truth, we may then say, there needs
no further disquisition in this point. And

First, This may abundantly convince us, That the hearts of men are naturally
evil, Because of the overflowing of all wickedness in all ages over the whole
world; How could such weeds, such briars and thorns grow up every where, were
not the soil bad? It Is true, in some ages some kind of sins have abounded
more than others, and so in some places. But there was never any generation,
wherein impiety did not cover the earth, as the waters do the Sea: Insomuch
that if we should with zeal undertake to reprove them according to their
desert, Non tam irascendum quam insaniendum est, as Seneca of the vices of his
time. Erasmus in his Epistle to Othusius complains, That since Christ's time,
there was not a more wicked age then that he lived in; Christ (says he)
cries, I have overcome the world, but the world seems, as if it would say
shortly: I have overcome Christ, because of the wickedness abounding, and that
among those who profess themselves the salt and light of the world. Now how
were it possible, that the whole world should thus lie in wickedness, 1 John 5.
19 as the Apostle affirms, but that all mankind by nature is like so many
Serpents and Toads, of which there is none without poison? If this wickedness
did abound only in some places, we might blame the Clymate, the Country, or
their Education, but it is in all places under the Equator, as well as the
Tropic; in all ages, former times as well as later have been all groaning
under ungodliness, and whereas you might say, The world is in its old age now,
and the continual habituated customary ways of wickedness have made us drink
the dregs of impiety, yet the Scripture tells us, That not long after the
Creation of the world, when we might judge greater innocence and freedom from
sin to have been every where, yet then all flesh had corrupted their ways,
Genesis 6. 12. which provoked God to bring that wonderful and extraordinary
judgment of drowning it with water, as if it were become like a noisome
dunghill that was to be cleansed. And lest you should think this was only
because of their actual impieties, we see God himself, charging it upon this,
because the imaginations of a man's heart were only evil, and that from his
youth up: So that there is no man who considers the ways and manners of all
the inhabitants of the world, but must conclude, had there not been poisonous
fountains within, there had never been such poisoned streams. The wars, the
rapines, the uncleanness, and all the horrid transgressions that have filled
the earth, as the vermin did Egypt, do plainly declare, That all men have
hearts full of evil; And lest you might think this deluge of impiety is only in
the Heathenish, Paganish and brutish part of the world. The Psalmist
complains of that people, who were the Church of God, and enjoyed the light
of the Word, That there was none righteous, that there was none that did good,
no not one, Psalm. 14. 3. So that as graves and dead men's bones, the Sepulchers
and monuments every where do fully manifest men are mortal, no less do the
actual impieries that fill all Cities, Towns and Villages discover, that all
are by nature prone to that which is sinful.

SECT. II.
SEcondly, This original sin may be proved by reason, yea and experience
thus, If you consider all the miseries, troubles and vexations man is subject
unto, and at last death it self; and that not only men grown up, who have
actual sins, but even new born Infants, will not this plainly inform us, That
all mankind has sinned, and is cast out of the favor of God: How can it enter
into any man's heart to think, that God the wise Creator, so full of goodness to
man, that he made him little lower than Angels, should yet make him more
miserable than all creatures? It was Theophrastus his complaint, when he lay a
dying, That man had such a short time of life prefixed him, who yet could have
been serviceable, and by long age and experience found out many observable
useful things, when Crows and Hearts, and other creatures of no consideration
have a long life vouchsafed to them: Yea, all the Heathens, even the most
learned of them, complained much concerning this Theme of man's misery, being
never able to satisfy themselves in the cause of it; But now by the Scripture
we see it is no wonder, the race of mankind is thus adjudged to all misery,
seeing it is all guilty of sin before God; so that if there had been no actual
sins committed by the sons of men, yet the ground would have been cursed to
bring forth briars and thorns, man would have been miserable and mortal: So
that this does not only teach us, there is such a sin, but that it was so
heinous and abominable in the eyes of God, that no sin has ever been punished
like this.

SECT. III.
THirdly, Those relics of the Image of God, and some implanted dictates and
notions, with a natural conscience accusing and excusing; These do demonstrate,
that there was a glorious Image of God in us, but we have lost it. There is
something in all men by nature, whereby they are convinced of a God, have
remorse upon sin, and tremble much when they are dying; Now what are all
these but the rubbidge and obscure remnants of that holy estate we were created
in; So that as when any famous building, or great City are brought to ruin,
yet commonly there remain some fragments or others, that witness there was such
a famous place once: Thus those implanted Dictates of conscience, those natural
apprehensions about a God, though they are very confused, and cannot be a star
to guide us to Christ, yet they remain as monuments of that spiritual excellent
building. It is true, Illyricus out of his vehement desire to aggravate
original sin in us, denies that those common notions about God, or good and
evil, are naturally in us, but that they are de novo infused into us by God,
and manifested, wherein also he has some followers, but if such natural
dictates remain in the Devils, which is plain, because otherwise they could not
be so tormented for their wickedness as they are, why should it be denied to
man? The Socinian also denies any implanted notion about a God, and that the
knowledge of him comes by observation of the creatures, and also by education
and tradition, but experience as well as Scripture confuteth this, in which
respect Tertullian said, O animan naturaliter Christianum! It Is true, some more
orthodox dispute, Whether the faculty of the understanding in its operations
only continues, or that there are habitual principles inhering in it? It is
enough that there remains a conscience in man, which like Job's messenger can
inform us, though very obscurely of that sad loss which has befallen us.

SECT. IV.
FOurthly, This may evidently convince us of our original pollution, That it is
far worse with man, now in respect of the end, he was created unto, and the
nature he was constituted in, then with any other creatures. This plainly
argues man's apostasy from God, for all creatures in their kind live
proportionably, and obtain their end, which is usefulness and serviceableness
to man, only man neither lives according to his nature rightly considered, and
withal does miserably fall short of that glorious end for which God made him.
If you consider man in his nature, he is a reasonable creature, and so ought to
walk according to the principles of reason, to do nothing against the rules
thereof; now all men are by original corruption, become like bruit beasts that
have no understanding; Hence the Scripture does so often compare them to
beasts, yea prefer beasts before them; The sluggard is commanded to go to the
Ant, Israel is said to be worse than the Stork that knows her season, and the
Ox or Ass that know their masters crib: Why does the Scripture speak thus, but
to show that beasts do in their kind surpass man in his kind? Every wicked man
is called a fool, and a simple one, because when he sins, he goes against
the dictates of true reason, and this is the condition of all men till
regenerated by grace, they do not consider what God made them for, or why they
have immortal and rational souls. Take the Drunkard, is not he worse then a
beast? does the beast drink any more then will suffice nature? insomuch that we
may truly say all by nature are become spiritual monsters, for as a monster in
nature is, when nature is deficient or redundant in her operations, and so
works not regularly: Thus also when a man does not keep the rules of reason,
and live as one who has a rational soul, he becomes like a monster, and so
ought to abhor himself: Oh then loath thy self and say, every creature lives
like its kind! The horse does as an horse should do, the ox as the ox should
do, but I miserable and wretched sinner do nothing that a man should do! Again,
The beasts, and so all creatures, although they are subject to vanity, and
groan under a curse, because of man's sin, yet they do not fall short of the
end, they were intended for. God he made man to serve him, and all the creaturs
to serve man, and thus they do still, though a great part of this dominion man
bath by his sin justly deprived himself of, yet the Sun gives light to him;
The earth brings forth her fruit for him, some living creatures are daily slain
for his food and clothing; what shoals of fish, and flocks of birds do at some
seasons of the year present themselves, as if they should say, here we appear
to serve you; and this is the utmost perfection they were made for. But come to
man, he was made to serve the Lord, therefore did God furnish him with all
these mercies, that he might the more willingly and diligently obey him, but
instead of God, he serves Gods enemies, he serves sin in the Insts thereof, he
serves the devil in his desires: Thus of all the creatures God made next to
the devils, man is in the most bitter and undone estate: So that this must
needs stop thy mouth against all cavils, if there be no original sin, Why is
man worst in his kind than any other creature in their kind? Yea, see the most
savage beasts agree well enough with one another, one Wolf with another, one
Tiger with another, yet one man is a Wolf and a Devil to another; When did you
ever hear of a company of Bears going out to fight with another company of
Bears? Yet what is more ordinary than to hear of one army of men, going out to
kill and slaughter another? Can we say, God made man thus vile and sinful?
What intolerable blasphemy would it be? Oh then let us roll our selves in the
dust! Let us say, we are not worthy the name of men, we are become beasts, yea,
worse than beasts: Say not, This is to vilify and to debase man too much; No,
this is the only way to perform that duty, which not only Scripture, but even
Heathens have admired, as revealed from Heaven, Nosc^ teipsum, Know thy self;
Does not that expression in Job abundantly confirm this, Chap. 11. 12. Vain man
would be wise, though man be born like a wild asses colt? A colt, the
asses-colt, and a wild asses-colt, such a stupid senssess thing is man, though
he would be wise.

SECT. V.
5. MAn is originally defiled, Because that which is the most noble and
excellent part in him, is captivated and inslaved to what is inferior unto it.
This was so greatly considered of by the Platonists, as you heard, that
therefore they thought the souls of men had committed some crimes, for which
they were adjudged to bodies as unto prisons and dungeons; How comes it about,
that the rational part of a man, which was made to be the guide, and called by
Philosophers the (...), that it should follow after the inferior lusts of the
soul, That this candle should be put not under a bushel, but a dunghill; That
the elder should serve the younger; That the tail should lead the head; we are
not carried out to what reason by the word of God commands, but by what every
sinful affection does suggest. Those that say, this rebellion between the mind
and affections, was from the Creation, that God made man with this contrariety
in himself, must needs make God the author of sin, but God saw every thing that
he had made, and it was exceeding good; If then thou doubtest, whether this
universal pollution be upon thee, look into thy self, observe the rebellion,
the repugnancy there, unto all light, whether natural or supernatural, and this
will make thee readily confess it.

SECT. VI.
6. THe incurvation of the soul unto all earthly and worldly objects, this also
makes it plain, we came with original sin into the world. The very making of
the body different from other creatures who look downwards, does denote that
therefore God created us, that both soul and body should look upwards. But is
not every man's soul till rectified by grace bowed down to these earthly
vanities, no more able to soar up to Heaven, than the worm can fly. Now this
is a plain sign of thy sinful apostate condition. It is one of Hippocrates his
rules, That when a sick man catches inordinatly at the feathers of his pillow,
or at straws, and any such light matter, it is a sign of death; and truly to
see men by nature so immoderatly snatching and catching at these worldly
things, argue, thou art a dying, a perishing man, unless Gods grace does
interpose: As the Sun, though with its beams it shine upon the earth, yet it is
not thereby defiled; So man ought, though he meddle in all outward affairs,
though he marry, though he buy and sell, and use this world, yet he ought not
in the least manner to soil and pollute his soul thereby. But as the body
deprived of the soul falls prostrate on the ground, thus does man deprived of
Gods Image, so that he is never able to get above the creatures, but is
vassaliz'd to them.

SECT. VII.
THe work remaining is, to give further reasons (the Scripture being first laid
as a foundation) to demonstrate this truth, That we are by nature originally
defiled; For though man be unwilling to be found thus a sinner, and the
entertaining of this truth seems to strike down all the hopes and comforts
that a natural man has. Believe this, and all men, (as in respect of defect)
are so many damned men, so that flesh and blood must needs deny, cavil,
distinguish, and turn it self into a thousand shapes ere it will acknowledge
it, yet look we into our selves diligently, and compare our selves with the
glass of Gods Word, we cannot but say, That all we have heard by the Ministers,
all that Sermons and Books tell us, come not up to what we feel in our selves;
So that as the Apostle, when he said, This corruption shall put on
incorruption, he did cutem tangere, did lay his hand upon his body, as
Tertullian thought, so do thou strike upon thy thigh, and smite upon thy
breast, and say, within this body, lies a soul covered all over with sin,
and damnable guilt. To assure us more herein, these further discoveries may be
added.

First, That spiritual death in sin, which we are all plunged into, whereby
we do become altogether senseless and stupid, as to any spiritual
concernement. The death threatened upon Adam's trangression was spiritual, as
well as corporal, and therefore Ephesians. 2. We are said to be dead in sins
till Christ quicken us by his power; Now this is a full discovery that we have
lost Gods Image, and all spiritual life, otherwise why should not spiritual
life be as quick, active, and moving toward spiritual objects, as our
natural and corporal life is to corporal things, Why is it, that when any do
threaten corporal death and outward misery we are afraid, and will give all we
have for this corporal life? But when the Devil tempts, and the world tempts,
so that we are in danger of loosing eternal life, we have no trembling or
horror taking hold upon us. Nebuchadnezzar made a law, that whosoever would not
worship his Image, should be cast into a fiery furnace, and unless the three
Worthies, none refused; so great a matter is the fear of a natural death. But
has not God threatened hell which is ten thousand times more dreadful then
that fiery furnace, to every one that goes on wickedly? yet none trembles
because of this; Is not this plain then, that thou art a dead man in sin?
Further, concerning our corporal life, how sollicitous are we about the
preserving of it? what carking and caring for meat and raiment? what labor for
the back and the belly? Is not the greatest employment in the world for these
two things, and all this is that our frail perishing life may yet be continued?
But do men naturally manifest any such thoughts and diligence about the means
of a spiritual life? The preaching of the Word, the Ordinances, these God has
appointed to be spiritual food, by these our heavenly life is maintained;
these are the oil, to keep that lamp burning: But do not all men by nature
loath these? are they not a burden to them? do they ever pant and thirst or
hunger after these things, as men do for meat or drink? now, why is all this,
but because we have no spiritual life in us? So that if you do consider the
insensibleness and stupidity of every natural man, as to things of an heavenly
aspect, you need no more to persuade you, that Gods Image is lost, and we are
dead in sin. When the body needs food needs raiment, all is supplied, but
so thy soul needs Christ, needs grace, and there is not the least thought
to have a supply: yea we are not only dead in sin, but have been a long while
thus dead, and if she said of Lazarus, Joh. 11. 39. Lord by this time he
stinketh, for he has been dead four days. How much more may we say this in a
spiritual sense of thee, who (it may be) have been dead forty or fifty years.

Secondly, This may be further enlarged by a consectary from the former; will
not this abundantly declare we are all over sinful, Because heavenly things
are not such objects of delight and pleasure to us, as carnal and worldly
things are. This is a palpable demonstration of our wretched pollution, That we
cannot feel any sweetness, any pleasure, or joy in those things which
immediately concern God: Adam in his state of integrity, was like Jacob's
ladder, the foot whereof was on the earth, but the top reached to heaven: Thus
though Adam's inferior part the body, was exercised in these earthly things,
yet his soul the more sublime part, that was fixed in heaven; But now all our
su^eableness and communion with heavenly objects is wholly perished; we have
hearts enlarged with joy, we are ravished with delights about wordly things,
and when brought to any thing that is heavenly, there we are weary, and neither
flesh or spirit is willing to such things; yet nature might reach us, that man
of all creatures only has hands, and those not to embrace the earth, but he
has feet to walk and trample upon it. We read of Paul and David, with other
godly ones, when recovered in part from the power of this original corruption,
what longings and breakings of soul they had after God, and his Ordinances.
These things were accounted for sweetness above the honey; and for presciousness
above gold; now why should not every man be able to say so as well as they? but
because our tastes are wholly distempered, and we are carnal not spiritual.
Certainly spiritual objects have in themselves infinite more matter of joy and
delight, then any earthly thing can have; who can think there is more sweetness
in a drop, then in the ocean? more light in the star, then in the sun? The
creature is less then these in comparison of God: May not than even blind men
see, that we are all over-plunged into sin? else, why should not God and
heavenly objects, which do so far surpass in matter of true delight be more
sweet and welcome to us, then all the creatures of the world though put
together? Psalm. 4* 6. Many say, who will show us any good? The natural man
finds no delight but in these earthly things oppositely to God. There is a
She^ll in his soul, that is always craving and asking, never satisfied; now,
why can they not with David as well put forth the following petition, Lord,
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us? But because the carnal man finds
no more pleasure in spiritual things, then the swine does in pearls or
pleasant flowers: A man that is spiritual having drunk of this water, desires
no other; As the Philosophers say, The matter of the heavens is so fully
actuated by the heavenly forms, that it desires no other, whereas the matter
of these sub^unary things is never satisfied but though under one form, yet it
still desires another. Thus the soul possessed of God and Christ, has so much
delight and pleasure that it has enough, it desires no change, but the
natural man is carried out from one thing to another, from one object to
another, first delighting in this, and then in that, it being impossible that
Zacheus his shoe should sit Goliah's foot: Thus you see that though a man be
restless in his delights, yet he can take pleasure in earthly things, whereas
he finds no sweetness, no delight in heavenly things, that are infinitely more
precious; So this may demonstrate the loss of Gods Image, and our service to
original sin in the lusts thereof.

Thirdly, That we are thus originally corrupted, appears, in that utter
impotency and inability to do any spiritual good: we are not able so much as
to think a thought, or send forth an hearty groan, as to our eternal welfare;
whereas at first God made Adam right, and thereby endowed him with power to do
any thing that was holy, called therefore the Image of God; so happy and
blessed was his condition, that he could with delight and joy fulfill the Law
of God, feeling no difficulty, nor impediment, but now being dead in sin, we
are no more able then dead men to move, or walk in holy things. The Scripture
is wonderfully clear in this, though Papists, Arminians and others have
endeavored to raise a mist, and obscure the sun beams, Joh. 15. Without me ye
can do nothing. Romans 8. The flesh is eumity against God, 1 Cor. 2. The natural
man perceives not the things of God, neither can he, where both the act of
doing good, and the power also is denied to every man by nature: If therefore
every man by nature be dead in sin like a stone, as in respect of any holy
impression from God, if he have blind eyes, deaf ears, a foolish heart, as to
any heavenly thing, does not this plainly tell us, that we are all over
polluted? It Is good for our humiliation to consider how the Scripture
describes a natural man, as wanting all his senses, he has no eyes to see,
no ears to hear, no heart to understand, but is wholly dead, and all this is
to show what a wonderful impotency is in man to help himself spiritually; Now
this declares the necessity of preserving this doctrine of original
corruption clean and sound; for if we be orthodox here, then also we shall hold
the truth of God against foe will and the power of nature in divine things; for
these two particulars are like Castor and (...), they always appear together;
and what is the design or Secinians, Papists, and Arminians, either in whole or
in part, to deny or extenuate original sin? but thereby to make a way to
advance their magnificent Diana. their free will to holy things, for they
evidently see, if original sin be such an universal, deep and inward
pollution of the whole soul, even the will as well as other parts, then their
doctrine of the power of nature is pulled up by the very root; Therefore the
more fully assure your souls of this truth, by how much the whole body of
Divinity depends upon this foundation. Indeed the Scripture is so clear in
debasing man as to supernaturalls, and giving all to the grace of God, that we
may wonder how this pride should settle it self in man's heart, and that he does
not tremble to speak or write any thing, whereby the grace of God may be
diminished, and man exalted; he that cannot make a white hair black, he that
cannot add one cubit to his stature, will yet think to make a polluted soul
holy, and add many cubits of grace to his spiritual stature.

Fourthly, Our original corruption will yet further appear, If you take notice
of that universal ignorance and dullness that is upon a man's understanding,
knowing no saving thing about God or Christ, if it be not revealed: Insomuch
that the necessity of Scripture Light, of revealed-light to conduct us to
heaven, does without contradiction, prove that by nature; we are (as Paul said)
Ephesians. 4, darkeness, even darkness it self; Look over the generation of
mankind, that are the wisest and most learned, where the light of Gods word
has not shore upon them, Romans 1. 1. The Apostle there informs us, that the
doctrine of the Gospel was foolishness to them, that professing themselves to
be wise they became foolish in their imaginations, what Aristotle or Pleto
could ever by natural reason understand any thing of Christ? If then we lay
this for a sure foundation, (though some would absurdly question it) That
without the knowledge of Christ and faith in him, none can be saved; And that
none by nature can come to this knowledge, then it follows undeniably, that
damnable ignorance does cover the face of our souls, as darkness did the deep
at first, That there is a very Chaos in our souls: Oh then that we had
knowledge to know our ignorance! Oh that the dark dungeon we are shut up in
might not be so pleasing to us! In that the Gospel is called a mystery; In that
flesh and blood does not reveal the things of Christ to us, this shows our
wretched estate in sin; Adam had knowledge about the means rending to
everlasting happiness, otherwise God would have made him imperfect; but now we
are ignorant of Christ the way: All that live in the Church, had it not been
for revealed light, would have groped in darkness, as we see all Heathens and
Pagans do: If therefore you would see, what our natures are of themselves,
consider the Sanages, the Indians, the Pagans of the world, who as to any right
knowledge of God have little more then bruit beasts; we cannot so well see what
man's nature is of it self, who live in the Church, because there is the light
of the Gospel, and many times godly education, and Christian institution of us
while young does restrain sin, otherwise if there were not this planting and
watering of us, we should not know any more about Christ, then the most rude
Barbarian that is; Take off then those ornaments, those supernatural
additaments that God has put upon us, who live under the Gospel, and then our
nakedness and deformity will plainly appear.

Fifthly, The woeful captivity and bondage we are in to Satan by nature, does
also manifest our original defilement; For were we not cast off by God, did
not sin make us like hell, why could so many legious of Devils dwell in us?
Ephesians 2, The prince of darkness, the god of this world, is said, to rule in the
hearts of the disobedient, and such we are all by nature; yea, we are, till
regenerated in the snares of the Devil, and taken captive at his will.
Therefore when Christ sent his Disciples to preach, he said, He saw Satan fall
like lightning from heaven: Thus the Devil has his throne in all men's hearts,
till Christ who is stronger cast him out. It is trne, by wicked and ungodly
customs in sin, The Devil takes further possession, as we see in Ananias,
and in Judas, The Devil is said to enter into him after the eating of the sop,
not but that he was before in him, only he had more power and strength over
him; Thus he does possess the souls of all that are born till regenerated, and
by frequent actings of sin, he setleth his kingdom more firmly.

Lastly, This may fully discover our original pollution, In that even in
respect of natural things, we are much weakened and debilitated; our
understandings are not able to find out even natural truths; Insomuch that
there was a famous sect of the Academicks, who held, That nihil scitur, we know
nothing at all. Even Aristotle, who is profanely made to be by some, the same
in naturalls, which Christ was in supernatural; yea Scaliger calls him,
Vltimus Musarum conatus, as if nature her self could not send forth a greater
Artist, yet his known saying (That our understandings in respect of the
celestial bodies especially, are but noctuae ad solemn, owls to the Sun,)
makes it appear, that we are ignorant of more things, then we know: yea, and
which is greatly to be bewailed, The more learning and parts men have had, they
have been more mischiefed by them; insomuch that mere Idiots, and natural
fools, have been less wicked then they: so that humane abilities, when
polished by arts, have been like wine to a feavourish man, like a sword in a
mad man's hand: neither did God ever choose many of the wise men of the world,
Austin being filled with humane eloquence, this was a great prejudice to him in
embracing Christianity; he contemned the simplicity of the Scripture,
dedignabar esse parvulus, as he confessed: And Scotus, who for his acute
understanding, was called, Doctor subtilis, yet the great Historian Jovius,
gives this censure of him, That he was ad ludibrium Theologiae natus, born to
make Religion a scorn and a reproach, because he could dispute every point,
probably on all sides, And memorable is that of profound Bradwardine, who
before he was cordially affected with the grace of God, confesses, That when
he heard Paul's Epistles read, he did despise them, because Paul had not
metaphisicum ingenium, a metaphysicall head. Thus you see that even those poor
abilities that with much labor are attained, make us the worse for them.

CHAP. XXII.
A Comparison and Opposition between the first and second Adam, as introductory
to this Question, How this Corruption is propagated?
SECT. I.
1 COR. 15. 49. And as we have born the Image of the earthy, we shall also bear
the Image of the heavenly.
THe Apostles chief scope in this Chapter, is to corroborate and establish one
main Fundamental Article and Principle in Religion, which is the Resurrection
of the dead. This Truth, as it is Fiducia Christianorum, the very confidence
and life of believers, so it has been opposed and denied by many, as most
absurd and fabulous: Insomuch that what Tertullian said concerning Christ, who
is God, becoming man, and crucified for us, Prorsus credibile, quia
impossible, the same may be applied to this Truth: Therefore it is the Object
of Faith, because reason cannot comprehend it. Now among many other Arguments
by which the Apostle statuminateth this Doctrine, Christ's Resurrection is most
palmarious: For although to Heathens this Argument would not be valid, yet to
the Corinthians, who either doubted of, or denied the Resurrection, but did not
wholly abandon the Christian Faith, this reason would be very cogent: So that
the Corinthians either doubt or infidelity in this Point, has made this
Doctrine the more unquestionably true, so that doubts and heresies have been
overruled by God, to make Truth more orient, like the file to rusty iron, and
like the shaking of the Tree, which makes the root faster and deeper.

But whereas the Doubt may be, Wherein lies the strength of this Argument?
Christ is risen, therefore his members, or all that are his shall rise (For you
must know the Apostle's Arguments do principally prove the blessed and happy
Resurrection of the Just, the Wicked they shall rise, but by the power of
Christ, as a Judge, not as members united to him their Head.) At the twentieth
verse he gives us a twofold reason of that connection:

First, Christ is the first fruits; now the first fruits sanctified the whole
crop of Corn, and although they were taken before the rest, yet this did
assure, that all would be taken in its time: Thus Christ being the first fruits
did sanctify all his people, and his Resurrection was an assured pledge of
theirs.

The second Reason (which is pertinent to my matter in hand) is from the
Collation between Adam and Christ; As Adam was the common root and principle of
death to all that come from him, so is Christ the common Head of Salvation and
Life to all who are of him. The Apostle, Romans 5. makes such a Comparison
between Adam and Christ, as two common Principles and Heads, but to another
purpose, there it is in respect of spiritual death, ( viz.) Sin by one, and
Righteousness by the other; but here it is principally in respect of temporal
Death, and Resurrection by Christ.

The Apostle having thus cleared this Truth, he then enters into a second
Debate, (viz.) In what bodies we shall rise? and determining, That it ^^eth a
corruptible body, but it shall be raised an incorruptible one; It dies a
natural body, but it shall be raised a spiritual.

Last this Distinction of a natural and spiritual body should seem uncouth, and
very absurd, he asserteth and confirms it by Scripture; And here again in the
second place, he takes up a Collation between the first Adam and the second;
and therein we have them compared,

1. In regard of their Condition and State.

2. In respect of their Originals. And

3. In respect of their Qualities and Properties.

This illustration the Apostle is large in, because the strength of his
Argument lies in this, Such as the Principles are, such are the Effects; Such
as the Root is, such are the Branches: Now all men have from Adam earthly
mortal bodies which will die: Therefore all that are Christ's shall have from
him heavenly and spiritual bodies.

Let us diligently open the particulars, wherein we have this Collation between
Adam and Christ made, for from hence we shall have a fair occasion to examine,
How from Adam we come thus to have his Image upon us? which is the great
difficulty in the Doctrine of original sin.

SECT. II.
THe first particular therefore wherein they are compared, is, The state and
condition Adam and Christ was made in; Adam's estate is proved from Scripture,
ver. 5. As it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; we have
this related, Genesis 2. 7. where God is said, To breath into man's nostrils the
breath of life, and man became a living soul. Adam's body being made out of the
dust, and formed thencefrom, was yet without life and motion, therefore God did
with him far otherwise than with bruit beasts, for He breathed into him the
breath of life. This is spoken after the manner of men in a figurative way, we
are not to think God took on him the form of a man, and so breathed life into
Adam; Neither may we say, This was a particle, or part of the divine Essence,
which God communicated to man; But the meaning is, God inspired into him his
soul, which gave life, and sense, and motion to the body, by which he becoming
a living soul, that is, a living creature; This is Adam's condition. But as for
Christ, who is here called the last Adam, Adam because a common Person, and
last, because there is no more to succeed him; This last Adam is said, To be
made a quickening Spirit, not but that Christ was man, yea and had such an
humane Nature, as Adam had like to him in all things, [Sinne only excepted]
But this is spoken of Christ principally after his Resurrection; For Christ
while he lived on earth had an animal body, he needed food and rest, but after
his Resurrection, then he had a spiritual body; so that it is in reference to
this, that Christ is called a Spirit, but with this Epithete, A quickening
Spirit, that is, which gives life to others; He has not only life in himself,
but he gives it also to others, and therefore no wonder if he raise those that
belong to him.

But seeing Christ is thus a quickening Spirit, it may be said, Why then have
the people of God their natural bodies still? If they be in the second Adam,
Why are they not as he is?

To this the Apostle answers, verse 46. That which is natural is first, and
afterward that which is spiritual. It is the will and appointment of God, that
the imperfect things should be first, and afterward that which is more perfect.

In the next place, The Comparison is made between the two Adams in respect of
their Originals, The first was of the earth, earthly, his body was made of the
dust of the earth: (The Egyptians had some confused knowledge of this, and
therefore defined man to be, Animal terrenum e limo natum; Hence in their
Feasts, they offered unto their gods an herb that grew in their lakes, to
signify what man was.)

But the second man is the Lord from Heaven. This place has an appearance of
some difficulty, for from this Text did some Anabaptists (who revived an old
Heresy, ( viz.) That Christ had not his body of the Virgin Mary) endeavor to
prove, That Christ had his body from Heaven, else (say they) what opposition
could there be made to Adam's body? Christ's body was in the Virgin Mary, but
not of her, as they affirm, But this is grossly to mistake; For the Apostle does
not intend to make a comparison in the Materials, of which both bodies were
compounded, but the Originals from whence they are; The one is from Earth, the
other from Heaven, being the Lord of Heaven and Earth. Some indeed have said,
That Christ is therefore said to be from Heaven, because though it was
materially of the Virgin Mary, yet because the Conception was in an
extraordinary manner by the holy Ghost, therefore it might be said to be from
Heaven. This may have some truth, yet Adam was in an extraordinary manner, and
that in respect of his body formed by God, called therefore the Son of God,
yet he cannot be said to be from Heaven, So that the most solid Interpretation
is to understand it of the Person of Christ, and so he is wholly of Heaven,
being the true and eternal God; in which respect, John 3. 13. he is said to be
The Son of man, which is in Heaven. John 6 38, 41. he is said, To come from
Heaven; So that although his body was of the Virgin Mary, yet as God, in which
respect he has his personality, so he is from Heaven

The third and last Collation is in respect of their qualities and properties.
The first man is of the earth earthy, in a three fold respect:

1. Because his affections are only to earthly things.

2. Because the place where he is to be is the earth.

3. Because of his mortality, he is to return to dust again.

But the 'second Adam is heavenly in a threefold contrary respect:

1. He is heavenly in regard of his life and conversation.

2. In regard of the place where now he is sitting in Heaven at the right hand
of God, and thus all Christ's members shall be heavenly, for they likewise shall
be in Heaven for ever with the Lord.

3. Heavenly, Because of his immortality, for he shall never die more.

SECT. III.
THus we have the Apostles elegant opposition between the first and second
Adam, and my Text is a Conclusion from the former Discourse. Some have read the
words preceptively, as if the sense were, As we have born the Image of the
first Adam, so let us bear the Image of the heavenly; But the most solid
Interpreters read it affirmatively, as in the Text we render it; and this
seems to be more consonant, because the Apostle is still in the Didactical
and Doctrinal point about our Resurrection; The particle (...) is for the, and
so, better translated illatively, Therefore.

The Text then affirms two things:

1. That all bear the Image of Adam who came from him.

2. Those who are of Christ shall bear his Image.

Having therefore treated of original sin, the Quod sit and the Quid sit, we
come to that which is deservedly thought the most difficult and hard to
conceive and explain in this point, Which is the manner of propagating it, and
this shall be soberly and modestly discussed out of these words. For from the
45th verse, Austin takes an occasion to dispute (as Paraeus relates) about the
souls traduction from Adam, as well as the body. Although to speak the truth,
that which is principally and apparently affirmed by the Apostle here, is, That
we have mortal bodies propagated to us from Adam, which is easier to conceive
of, then to have also sinful souls from him, yet because the Text speaks of
Adam's Image in us, and that does necessarilly suppose a sinful soul, as well
as a mortal body. We shall therefore declare the truth as of them conjoined
together. Observe

That all who come of Adam do thereby bear his Image: Our natural descension
from him, makes us to be wholly like him; when he was corrupted. That as those
who are of Christ are renewed after his Image in righteousness and true
holiness, so all of Adam are corrupted in sin and ungodliness.

SECT. IV.
WHat this Image is, you have heard already at large, our main work is to
examine, How we come to be made partakers of it? Yet it is good summarily to
say something of this Image of Adams we all bear about with us. And

First, Man who was not only made after the Image of God, Genesis 1. 26. but is
said absolutely to be the Image of God, 1. Cor. 11. 7. by his apostasy became
not only like the beasts that perish, but also like the Devils that are damned.
Insomuch that now this glorious Image of God being defaced: If you ask, Whose
Image and Superscription he bears? We answer of corrupted sinful and mortal
Adam, an Image we are to be ashamed of, and to mourn under all the days of our
life; Who can look upon man, but may behold sin and misery, folly and
mortality? Now this Image of the first Adam comprehended the things of the soul
and the body. In the body we have pains, diseases, and a necessity, of death at
last; In the soul there is horrible blackness and confusion upon it, that as
devils are represented in the most horrid and black manner that can be, such
things are our souls now become. Although therefore the Text speaks of Adam's
Image in the bodily part, that we are thereby corruptible and mortal, and so
need a Resurrection to make us happy, yet I shall chiefly speak of this Image
in the soul, as it is infected and polluted with sin from him. This is the
Image we bear, but there is exceeding great comfort to the godly, that they
being in Christ the second Adam, they shall be made perfectly conformable to
him, they shall bear that heavenly Image, and at last shall have no cause to
complain, that their souls are bowed down with sinful, earthly and heavy
affections, weighing us down to the ground; were it not for hope of this at our
Resurrection, the Doctrine about Adam's fall, and our hurt thereby would
utterly discourage us; but there is a second Adam as well as a first, if he had
been the first and last too, that no Adam would have answered him in the way of
righteousness and life, as he was in the way of sin and death; nothing but
horror and damnation could have taken hold of us; Let us be more deeply
affected with the first Adam, and so shall we come more highly to prize and
esteem the second Adam.

Secondly, Adam 's Image as it is sinful in the general, is not only born by
us, but there seems to be a stamp and impression upon us of those very sins
he committed. As those women who have inordinate desire after some things, do
sometimes leave marks and impressions thereof upon the body: Thus it is
spiritually. Those very sins which Adam particularly committed in eating the
forbidden fruit, all men seem most universally to incline unto. As

1. A curiosity and affectation of knowing that which is not to be known. An
inordinate desire was in Eve to eat of the Tree of knowledge, because the Devil
told her, It would make her wise, therefore she must eat of it; And is not this
a very natural sin in all, a curiosity in knowledge? Do not all desire to eat
of the Tree of knowledge, but few of the Tree of life, especially Scholars, and
such who are busied in learning? What an incurable itch is there to be wise
above Scripture, and to know such things God has hidden? And this is a good
Item to us to content our selves with sobriety, in questioning, How Adam's
sin can be ours? How the soul can come to be polluted? To desire to know
this, is like the eating of the forbidden fruit: While thou art thus curious,
remember Adam's sin, that thou art acting it, while thou inquire, how we
are guilty of it?

A second thing remarkable in the first sin was Their mincing about the word
of God, yea plainly lying, that God had said, they should not touch it, which,
though some say, is put for eating; Others, that Eve did say so for caution
sake; Whence Ambrose has a good saying, Nihil quod bonum videtur, etc. we must
add nothing to Gods precept, though it seem very good, and make much for
godliness; yet others make Eve plainly to lie, and so to accuse God, as if he
envied them further knowledge; Now this sin of lying, how natural is it? We
see it in children, before they can move their feet to go, their tongues can
stir to lie, as if they had been taught, they are so subtle in it.

3. Adam did excuse and cover his sin as much as may be, putting it off from
himself to others, and herein also we have a natural resemblance of him, for
how prone are we to clear our selves, to lay the fault any where, rather than
on our selves? Thus we bear Adam's Image.

CHAP. XXIII.
The various Opinions, Objections, and Doubts, about the manner how the Soul
comes to be polluted.
SECT. I.
THe next work is to consider of the manner how we come to bear this Image. As
for the body, to have a mortal and a corruptible one from Adam is easily to be
conceived, because the body is causally and seminally in the first man, so
propagated from man to man but this has deservedly been acknowledged the
hardest knot to unty in all this doctrinal truth about original sin, how the
soul can come to be polluted if created from God. In this Argument, The
Pelagians did much triumph, and Austin was so puzzled with it, that he many
times confesses his ignorance at least his doubt in this point, yea (he says)
That he could neither legendo, erando, or ratiocinando, find out how the
propagation of original sin, and the creation of the soul could be defended
together, But of this more in its time.

SECT. II.
The great Objections that are against asserting the Souls Creation.
IT is certain that here are dangerous rocks on both sides, for if we say, the
soul is created, then seeing God cannot but make every thing holy, he cannot
make a sinful soul, how then can it be infected with sin? Again, if the soul
be created, then it was not virtually in Adam, then it could not be said to
sin in him, because it was never in him, for why did not Christ sin in him,
but because he was not seminally in him, and if the soul was never radically in
Adam, how can it be polluted, is it just with God to punish that with Adams
sin which never sinned in Adam? If it be said, that the soul when united to
the body, does from that receive infection, as if pure liquour were powered into
a stinking vessel, This will not solve but increase the doubt, for a vessel
indeed may pollute liquour. because they are both bodies and so act by a
corporal contact, but the soul is a spirit, and its a rule (say they) received
by all, that a body cannot act upon a spirit, Besides, sin is properly in the
soul, and must from that be conveyed to the body: The body, why without a
soul, is not capable of sin no more then a bruit beast; It has no reason, it
is under no law, how then can that communicate sin to the soul, when it has
none at all it self? Thus you see what strong cords here are, even that a
Sampson can hardly break.

SECT. III.
Objections against holding that the Souls come by Generation, Multiplication,
etc.
THen on the other side, if you think that the only way to maintain the
propagation of original corruption, is to hold, that the souls are not
immediately created of God, but either by generation or multiplication, or some
other way. Then here also are more dangerous rocks, for if we hold this, we
seem to contradict some strong Texts of Scripture, that makes God the
immediate giver of the soul. Besides, we must then necessarily make it material
yea though they who hold the traduction of the soul will not grant that
consequence, yet it cannot be avoided, but what is generable is corruptible,
and so the soul must be mortal, and that rule of Aquinas seems to carry much
evident light with it, Quod dependet a materia quoad fieri, dependet quod
existere. This rule holds true in every thing else, and why should it be denied
about the soul, if the soul in its beginning depends upon the body, it cannot
continue separate from it, and so be immortal.

SECT. IV.
THus you see there is a veil upon the face of this Doctrine: But although
modesty and sobriety be necessary in this point, as also in the Doctrine of the
Trinity and Christ's incarnation, yet as in them its necessary to search the
Scriptures, and so far to improve the light shining from them; that we may be
able to convince heretical gainsayers; Thus it is also in this truth, so much
knowledge as is not forbidden yea as is revealed in the Scripture, let us
thankfully acknowledge, and humbly, yet with diligence and constancy improve
against those, who by reason of these difficulties would overthrow the
fundamental Truth it self, we must not for some seeming Objections forsake the
clear Texts of Scripture; It commonly falls out, that almost in every great
and fundamental truth in Religion, as the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Doctrine
of Justification. There is some Objection above all the rest, that has more
difficulty in it then ordinary, and so it is here; but let us not be afraid to
get Canaan, because of some Anakims in the way.

SECT. V.
The several Ways that learned Men have gone to remove the aforesaid
Difficulties.
TO guide you therefore in this wilderness to it, let us consider what are the
several ways that many either of learned or of corrupt judgments have said to
the clearing of this, And

First, Origin and Plato's opinion
There are and have been some in the Church following Origin, who also followed
Plato, deriving many opinions from him, who did thus think to make this truth
easy, By holding that the souls were created long before the bodies, and that
upon their evil, and sin committed, they were adjudged to be put into
bodies, and so from hence it is, that they say, man is so propense to all
evil; Therefore they will not say, That the souls of men are either by
traduction, or immediate creation and infusion into the body, but that they
were created long before the body, and while preexistent before it, they
deserved to be put into this dark prison of the body, There was one Vincentius
Victor, according to his name, bold and audacious, who disliked Austin for his
cunctation and deliberation in the point of the traduction of the soul, which
occasioned Austin to write four Books De origin animae, Now this Vincentius he
affirmed, That the soul was created before the body, and did deserve to be made
part of that man, who is a sinner, yea that it did deserve to be made peccatrix
a sinner. Some have also thought, that this was a general received opinion
amongst the Jews; and they prove it from that question proposed to Christ,
The Jews.
concerning the man born blind, yea they were Christ's Disciples that did make
that question; so that it seems they were still infected with that vulgar
error, for Joh. 92, They say, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents,
that he should be born blind? They ask, whether the sins of the man's parents,
or his own sins made him to be born blind, now he could not have any sins
before he was born, unless his soul did preexist before his body, and it
seems the Pharisees concluded, that they were his own sins, for they say
ver. 34. Thou wast altogether born in sins. They did not (happily) mean
original sin, for they say sins, which must be actual sins, either his
own, or his parents.

But this opinion is so wicked and absurd, that to name it is enough to refel
it; and for this monstrous figment might Origin be called Centaurus, as well as
for others. Only two things are to be said to it.

First, If souls for sins acted were adjudged to their bodies, how is it that
the Scripture gives that command of, Increase and multiply? how is it that
children, and life are made blessings? certainly to be kept in a prison, or
adjudged thereunto is a curse not a blessing, But

Secondly, This opinion does not at all heal the wound, that the mentioned
Objection gives; for the doubt is how our souls are infected, because of Adam,
if they were not causally in him? And this speaks to another matter, that
they sinned before they were incarnated, and therefore have such a troublesome
and noisome lodging.

Again this contradicts the Apostle, and does indeed take away the subject of
the question, for Romans 5. The Apostle makes Adam's disobedience to be the
cause of all the sin that we have as soon as we are born, It is not then the
souls sinning before its union to the body, but Adam the first man, and the
common head in whom we all sinned; and seeing the souls of men were (...) Adam,
as their bodies are, the stone still remains unremoved.

In the next place, Therefore there are those, of a later hatch, but few, yet
would be, if not in the number of the first worthies, yet of the second,
Papists I mean; Pighius and Catharinus, against whom the Papists do as largely
dispute in this controversy of original sin almost, as they do against the
Protestants. These lay down their opinion in two things.

First, Some Papists.
That the soul of a man comes into the world pure and holy without any
inherent filth of sin, and that till there be actual sins, there is nothing
in man but what is of God, and for this they bring all the Arguments, which the
Pelagians of old use to do, But then

In the second place, That they may not be anathematized as pelagianizing. They
say, Adams actual disobedience is made our sin by imputation, so that they
deny any original sin inherent in us, only all the original sin we have is
Adams first sin of disobedience, which is made ours, hence they deny that
every one has his proper original sin, as if there were as many original
sins as persons born; but they say, Adams actual disobedience, being made
ours, is the one original sin of all mankind. Thus as one sun serves to
inlighten all the stars, and as some Philosophers say, that there is one
intellectus agens, common and universal to all men, so they make one original
sin to be common to all, and this only Adams posterity is guilty of. This
opinion they press, as hereby making every thing easy and clear; Then there
needs no disputation about the original of the soul, or how it can be
infected, if this, be true (say they) then here is no occasion for these
intricate disputes about the propagation of original sin, To which the most
learned are never able to give a satisfactory Answer? Although this opinion of
imputation does no ways remove the doubt about the Creation of the soul, for
if the soul be by Creation, how comes Adam's sin to be imputed to man born
of Adam, if his soul was never causally in Adam? so that the difficulty does
still continue as great notwithstanding this opinion. But as this opinion has
some truth in it, so also much more error, and therefore though it be sweet in
the mouth, yet it proves wormwood in the belly: The truth is this, That Adams
actual sin is made ours by imputation; this must be constantly affirmed,
because denied by those, who also deny the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
as if thereby we were justified; we grant therefore, that Adams one sin is
made all mankinds: Hence the Apostle does still speak of one man (though there
be many immediate parents) by whom we are not only made sinners, but in whom
also we did sin; and this does arise wholly from Gods ordination and
appointment of it: for although Scoto, and others, do call the Covenant in this
respect, fabula, a mere fable, yet Suarez does confess the necessity of it; and
indeed it must be, for though Adam had a thousand times over, wil^ed that his
sin should be the sin of all his posterity, yet they could not have been
guilty of it, had not that Covenant involved them: so that if the patrones of
this imputation had not stayed here, but acknowledged also an inherent
pollution, they would not have been so justly censured. But we have already
proved by Scripture, reason, and experience, that mankind is involved in an
inherent pollution of their own, as well as guilty of imputed sin: and
indeed, how could man be obnoxious to eternal wrath, if there were not damnable
matter within, as well as without? can they go to hell with souls pure and holy?

But if this imputation be granted, then the pelagians Objection seems to be
of force, That as Adams sin could hurt those that have not actually sinned,
so Christ's righteousness may profit those that do not believe.

This Objection (...) rather to be answered, because the Antinomian thinks
from hence, (...) answerable argument, to prove, that we are justified before
we (...) That the elect are accepted of, having their sins pardoned, (...)
they do repent, yea before their sins are committed, because we are in (...)
the second Adam. To this Argument, Austin answered of old the Pelagians, That
Christ's righteousness did not profit any but believers, and therefore Infants
they were saved aliena side by the faith of their Parents, Even as we are
condemned alieno peccato by the sin of another, although it be so alienum, as
that it is also proprium; but this is not satisfactory.

Therefore to the Antinomian we answer, That although we are all said to sin
in Adam, and his disobedience is imputed to all, yet the condition, or the
medium by which we come to partake of this imputation, is natural generation;
and therefore till we have an actual being, we cannot be said to sin in him:
potentially indeed we may, but natural generation (supposing Gods Covenant as
the reason of the conveighance of it in this way, Even as in the state of
integrity, the Covenant would have been the cause of transmitting original
righteousness to Adams posterity, though natural generation would have been the
way of communicating of it) is that only which makes us actually to
participate of his guilt, Therefore it is a feeble thing in a late writer, (
Eire) to oppose the natural generation or descent from Adam, to the Covenant,
for both are requisite, the latter as the cause, the former as the medium. And
thus it is in regard of Christ's righteousness, that is the cause of our
justification, in Christ we are made righteous, as in Adam sinners, yet the
medium to apply this and to make it ours, is faith, so that none are justified
till they do believe, as none are condemned for Adams sin till they have an
actual being, faith is the same in a supernatural way to partake of Christ, as
natural propagation and descent from Adam is to be made a sinner in him,
Although we may say truly that Christ does profit the non-believers, who belong
to grace, for by him they are brought to believe, they are brought out of the
bondage of sin, only Justification and such Gospel-priveledges are actually
bestowed upon none till they do believe, we have not time to proceed in the
discovery of other ways and opinions of the learned to answer this doubt, only
thus much we have heard, that may make us therefore to bewail original sin,
that we are in such a dark ignorance, that we do but grope about the
propagation, had Adam continued in integrity, he would not have only
communicated righteousness to his posterity, but they would also have certainly
known the manner how, but now we are wholly miserable and know not exactly the
manner how, we know little about the soul, so that the soul which only is
knowing in man knows very little of it self, of its nature, of its original,
like the eye that sees other things but not it self. Let us then be more
sollicitous about our going out of the world, then how we came into it. Be more
desirous to come out of this pit, then to stand wondering how thou did fall
into it, do thou not observe more, ready to inquire curiously about the one,
then daily to pray about the other.

SECT. V.
HItherto the expedients thought upon, to ease that great difficulty about the
propagation of original sin, have appeared very improbable, and in some
respect very absurd, like unwise Chyrurgians, not healing, but vexing the wound
worse: We shall now proceed to some more probable ones, and dispatch them with
convenient speed, lest you should think these are such (...) upon which no
grapes can grow, of more difficulty then usefulness; although you shall find,
that even in this wilderness we may meet with M^ona; The truth discussed will
not only be for doctrinal Information, (...) doctrinate Application: The next
therefore that I shall instance in, is (...) of those who hold, The soul is not
by the immediate Creation of God, but (...), or multiplication; and this they
are so confident in, That they (...) Doctrine of original corruption cannot be
maintained, unless we affirm so: Thus you heard Austin affirming, That neither
by reading, prayer, or disputing could he find out, how one could be defended
without the other, It is true Bellermine says, That the opinion of the
traduction of the soul from the parents does no way at all either advantage, or
incommodate the Doctrine of original sin; but that the difficulty will still
be as great: so also Arminius (These. pri. de primo peccato.) makes the dispute
about the original of the soul, in the matter of the propagation of this
hereditary defilement, unusefull and needless; But certainly, the clearing of
the souls original is very influential into this point, especially because we
are forced to it by the adversaries of this truth; for it seems very
probable, that Austin would readily have believed the immediate creation of
every of every soul, but that the dispute about original corruption was the
remora: for he regarded not any other Objection. This opinion then, That the
soul comes originally from the parents; as well as the body, has had its
grave, and learned abettors. Tertullian of old, who wrote a book ( De anima);
And as for Austin, it is true, he did not defend this opinion, neither did he
deny it, he wrote four Books, ( De origin animae,) against one Vincentius
Victor, who blamed Austin for his hesitancy in this point; and in those Austin
does still persist in the same doubt, and does answer those Arguments, which
are usually brought out of the Scripture, yet so as that he does not determine
against the souls Creation, but desired stronger Arguments, and therefore does
rebuke that young man for his bold presumption, in determining that
controversy so confidently. Austin also (in his tenth Book upon Genesis ad
literam) does show the same doubting mind within him, as also (in his Epistle
to Hierom) wholly about the original of the soul, wherein he does earnestly
desire of Hierom, that he would teach him and satisfy him in this point by
strong and sure evidence, likewise he makes the original of the so^^, the
subject of this Epistle to Optatus. It appears that Austin did more incline
to hold the Creation of the soul, therefore he says to Hierom, That although
none can by wishing make a thing to be true, yet if it could he would by
wishing have the Doctrine of the Creation of the soul to be the truth: No
wonder that Austin thus doubted, seeing Hierom says, the greatest part of the
western Doctors were for the traduction of the soul; But the eastern the greek
Fathers, they did generally hold, the immediate Creation of it. In the latter
days of the Church, since the Reformation, there have also been eminent and
able Divines, asserting the traduction of the soul from the parents, and
thereby original sin: Vostius mentions Johnius, and Marnixius: The Lutheran
Divines seem generally to be of this opinion as appears by Brechword and
Meisner; The latter whereof relates of Luther, that he should say, He would
never trouble the Church about any opinion about the original of the soul, yet
his private opinion was, that it was not by Creation; and they do pitch on
this, as holding it most convenient to remove all doubts; although Meisner
confesses, there are even unanswerable Objections, if they do hold the
generation of it from the parents; But I must tell you, that those, who affirm
the soul to be from the parents, as well as the body, differ amongst
themselves, for some say, it is by eduction out of the matter, that it is
generated, as the body: Others, they say, by traduction, that the soul is not
corporally begotten, but the parents soul does multiply the infants soul; even
(say they) as you see one candle does inlighten another.

In the confession of the Aethiopick Faith, as Hornebeck (summa Cont. de
Gracis) relates, it is affirmed, Omnes sine ulla hesitantia in hac sententia
versamur, etc. All of us are in this opinion without any hesitancy, that all
our souls come of Adam, as well as our flesh, and that we are all Adam's seed
both in flesh, and soul.

CHAP. XXIV.
That the Soul is neither by Eduction or Traduction, but by Introduction or
immediate Infusion, proved by Texts of Scripture.
SECT. I.
BUt whatsoever learned men have thought therein, we may say, That it is
against Scripture and true reason, that the soul is either by Eduction or
Traduction, but by Introduction, or immediate Infusion, and that by God
himself: And I shall instance in some Texts of Scripture, to which, though they
give exceptions, yet (I suppose the Truth stands immovable, neither do you
think this work needless, for it is worth the while, if there were no other use,
but to inform you against a dangerous sect, that are called Mortalists, who
hold the soul is nothing but the temperament of the body, and that it is
mortal, to which abominable opinion the Socinians also do strongly incline.

The first Text to prove the Creation of the soul, shall be from Eccl. 12. 7.
Then shall dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to
God who gave it. This seems to be very clear, for he speaks of every man
that dies, he considers the two essential parts of man, his body, which he
calls dust, because it was made of dust, and then his soul, which he calls a
spirit, because of its simple and incorporeal nature, again, which strengthens
the Argument, he compares these two in their contrary or diverse originals, The
body returns to the earth, the Spirit unto God that gave it.

Though we would think this might satisfy, yet Austin of old, and those that
are Traducians, they say, God indeed gives the soul by propagation, as well as
by Creation; God gives two ways, by Creation, or by Propagation, as says
Austin. God is said, 1 Cor. 15. 38. to give every several grain its body, yet
it is by seminal propagation, and God is often in the Scripture said, to give
us our eyes, and our ears, and our bodies, yet they are by natural generation;
or if this will not serve, then they say, This is true only of Adam, not his
posterity, because Adam's body was only made of the dust, not ours; and God did
breath a soul into him at first.

But every one may see these are weak exceptions, as for the later, it is plain,
he does not speak of Adam, but every man that dies; For having advised the
young man to improve his youth for God, he tells him, old age is coming, and
then death, then shall he return, How can this be applied to Adam, who had
returned to the earth many hundreds of years before that was spoken? And
whereas it is said, That only Adam's body was made of dust. The answer is
easy, That though our bodies be of flesh and bone immediately, yet the remote
principle is dust, and therefore Abraham, though his body was not made as
Adams, yet he said, (...) was but dust and ashes. Thus this Text stands firm
for the immediate Creation of the soul. Though (let me by the way give you
rightly to understand that later clause) The spirit returns to him that gave
it; The meaning is not, as if the soul of every man was saved, but that it
goes into the hands of God, as a Judge to dispose of it, according to what
has been done in the flesh; As for the next exception, that will be answered
in the following Argument; only in the general this may be said, That if God
gave the soul only mediately by propagation, then the body might be said to
return to him, as well as the soul.

SECT. II.
WE will proceed to a second, and that is from Zech. 12. 1. The Lord which
stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and
forms the spirit of man within him. Here we see the Lords power described by
a threefold effect, the making of the Heavens, the laying of the earths
foundation, and making the spirit of man; Now it is plain, that the two former
were by Gods immediate Creation, therefore the later must be: So that the
Context does evidently show, That Gods making of the soul of a man within him,
is no less wonderful then the making Heaven and earth. This Text was also of
old agitated by Austin in this controversy, and to answer it, he runs to
his old refuge of forming a thing immediately, and by natural propagation: God
is not to be excluded (says he) from having a special hand in giving being to
the soul, yet it does not follow, that therefore it must be by creation out of
nothing. To this purpose they bring that of Job, Chap. 10. 10, 11. where Job
attributes the making and forming of his body to God, Have thou not poured me
out like milk, etc? Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh. So Psalm. 139.
13, 14, 15. where David acknowledges the wonderful wisdom and power of God,
in making his body, Then have curiously wrought me; As the curious needle-woman
does some choice piece; now we cannot from hence prove, that therefore the body
is of God by immediate Creation.

But this cannot weaken the Text, for we told you, That the Argument is not
merely from that expressing of forming the spirit of man within him, but from
the upper two Attributes. Besides the Scripture tells us plainly of what
materials the body is formed of, whereas they who hold the propagation of the
soul, are extremely straightened and difficultated to say, what the soul is made
of; They say, it is not ex anima, but ab anima. not of the soul, but from the
soul of the Parent, but then are divided amongst themselves when they go to
explicate, how the soul has its being if not from Creation. Some say, it has
its being by a corporal seminal manner, but then it must be a body, which
Austin would constantly deny, for he dissents from Tertullian in that, though
both held the natural Traduction of the soul, Austin I mean only suppositively,
but Tertullian positively, yet he professes his dissent from Tertullian, who
made it a body. This therefore being thought absurd, others they tell us of an
incorporeal and immaterial seed from the soul of the Parents, which causes the
soul of the child. To this purpose Tertullian in his book de anima,
distinguishes of semen animale, which comes from the soul, and semen
corporeum, which comes from the body. But this may easily be judged as absurd
as the former: If therefore the Scripture, when it speaks of the forming of
man's spirit within him, had discovered the materials of which it is formed, as
well as when it speaks of the forming of the body, there would have been some
pretense for the Argument. But calling it a spirit, and as you see in the Text,
comparing the forming of it with the making of the Heavens and the Earth, this
makes the creation of the soul more than probable. Tarnavius the Lutheran would
likewise avoid this place ( Comment. in loc.) by saying the Hebrew word Jahac
does most commonly signify, not an immediate creation out of nothing, for so
the Hebrew word Barah does for the most, but a mediate out of some prejacent
matter, yet indisposed; but this Rule being not universal, it has no strength
in it. Besides, the Hebrew word is in the Present tense, who forms, so that
it cannot relate to the making of Adam's soul at first. Indeed the forenamed
Tarnavius does from the participle Benani draw an Argument against us, saying,
It does not always signify actum secundum, but habitum and potentiam, and so
makes the sense to be God, who has this power immediately to create the soul,
if he will; but all will confess this to be forced; That is more considerable,
when he says, As God in stretching out the Heavens, and laying the foundation
of the earth, is not thereby declared to create new Heavens, and a new earth
every day; so neither is it necessary that he should create souls daily, but
conserve the order appointed, as he does, about the Heavens. The Answer is
easy, therefore do the words relate to the Creation at first with the
conservation of them, because new Heavens and new earths are not every day
made; but both they and we do acknowledge new souls are every day produced, as
often as a man is born, and God at first making Adam's soul by breathing into
it, the same order is still to be conserved.

This Text thus cleared, we may add as proofs also of the like kind, Isa. 42.
5. Though Austin thought by spirit there, might be meant the sanctifying Spirit
of God; But that has no probability. Psalm. 33. 15. the Psalmist says, God
has fashioned the hearts of men alike, or wholly throughout; By which is meant
the soul of a man in all its thoughts and workings, because the soul puts forth
its vital actions in the heart. That also is remarkable, which yet I find not
mentioned by any in this Controversy, Jer. 38. 16. where Zedekiah makes an
oath to Jeremiah, that he will not kill him, after this manner, Thus says the
Lord, who made us this soul, not this body, but this soul, (he puts that
into the oath,) intimating what an heavy sin it would be to kill a man that
is innocent, seeing he has his soul from God. I shall mention but one Text
more, and that is in the New Testament, which seems clearly to demonstrate
the creation of the soul, Heb. 12 9. We have had fathers of our flesh that
corrected us, etc. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits? I think this Text may put us out of all doubt, God is opposed as a
Father to our natural parents; God is called a Father of Spirits, natural
parents father of our flesh: Now if our souls did come from our parents, they
might be called fathers of our spirits, as well as of our flesh: The Apostles
Argument would have no force, if the Creation of the soul by God alone, and the
generation of the flesh only by natural parents be not asserted: Thus Numb. 16.
20. as also Chap. 27. 16. God is there styled, The God of the spirit of all
flesh, in a peculiar manner. It may be wondered, that though Austin busied
himself so much in finding out of this Truth, diligently attending to the
Scripture, yet he never mentioned this place. Certainly, this Text might have
removed his doubt, and made him wholly positive in affirming the creation of
the soul.

That which I find later Writers reply to it, is, That God is called the Father
of Spirits in respect of Regeneration, because he sanctifies and makes holy.

But the opposition to our fathers of the flesh, evidently confuteth this; and
withal they can never show, that God is called a Father of Spirits, or a God
of Spirits, but in respect of Creation, not Regeneration. It is true, the word
spirit may sometimes be used for a man as regenerate, as flesh is for a man
wholly corrupt; but they can never show that the word spirits in the plural
number is taken for men regenerate.

Use. Of Exhortation, To quicken up your attention to this Truth, do not think
this is unprofitable and useless, that this Question is like those of which
Paul complains, some doted, foolish and endless; No, it is very profitable,
for in knowing the original of thy soul, how it comes even from God himself,
may it not shame thee to make thy self like a beast, as if thou had no better
soul then they have? Profaneness and sottish ignorance do greatly oppose the
nature of thy soul. Why do men say in effect, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die, but as if they and beasts were all alike? And why is it
that you see so many have no understanding, but that they are like the horse
and the mule? Why does the Scripture compare wicked men to so many kind of
beasts, but because they live, as if God had put no rational soul into them?
That though in the making of their bodies they differ from beasts, yet in their
souls they do greatly agree.

SECT. III.
THus you see we are examining, Whether that Doctrine of the Propagation of
souls from parents, be a sure foundation to build upon, in clearing the
conveyance of original sin to Adam's posterity; And we have evidently proved,
That the soul has its immediate creation from God; So that to run to the
Sanctuary of the Souls Traduction, would be to implore a dangerous error to
assist the Truth; As God needs not a lie, so neither does his Truth any
error. And indeed, Although I shall not call the Doctrine of the Creation of
the soul, an article of faith, because so many learned men have hesitated
therein; So that it would be an high breach of charity to commaculate such with
the note of heresy, yet we may with Hierom call it, Ecclesiasticum dogma, a
Doctrine that the most Orthodox have always received; So that the contrary
opinion seems to be absurd, as Whitaker well says. Although Vorstius would
make this dispute to be merely philosophical, in his Antibellarm.

Having therefore laid down those Texts, which are a sure pillar of this Truth,
we shall add some further reasons, and then make use of this point, which is
very fruitful.

SECT. IV.
Arguments from Scripture to prove the Souls Creation.
THe first Reason, which may appear in the defense of the Souls immediate
Creation from God, is, From the historical Narration, which Moses makes of the
beginning and original of Adam 's soul: For as God when he was to create man,
did it in a more transcendent and glorious way, then when he made beasts, or
the other creatures; For then he said, Let there be light, and, Let the waters
bring forth abundantly the moving creatures, that have life, Genesis 1. 20. And
so, Let the earth bring forth the living creatures, the beasts after their
kind; But when he comes to make man, then the expression is altered, Let us
make man in our Image; and Genesis 2. 7. where we have the manner of the execution
of this counsel, it is said, He formed the body of Adam out of the dust of the
earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; No such thing was
done to other creatures: So that you see Adam's soul was from God immediately,
though his body was from the earth; This breathing of life into Adam, was
infusing of the rational soul. Some Ancients thought, that it was the bestowing
of the holy Ghost upon Adam, and that he had his rational soul before; They
compare it with Christ's breathing on his Disciples, whereby was communicated
the holy Ghost. Now it is plain, they had their rational souls before.

This is vain, because by the breathing of this life, it is said, Adam became a
living soul, so that he was but a dead lump of earth (as it were) before; And
indeed this Text is so clear, that I know none of the Adversaries to the souls
immediate Creation do deny it: Now then, If the soul of Adam was by creation,
Is it not probable that all other souls were in the like manner? What a great
disproportion would there be between Adam and us, if his soul was by creation,
and ours by generation? Some have questioned, Whether it would not make a
specifical difference between Adam and us? But that is not to be affirmed; For
Christ as man was of the same species with other men, though his Conception and
Nativity were miraculous: But the Argument from the Creation of Adam's soul, to
the Creation of ours, though it be not cogent, yet it makes it more then
probable, because God at first did appoint that order, which afterward was to
continue; So he appointed the animate creatures, to multiply in their way,
making their bodies and forms to be educed out of the power of the matter, (as
Philosophers express it, though very obscurely,) but he did not do so with
Adam's soul; Can we think that our souls are less glorious and precious before
God (I mean as meet creatures) then Adam's was? It is true, There was a
necessity that Adam 's body should be otherwise made then ours, because he was
the first Parent, and so he could not be bygeneration; Thus the other living
creatures they had their bodies at first out of the earth, or out of the water,
not by generation, as afterward; Thus for the body there was a necessity, but
then for the soul there was none at all; Why might not Adam's soul have been
with his body out of the prejacent matter, as well as it was with other living
creatures? But because the soul of man is of an higher nature coming from God
alone: This Argument will appear in further strength, if you consider that Eve,
though she was made in such an extraordinary manner out of Adam, yet she had
not her soul from him, but her body only; For when he awakened, see what he
says, This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; He does not say, This is
soul of my soul, and yet as Austin in this matter, though doubting, does well
argue, That if Eve had had her soul from Adam, Quid charius potuit dicere
(says he) This would have been a more indeared and affectionate expression, to
have called her soul of his soul, then flesh of his flesh. It is true, some
say, it is a synecdochical speech, By flesh (they say) is meant whole Eve, her
whole person soul and body; but that is easier said than proved; No doubt if it
had been so, Adam would have expressed it, as being a manifestation of greater
unity, then what was in the body only: If you say, But why is it not said then,
that God created Eve 's soul, as well as Adam 's? If God had so immediately
breathed a soul into her, would not the Scripture have mentioned it? No, that
is not necessary, it is enough, that we read what God did to Adam about his
soul; and the Scripture says, Genes. 1. 27. God created man in his Image male
and female created he them. Thus you see they were both, as in respect of Gods
Image made alike: So Chap. 5. 2. Male and female created he them, and called
their name Adam; And thus much for the first Reason.

The second is more cogent, and that is taken from the soul of Christ, If
Christ had his soul by creation, then we had ours also; The consequence is
clear, because Christ is said to be like us in all things, sin only
excepted; Hence it is, that he also would have assumed our humane Nature in an
ordinary way of generation, but that it could not be without sin; If then
Christ became like us in all things, wherein sin was not necessarily adherent,
then if he had his soul by immediate Creation we had ours also.

This Argument does divide the Adversaries to the Creation of the soul; For
some say, Christ had not his soul by immediate Creation, no more then we, but
from his mother: But the most wary will not say so: Austin in this controversy
does always except Christ's soul, and indeed there is this Argument which may
nforce us to it, taken from the comparison that the Apostle makes between Levi
and Christ, affirming Levi did pay tithes in Abraham's loins, but not Christ,
Heb. 7. 9. Now if Christ was every way in Abraham's loins, as Levi was, then
must Christ have paid tithes in Abraham, as well as Levi, and so the Apostles
Argument would be without any force.

But it may be (and indeed it is urged by Austin and others,) This will prove
Levi's soul to have been in Abraham, else Levi could not have been said to have
paid tithes in him, but as because Christ's soul was not in Abraham originally,
therefore he did not pay tith, so neither might Levi

To this therefore the solid Answer is, That the reason why Christ did not pay
tithes in Abraham, in the Apostles sense, was not because his soul was
immediately from God, for so also was Levi's, but because Christ was of Abraham
only, Quoad corpulentam substantiam, not seminatam rationem, his fleshly
substance was from Abraham, but not by natural propagation; he was from Abraham
only materialiter not effective, whereas Levi was both ways, and hence he
comes short of Christ.

Thirdly, Arg. 3.
If so be that the soul of the parents did beget or multiply the souls of
children, then this would hold also in Angels; for the multiplication of
another must needs be acknowledged a perfection, where the subject is capable
of it; Certainly, generation of another is not in it self an imperfection. for
then in the blessed Trinity, the Son could not be begotten of the Father, but
generation as in creatures denotes imperfection. If then souls may come from
souls, why not Angels from Angels? but this is acknowleged by all, That no
Angel can produce another, but that there are as many and no more or less then
was at first Creation. As for that example of the soul producing another, as we
see one candle light another, that is nothing to this purpose; for therefore
does the candle inlighten another, because there is prepared and fitted matter
to receive this light; so that its from prejacent materials the light is
produced; but how can this be applied to the soul which is wholly spiritual,
what preexistent matter that can be made of?

Fourthly, Arg. 4.
If so be the soul be not by immediate Creation, then it must be material,
corporal, and mortal: for although this consequence is denied, yet the evidence
of natural reason will commend this. Its traduced (says Tertullian) and is a
body, yet is immortal: It is by propagation (say the Lutheran Divines) and yet
is not a body but a spirit, and immortal: But above all, those abominable
Mortalists, they make it to be only the crusis of the body, of which opinion
Galen also is said to be, and so they make it mortal: We see then, that its
necessary to have a sound judgment about the original of the soul, for the
Mortalists have fallen into that deep pit of heresy, because they erred in this
first. It is with men, as they say of Fishes, they begin to putrify in the head
first, and so commonly men fall into loose opinions, and then into loose
practices: But this rule must be acknowledged, That whatsoever depends upon
matter in being, does also depend upon it in existency: It Is Aquinas his rule,
(as you heard,) Quicquid dependet a materia in fieri, depend quoad esse et
existere; That is the reason, why the souls of all beasts are mortal, because
they depend upon the matter in being, They cannot be produced but dependently
on that, and therefore their souls cannot subsist without their bodies; As it
is plain, the souls of men do after death, till the resurrection; So that this
Doctrine is injurious, and derogatory to our spiritual and immortal souls.

Fifthly, Arg. 5.
If souls were not by immediate Creation, but by natural propagation from the
parents, then either from the mother alone or from the father alone, or from
both together.

This Argument Lactantius of old (as Cerda in Tertull. alleges him) formed to
himself, and answers; it is neither of those ways but from God. Not from the
Father alone, because David does bewail his mothers co operation hereunto, Psalm
51, Iniquity did my Mother conceive me. Not the Mother alone, because the
Father is made the chief cause of conveighing this original sin by the
Apostle, he lays it upon Adam, more then Eve, though Eve is not excluded; Not
from both together, for then the soul must be partible and divisible, part from
the Father and part from the Mother, and so it cannot be a simple substance.
Under this Argument Meisuer does labor, and confesses, it is inexplicable how
the soul should come from the parents, though he assaieth to give some
satisfaction.

Lastly, Argum. 6.
There is something even of nature implanted in us, to believe our souls come
from God; who has not almost some impression upon his conscience, to think,
that he had not his soul from his parents? even nature does almost teach us in
this thing; Hence the wisest Heathens have concluded of it as Plato, and also
Aristotle, who confuteth the several false opinions of Philosophers about the
soul, (for it was a doubt as Tertullian (lib de anima) expresses it) whether
Aristotle was parasior sua implera, aut aliena inantre) and affirms it (...),
to come from without, and that it is a divine thing: Thus it was with some
Heathens, though destitute of the Light of Gods Word, yet in somethings they
did fall upon the truth, (as says Tertullian) The Pilot in a tempestuous black
night puts into a good haven, sometimes prospero errore, and a man in a dark
place gropeth and finds the way out sometimes, caeca quadam felicitate: Thus
did some Heathens in some things.

SECT. IV.
IF you ask, What Arguments have they, who hold the traduction of the Soul?

I answer, There is none out of Scripture, that is worth the answering: The two
things they urge, are,

First, If the soul be not propagated, then man does not beget a man, as a
beast does a beast, and he is more imperfect, then other creatures: but this is
to be answered hereafter. The other is, Because original sin cannot else be
maintained; but this is to be answered in the Explication, how we come to
partake of it, Let us proceed to the Uses.

Use 1. Does God create the soul? then he must know all the thoughts, all the
inward workings and motions of thy soul; As he that makes a Clock, or a Watch,
knows all the motions of it; Therefore take heed of soul-sinnes, of
spirit-sinnes: What, though men know not your unclean thoughts, your proud
thoughts, your malicious thoughts, yet God who made thy soul does; and
therefore this should make us attend to Gods eye upon us.

Use 2. Did God make and create the soul? then he also can regenerate it, and
make it new again, he made it as a Creator, and he only in the way of
regeneration can make it again. This may comfort the godly that mourn and pray,
Oh they would have more heavenly holy souls: They would not have such vain
thoughts, such sinful motions: Remember, God made thy heart and he can
spiritualize it.

3. Does God create the souls? then here we see that it is our duty to give our
souls to him in the first place, John 4. God is a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in spirit; This has been always a complaint, men have drawed nigh
to God bodily, but their hearts have been far from him; God made thy soul
more then thy body, and therefore let that be in every duty.

Lastly, If Parents do not make our souls, then here we see, Children must obey
Parents, but in the Lord: Should thy Parents command thee to do any sinful
action, to break the Sabbath, you must not obey, you may say, My father and
mother they help me but to my body, God does give me my soul, and therefore
they are but parents of your bodies, not of your conscience and souls.

SECT. V.
The Authors Apology for his handling this great Question.
THe false ways which some have wandered in, to maintain the Propagation of
Original Corruption to all mankind, being detected, our work is now to
explicate that Doctrine, which seems most consonant to solid Reason and
Scripture.

But before we essay that, we are to inform you of one sort of learned
Authors, who, because of the difficulty attending this Point, Whether we hold
the Traduction or Creation of the soul, have thought it the most wife and sober
way to acknowledge the Propagation of original Sin; But as for the manner
How, there to have a modest suspense of our judgment, to profess a learned
ignorance herein to believe That it is, though How it is so, we know not. And
Tertullian, concerning the original of the soul ( Lib. de Anima) has this
known saying, Praestat per Deum nescire, quae ipse non revelaverit, quam per
hominem scire, quae ipse praesumpserit. In this way of suspense Austin
continued as long as he lived, thinking that this might be one of those Truths,
we shall not know, till we come into the Academy of Heaven; and to this modest
silence, we have one place of Scripture, which might much incline us, Eccles.
11. 5. As thou know not the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in
the womb, etc. This Text should teach us not to (...), to venture too far,
but to observe the light of the Scripture, as they did the Pillar and Cloud in
the wilderness to stand still, where that stands still; And indeed the
Disputes about the Modes of things, is very intricate. The known saying is
Motum, sometimes Modum nescimus, the manner of Gods working in conversion, The
manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, what endless controversies has
it begotten? And therefore it was the King of Navarr's counsel to the Divines,
when the Lutherans and Calvinists were upon pacification about the Sacrament,
that they should not De modo ultra modum disputare. Now although this be good
counsel, yet when heretical and erroneous opinions have invaded the Modus, then
it is our duty to maintain not only the truth of a thing, but the manner of it
also; What is a greater mystery then the Son of God, having his being from
the Father? He that will touch this mystery with mere natural reason, does as
if the Smith should handle his live-coals with his hands and not the Tongs,
says Chrysostom, yet because of the Socinians, who say, He is only a made
God in time, and has his Deity by donation; We are forced not to be content
only to believe, that he is the Son of God, but also how, viz. By eternal
Generation; So in the great Controversy with the Arminians about the
conversion of man. It is not enough to say, we are converted by grace, but are
necessitated also to express the manner How, not by a moral suasion, or per
modum sapientiae only, but by invincible efficacy and power also. Thus the
manner of Christ's presence, in the Sacrament was necessarily to be determined
against the Lutherans. Thus it is in our point in hand, we might well enough
sit down with this Truth, That original sin is communicated to every son of
Adam, and enquire no further, as the primitive Church did till Austin's time,
in a great measure; But when Heretics will deny the true Doctrine, because
the manner is difficult to express; or when men will deny the Creation of the
soul, then it is our duty in a sober manner to search into the way, how we
partake of it: Neither does the fore mentioned Text contradict this; For,
though we know not how the bones grow in the womb exactly and punctually, yet
we know in the general, that they do by virtue of generation; So although we
know not particularly how the soul comes to have its being in the body, yet in
the general, that it is by Creation, we have had Scripture light fully to
convince us therein.

This then premised, Let us proceed to clear the Doctrine of the Propagation of
original sin, and that by several Propositions, which will be as so many
steps and degrees to the main Truth.

SECT. VII.
Propositions to clear the Doctrine of the Propagation of Original Sin by the
Souls Creation.
FIrst, We lay this for a foundation, That God does create the soul of every
man a spiritual substance. This Proposition must be the foundation-stone to
build upon. That God does create the soul immediately, you have heard several
Texts attesting thereunto. So that Bellarmine was too dissident, when moved,
(it seemed) by Austin, does wave all Texts of Scripture for the creation of the
soul, and so proceeds to other Arguments. Perierius on 2 Chap. of Genes.
verse. 7. gives a better censure of Austin: for having produced some Texts for
the Creation of the soul, he says, Conatur Augustinus, sed frustra hos locos
elidere. I shall add one more fit for that purpose also. The Text is 1 Pet. 4.
19. Wherefore let them that suffer, according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls unto God, as to a faithful Creator. Here the afflicted
children of God are required, as Christ did, to commend their souls to God, and
the reason is, Because he is a faithful Creator of them; So that Gods Creation
of them is here made an engagement to God to keep them, they being now
sanctified and made holy.

Our souls then are created: In the next place, I say, they are created
Substances: This is to obviate those that make the soul only an accident, or
the crasis and temperament of the humors; Galen (as Cerda on Tertull. de anima
alleges him) in his second Book of prediction by the pulses, has this
passage, Hitherto I have doubted, what should be the substance of the soul, but
by age and experience being made wiser, I dare be bold to affirm it is no other
thing, then the temperament; He was not made wiser, but more absurd and foolish
in this thing. Yea, there is one Dicaearchus much spoken of, that said, The
soul was nothing, it was but an opinion; And the Mortalists they directly join
with Galen's opinion. Who would think, that when we have the Scripture speaking
so plainly about the soul, that it is a spirit, that it removes when the body
is killed, that any should be delivered up to such licentious and abominable
Doctrines?

Again, I add, God creates it a spiritual substance. This opposes the
Sadduces, who denied any spirits. It is plain by Scripture, that they are
substances and spiritual ones, because they subsist without the body.
Tertullian, though he does so acutely perstringe the Philosophers about the
soul, yet some of them were more sound then he, Men (says he) have thought
about the soul, either as Platonis honor, Zenonis vigor, Aristotelis tenor,
Epicuri stupor, Heracliti maestor, Empedoclis furor persuaserint. It is true,
some of these thought the souls to be bodies, and so does Tertullian, and
happily he might have been excused by taking body largely, for that which is
not nihil, in which sense he attributes a body to God, but that he says the
soul is not only a body, but effigiated and shaped also, yea that the souls
differ in sex, which is very irrational; We may then conclude this with a
saying of Numertus, That if any souls are corporeal, it is of those, who say,
souls are corporeal.

A second Proposition is, That though God does create immediately the souls of
all men spiritual substances, yet they are not complete and perfect substances,
as Angles are, but the essential parts of men. Upon this Proposition depends
much weight of this Truth about the communicating of original sin, for we are
apt to think God creates our souls like Angels, perfect and having subsistency
of themselves, whereas they are created as parts of a man, neither do they come
from God any otherwise, If God should create a soul to subsist of it self, and
not to be united to the body to constitute a man, that soul would not be
polluted. But because every soul is created as an essential part of man, and so
has its being: Hence it is, That it comes into the world part of Adam, and so
obnoxious to that curse, which he had deserved; whatsoever then in its first
being is part of man, that is partaker of Adam's sin and curse; But the soul
in its first instant of being is part of man, therefore no wonder if it became
polluted and cursed. The example of that miraculous Resurrection of Lazarus and
others may something clear this, they were fully dead, their souls and bodies
union dissolved, yet because their souls were not made perfect and pure without
sin, and translated into Heaven, but by the power of God detained here on
earth, that the glory of Christ might be exalted, he does unite this soul,
though with pollution to the body: Now Gods uniting of the sinful soul to the
body, did not make him the cause of any sin therein, Because he united it as
part of that man, who yet was not wholly purged from sin. Now the reason why
the soul is created, not as a perfect substance in it self, is, Because it is
the form of man, not an assisting form, and therefore is not in the body, as
when an Angel did assume bodies, or as a man in his house, or as a Musician
uses an Instrument, but a form informing, whereby it is made an intrinsecal
essential part of a man: The truth of this will give much light to our point in
hand, the soul is created by God, The informing form of a man, and so has no
other consideration, but as an essential part of him; and therefore seeing the
man is in Adam, whose soul this is, that is thereby exposed to all the sin of
Adam; Hence it is that there is some difference between the creation of Angles,
and the Chaos at first, which were made absolutely of nothing, and of the soul;
For the soul, though it be created of nothing, yet because a form has an
essential respect to its matter; for which cause Contarenus (as Zanchy says)
affirmed, The soul had a middle way of being between Creation and Generation;
and therefore is that distinction of some learned men, that though the soul be
not ex materia, yet it is in materia, God did not create it, but in the body,
though not of the body, and thus far it may be said to be of man, as that he
is the cause, though not of the being of the soul, yet of the being of it n
this body.

The third Proposition, The soul being thus created an essential part of a man,
and the form informing of him: Hence it is, That we must not conceive the soul
to be first created, as it were, of it self subsisting, and then infused into
the body, but when the materials are sufficiently prepared then as the
Schoolmen express it well, Infundendo creatur, and creando infuditur, it is
infused by the creating of it, and created by infusing; So that the soul is
made in the body organized, not without it; so the Scripture, Zech. 12. 1. Who
forms the spirit of man with him, and because of the souls unon to the body
when thus disposed; Hence it is that man may truly and univocally be said to
beget a man, though his soul be created; for seeing man who is the compositum,
is the Terminus generationis; Hence it is that man begets man, as well as a
beast, though the soul of a beast be from the matter, as we see in Christ, the
Virgin Mary is truly said to be the mother of Christ, though she was not the
mother of his Divine Nature, nor of his soul. Thus man does properly beget
another man, though the soul be by Creation (as the matter also according to
Philosophy is ingenerable) because the soul is united to the body, prepared and
disposed for it by man; from which union resulteth the whole person or
compositum, consisting of soul and body: So that although man be not the cause
of his child's souls being, yet that it has a being in this body, and thereby
such a person produced, he is the cause of it, and by this, if well understood,
you may see original sin communicated to every one, though the soul be
created, In that way which the humane nature is communicated to every one: So
that if we truly know how a man is made a man from his parents, we may also
know how sin is thereby also communicated.

The fourth Proposition is, Although God does daily create new souls, yet his
Decree and Purpose to do so was from all eternity; And therefore in this
respect we may say all men consisting of souls and bodies were present to God
in Adam in respect of Gods Decree, and also his Covenant with Adam, so that
although there be a new Creation, yet there is no new institution or ordination
on Gods part; Whereas therefore it is thought hard, that because Adam was so
many thousand years ago, the soul created now should partake of his sin. The
Answer is, That in respect of Gods Decree and Covenant we were all present to
God in Adam; There is no man has his being De Novo, but unto God he was
present from eternity; so that though the things in time have a succession of
being, yet to God all are present in eternity: Not that we can say they were
actually sinners, or actually justified, but in respect of Gods purpose all
were present, and this will help much to facilitate this difficulty, we are as
present to God in respect of his Decree, and knowledge, as if we had been then
actually in Adam, in which sense it is said, Omnes fuerunt ille unus homo, and
Act. 15. 18. Known to God are all his works from the beginning.

The fifth Proposition. Hence it is that the just and wise God is not to alter,
and change that course of nature, because man has sinned. It is vain to say,
Why will God unite this soul to the body, when thereby both shall be polluted?
For though man has by his sin deserved that this should be, yet God is not
therefore to cease of the continuing and multiplying of mankind, God does keep
to the fixed course of nature, notwithstanding man's sin; And therefore we see
that even to those, who are begot in fornication and whoredom, yet even to
such in that unlawful act, God gives souls, because he will not interrupt the
course of nature.

The sixth Proposition. Adam by his first transgression did deserve that all
who should be of him, should be deprived of the Image of God, and the privation
of that does necessarily infer the presence of all sin in a subject
susceptible: As take away light from the air, and it must be dark; so that this
Proposition answers the whole difficulty: Adam deserved by his transgression,
that all his posterity should become dead in sin; and as he had thus deserved
it, so God had ordained it, and appointed it; The soul then of every one being
made part of that man who is thus cursed in Adam, it becomes deprived of the
Image of God, and so full of sin; So that although God create the soul
naturally good, yet because part of man condemned by his sentence, he denies
it that original righteousness it once had; God does not infuse any evil into
the soul, nor is the Author of any sin therein, but as a just Judge denies
that righteousness, which otherwise the soul might have had: So that you must
not look for an efficient cause of original sin in the soul, but a deficient,
and a meritorious cause: So that the Sum is this, If you ask, How comes the
soul defiled, if created of God? I answer, The Meritorious cause is Adam's
disobedience, by his transgression he demerited this for all that should come
of him. And if you say, Who puts the sin in? I answer, There is no
efficient cause that puts it in: It is enough that God does justly refuse to
give or continue his Image. And this being denied the soul, because a subject
either of holiness or sin, when wanting one must necessarily fall into the
other: Thus it is with the souls being polluted, as it is with night, there is
no efficient cause of the night, only the withdrawing of the Sun necessarily
makes it: So God does nothing positively to make the soul sinful, but
according to his just appointment at first denies that righteousness, which
Adam wilfully put away from himself and his posterity: So that we may as easily
conceive of every child's souls pollution by sin, as of Adam and Eve
themselves. God made them righteous, but upon their transgression they became
unclean and sinful: How was this? God in justice denied the continuance of
this holiness to them any longer, so that they became sinful, not because God
infused evil, but denied him that righteousness to them. This may fully
satisfy the sober and modest minded man.

Therefore the last Proposition is, That we cannot say, the soul being pure in
it self comes into the body, and so is insected; As if some wine should be put
in a poisoned vessel, for the soul and the body do mutually infect one another,
not physically by contact, but morally; For the soul being destitute of the
Image of God in all its operations, is sinful, and so all the bodily actions
are polluted: And then again, the body that having lost the properties it had
before the fall, is a clod and a burden to the soul: Thus they do mutually
help to damn one another, the soul polluteth the body, and the body that again
polluteth the soul; And thus those two which at first God put together in so
near an union to make man happy, are now so defiled, that both from soul and
from body, the matter of his damnation does arise. It is true, we may say
inchoatively, Sin it in the body before enlivened by the soul, in which sense
David bewailed his being conceived in sin, but explicitly and formally it
cannot be, and therefore we are not to conceive sin in the body before the
soul be united, or in the soul before the body be joined to it, but as soon as
they both became man, then they are under the just curse of God, and the soul
being blind, and the body same, they both fall into that eternal pit of
damnation, if the grace of God deliver not.

I may in time show how many ways the soul defiles the body, and the body
again infecteth the soul (viz.) in a moral sense, and therefore let this
suffice for the present; Only from what has been said, let us turn our
Disputation into Deploration, Let the head busied to argue, be now as much
exercised to weep; Jeremiah wished his head was a fountain of tears for the
slain of his people, and that was but a temporal death, and that of one Nation
only, How much more may we desir so for the spiritual death, and that of all in
the world? Say unto all Heretical Teachers, Get ye behind me Satan's, you hinder
and trouble me in my humiliation: Is not the Infant new born swadled and bound
up hand and feet, and so lies crying? A sad representation, that so God might
bind every one, and send him crying to Hell: Thus original sin opened Hell,
kindled the fire of Hell, there was no Hell till this was committed: Oh
grievous necessity and unhappy condition we are all born in! Antequam peccemus
peccato constringimur, antequam delinquimus delicto tenemur. This, even this
seriously considered, should make us have no rest, till we be put into the
second Adam, in whom we have Justification and Salvation.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin.

The Third Part.

HANDLING The Subject of ORIGINAL SIN IN What Part it does reside, and what
Powers of the Soul are corrupted by it.

By Anthony Burgess.

ANCHORA SPEI.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin. PART. III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Pollution of the Mind with Original Sin.
SECT. I.
EPHESIANS. 4. 23. And be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind.
COncerning our Subject of Original Sin, these particulars have been largely
treated on, viz. That it is, What it is, and How it is communicated. The next
thing therefore in our method to be considered, is, The Subject of Inhesion,
wherein it is, in what part it does reside, and what powers of the soul are
corrupted by it. There is indeed made by Divines a two fold Subject of original
sin.

1. Of Predication, the persons in whom it is affirmed to be, and that is in
all who naturally come of Adam, Christ only is excepted; And in this there is
not much controversy, only the Francisean Papists opposing the Dominicans, do
hotly contend, that the Virgin. Mary was by special privilege exempted from
original sin, Scotus seems to be the first, that made it received as a kind
of an Ecclesiastical opinion, whereas formerly it was but thought doubtful, or
at most probable: It is not worth the while to trouble you with this, and I may
have occasion ere the subject be dispatched to say, what will be necessary to
it: I shall therefore proceed to that which is more practical and profitable,
even to search into the seat and bowels of this original sin, that we may be
fully informed, no part of the soul is free from this pestilence. To which
truth the Text in hand will contribute great assistance. And

For the Coherence of it briefly take notice that the Apostle at the 17th verse
gives a short but dreadful Description of a Gentile conversation, or the life
of one without the knowledge of Christ; wherein you may observe a threefold
ignorance or blindness upon all such, so impossible is it that of themselves
they should ever come to see; There is a natural blindness, a voluntary
contracted blindness, and a Judicial one inflicted on them by God, for abuse of
natural light. These there are mentioned in the 18th verse. And in this verse.
19. we have the formidable consequence declared, That being past feeling, no
remorse of conscience in them, They give up themselves to all wickedness with
greediness: Oh that this were only among Pagans! But how many have this
natural, voluntary and judicial blindness and obstinacy upon them under the
light of the Gospel? Yea, their eyes are more blinded, and hearts more hardened,
where the means of grace have been contemned, then in the places where the name
of Christ has not been known. This black condition of Heathens being
described, he compares those of Christians with it, and so we have darkness
and light here set together; And this the Apostle declares, verse. 20. But ye
have not so learned Christ; Christ teaches no such wickedness, yet because
many may have a bare knowledge, and a vain empty profession of Christ, and live
such Paganish lives, he adds a corrective to his speech, which is worthy of
all attention, If so be ye have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus.
This is an excellent limitation, men may know Christ, profess Christ, and yet
not do it, as the truth is in Jesus; that is not to obey the Doctrine of
Christ, as he has commanded; Christ never required that thou should only
make a profession of faith in him, and then for thy life, that that may be full
of vice and corruption, know, if you do so, you know not the truth as it is in
Jesus Christ. We have a like expression, Colos. 1. 6. where the godly are said,
To know the grace of God in truth^, and Tit. 1. 1. There is the acknowledging
of the truth after godliness: Oh let such hear, and let their ears tingle, and
their hearts tremble, who come to Church, profess Christ, and yet run in all
excess of riot! What does any knowledge profit if it be not of the truth as it
is in Jesus, if it be not an acknowledgment after godliness, thou deniest the
faith, and art indeed worse then an Heathen? There is Theologia rationalia and
experimentalis, as Gerson, or Theologia docens and utens. It is this later,
viz. an exercised experimental Divinity, that makes a Divine properly:
Therefore Amesius his definition of Theologia is good, that it is Doctrius Deo
vivendi, a Doctrine whereby we are taught to live unto God. Every wicked
Christian is worse then a Pagan; But who will believe this report? Now that we
may know what it is to know truth as it is in Jesus, he instanceth in a twosold
effect or demonstration thereof:

The first is, To put off the old man with the decitfull lusts thereof. This
old man you heard is original sin, this must be mortified with the immediate
issues thereof: So that a true knowledge of Christ does not only cleanse the
strems, but the fountain also, does not only change the conversation of a man,
but the heart, the affections, the whole man. It goes to the root as well as
the branches.

And the second effect is in the Text, To be renewed in the spirit of your
mind; wherein we are to observe the Duty, and the Subject of it. The Duty is
(...) To be renewed; We read it Imperatively, but in the Greek it is the
Infinitive mood, as also the Duty to put off, mentioned ver. 22. is in the same
mood, for these Infinitives do relate to the Verb, being taught as the truth is
in Christ, to be taught to put off, to be taught to be renewed; If so be we
conceive of those to whom Paul writes, as converted already, then this duty of
renovation, is to be understood of further increased and degrees. To be more
renewed every day, for it is usual with the Apostle to write to those who are
supposed to be in the state of grace, that they should be more sanctified and
reconciled to God. To be renewed, is to have the mind endowed with new
Properties and Qualities; for ignorance, knowledge; for atheism and unbelief,
faith; for sinful and vain thoughts, gracious and holy ones, etc. So that
there are two extreme errors in the expounding of this:

1. Of the Illyricans, who as they held sin to be the substance of a man, so
this renovation they must hold to be substantial, not accidental. But it is
absurd to say, a man must have a new soul essentially in regeneration.

The other extreme is of Socinians, for they holding, There is no such thing as
original sin, they must needs say, That this renovation is only in regard of
contracted sin, and external impiety in the life, not in respect of any
inbred and inherent pollution in the mind: But this also is against the
Scripture.

The second thing in the Text, is the Subject of this renovation, The spirit of
your mind. Concerning the difference between spirit and mind, many thoughts
have been, but either it is an Hebraism, and is no more then the mind which is
a spirit, or else spirit is taken for that which is the most sublime, noble,
and also most active and vigorous in a man. Thus Job 20. 3. we have the spirit
of understanding, And Isa. 11. 2. The spirit of wisdom, the spirit of counsel,
and the spirit of knowledge; Yea, it is sometime applied to the vigorous and
high actings of evil, as Hos. 4. 12. The spirit of whoredom; And the spirit of
whoredoms, Hosea 5. 4. So that when the Apostle does not say, Be renewed in
your mind, but in the spirit of your mind; This supposes, That what is most
choice, excellent and noble, even in the rational part of a man, called for its
dignity (...), yet this is all over polluted by original sin, and so needs
a renovation: As for those who by the spirit would understand the holy Ghost,
that is most absurd, For how can we be renewed in that?

SECT. II.
THe Text thus opened, we may see two Doctrines in the womb of it, the first
implied and supposed, viz.

1. That the mind of every man in all the choice operations thereof, is wholly
polluted and stained.

2. Because it is thus polluted that needs regeneration and renovation as well
as any other parts.

The former Doctrine is only to my subject in hand; for now my work is to show
you, Wherein this contagion does discover it self? And I shall begin with that
which has the greatest dignity in a man, and if that has not escaped
pollution, much less may we think the other parts have; And if the eye be
dark, how great must our darkness be? And before we speak particularly to
that, let us say something in the general about the subject wherein this
original sin is seated.

SECT. III.
FIrst, There has been some, who have not so much seated it in the soul, as
made the very soul and substance of a man to be original sin; So that we
might properly and truly say, Man was sin it self. The Author of this was
Flaccius Illyricus, who in many things is to be praised for his diligence and
industry, but he was of a turbulent spirit, very restless; insomuch that in his
studies at first, he was so greatly tempted, that many times public prayer was
made for him in the solemn Assemblies. ( Vide Horned. Sum. Controv. de
Lutheranismo.) This man out of great earnestness to oppose Papists, yea and the
Lutheran Strigelius, who extenuated original sin, fell into another extreme,
making it to be the very substance of man. It is true, Some have excused him,
as thinking his opinion was sound, only his words were obscure and dangerous,
for he does often distinguish between the Homo Physicus, and the Homo
Theologicus, he makes the Theological man, as he is in such a consideration to
be only sinful. But surely it is as easy to understand Epicurus his Atoms,
Pythagoras his numbers, Plato's Ideas, Aristotle's Entelechias, as Illirieus
his Homo theologicus in the way he lays it down, denying all along, that
original sin is an accident. This opinion made a great rent among the
Lutherans, whereof some were called Substantiarii, others Accidentarii, as
Coceius the Papist relates ( Coccius These. de peccato.) but this is to be
refused with great indignation: Original sin is most intimately cleaving to
us, inseparably joined to the nature of man, yet it is not the nature of man,
for then Christ could not have taken our nature without sin. Though therefore
it be seated in the soul, and that most tenaciously, yet it is not the essence
of a man: But of this more in its time.

Secondly, It is also a great Dispute among the Schoolmen, Whether original
sin be immediately and proximely seated in the essence of the soul, or in the
powers of it? Whether because it is first in the essence of the soul, therefore
the understanding and will are corrupted? Or, Whether these powers are first
polluted and infected by it? But this is founded upon a philosophical Dispute,
Whether the soul and the faculties thereof are distinguished: And therefore I
shall not trouble you with it.

Thirdly, Some Papists have limited original sin only to the affections, to
the inferior and sensitive part of a man, as if sin were not in the
understanding, and reason at all, but in the affections and fleshly part only;
But the more learned of the Papists gainsay this, and do acknowledge, that the
mind as well as other parts is polluted with this leprosy.

SECT. IV.
Wherein Original Sin has infected the minds of all men.
THese things premised, Let us consider, Wherein original sin has infected
the minds of all men, so that in respect thereof that is to be renewed. And

Horrible ignorance of God, and the things of salvation does cover the soul of
every man by nature, even as darkness was upon the face of the deep. Thus Romans
3. you heard the Apostle pronounces generally, There is Rome that
understands, or seeks after God, No, not one. Hence also Ephesians. 5. 8.
unconverted persons are said to be darkness in the very abstract, and that
both because of their original and acquired blindness of mind upon them; What
could the wisest and most learned of the world do in respect of any knowledge
of Christ, if this were not revealed? for this cause it is called the
Ministry, and the Gospel is constantly compared to light, and all the world is
said, To sit in darkness till this does arise; so that our minds are by nature
wholly ignorant about our selves, about God and Christ, which made our Savior
say to Peter, upon his confession, That flesh and blend had not revealed this
to him: whereas then in the state of integrity our minds were as gloriously
filled with all perfections, and abilities, as the firmament with slarres,
there was sapience, in respect of God, science, in respect of all natural
things to be known, and prudence, in respect of all things to be done; now our
eye is put out, and like Sampson, the Philistims can do what they please with
us, for this respect it is, that every creature is better then man, they have a
natural instinct, whereby they know what is proper for them, Opera natura sunt
opera artis, or intelligeniae; They have as much knowledge sensitive (I mean)
as they were made with at first, even the least creatures and most despicable;
yea God is, maximus in minimus, most wonder full in the least things, which
made Austin prefer Fly before the Sun, and that he did more admire, Opera
Formicarum, then Onera Camelorum, the wise works of the Ant, before the heavy
burdens of Camels: Thus all creatures have a suitable knowledge for their end
in their way, only man is in horrible darkness, and is absolutely ignorant
about God or his own happiness. Therefore those opinions of some, who attribute
a possibility of salvation to Heathens, by the natural knowledge they have, do
in effect make void Christ and the Gospel.

Secondly, Original sin does not only deprive us of all knowledge of God in a
saving way, but also fills us with error, and positive mistakes, whereby we
have not only unbelief, but misbelief, our condition were not so universally
miserable, if so be our minds were only in a not knowing, or mere privative
ignorance about God: but oh the gross soul and absurd persuasions men have
naturally about God! The Atheism naturally that is in us, either denying or
doubting about God; but especially, the false and absurd representations of God
to us; It is from the error in man's mind, that Polytheisme has so abounded,
persuading themselves of many gods; yea, the idolatry that has filled the
pagarish world, and under subtle distractions has invaded the Church also,
does abundantly proclaim original ignorance and error in us about divine
things; yea, the wiser men, as the Apostle observes, Romans 1. They became the
more foolish in their imaginations, turning the image of God into the likeness
of the vilest creatures.

But before we proceed, we must answer an Objection, that may be made to the
Doctrine delivered; for it will easily be said, That the corruption hitherto
mentioned in the understanding is actual sin rather then original; Ignorance,
Atheism, I dolatrical thoughts of God, these must necessarily be judged
actual; and if it be so, Why do we ascribe this to original? And indeed this
Objection is commonly made by Papists, against the Positions and Confessions
which the Protestants have made about original sin; for when they discribe
the nature of it, they usually instance in particulars, as horrible ignorance,
Atheism, and dissidence in the mind, etc. To this the Papists reply, saying, We
confound actual and original sin; yea, when we bring that famous place. Genesis
5. 6. The imaginations of the thoughts of the heart, are only evil, and that
continually, to prove original sin, they reply the same thing to that Text
also.

Therefore to clear this, we are to know, that it is true, Atheism, ignorance;
these are actual sins, as they are put in exercise, but yet when we ascribe
them to original sin, we do not so much mean, the actual exercise of these
evils, as the Proneness and propensity of the heart to them: So that our
meaning is, The heart of it self is prone to all these actual wickednesses;
Therefore though we name these as actual, yet you must understand them,
habitually and seminally, there being an inclination to all that impiety.

Only the reason, why we describe original sin thus, as if it were actual
pollution, it is, Because that it is a principle always acting, it never
cease; the sparks of this lust are like those of hell which never go out; as
the heart of a man naturally, never cease its motion, so neither does the
evil heart of a man.

This difficulty being removed, let us proceed to discover further actings of
original sin in the mind, and spirit of man, And

That incapacity, which is in every man's understanding about holy things:
Divine and supernatural things are no more received by him, then a Beast does
apprehend the things of reason; We have this fully affirmed, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But
the natural man receives not the things of God, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned; you see there is no habitude or
proportion between the understannding of a natural man, and spiritual things,
no more, then is between the bodily eye, and a spiritual: (...), is one that
does, excolere animam, such as labor to adorn and perfect the soul, with the
most intellectual and moral indowments that are: a Tully, a Plato, an
Aristotle, these, if brought to Gospel Truth, are not so much as noctuae ad
solemn, Owls to the Sunne-beames; To this purpose also, Romans 8. 7, we have not
only this truth asserted, but also aggravated, where the carnal mind is said,
To be enmity against God, and it is not subject to the Law of God, neither can
it be. By which places of Scripture, it is evident, That the mind of man, has
an utter incapacity, as to any divine things. Indeed there is a passive
capacity, as some express it, and so the mind of man is susceptible of holy
truth, and such a capacity is not in a beast; as that is not capable of sin,
so neither of regeneration; But then there is an active capacity, when the soul
by some ability and power of its own, is able to move to these supernatural
objects; and thus the understanding of the most learned in the world, cannot of
it self receive it, and therefore faith is said, To be the gift of God; so that
we may justly abhor the Arminians, Probitas animi, and Pia doxilitas, which
they make preparatory or main part to conversion: Now there is a twofold
receiving of divine Truths.

1. Speculatively, by a bare dogmatical assent; and even thus, none by nature
can receive the Truths of God; for the Pharisees though they heard Christ
preached, and saw the miracles he did, yet they did not believe with so much as
a dogmatical faith.

2. There is a practical, and experimental receiving of holy Truths in the
power of them, which is here called, the knowing of Truths, as they are in
Jesus, and this much less are we able to receive: To the former is required the
common grace of God; To this a more special one. Wonder not then, if you see
men, even the most learned, naturally so brutish, so ignorant about divine
things, That they have no more understanding, and apprehension about heavenly
things, Oh bewail original corruption, which makes thee so unteachable, so
untractable! Why does not every Scripture-truth, every powerful Sermon have
its full and powerful operation upon thee, but because it does not me et with
a preparedand fitted subject?

Original sin polluteth the understanding, by making it to incline to
curiosity, and a prying into such things, which God has not revealed. Adam's
actual sin, which is our original imputed one, was partly this, They desired
to be as gods, to know good and evil, which has left its impression upon all:
Like the Bethshemite, we desire to be looking into the Ark. The Apostle, 1 Cor.
4. 6, as he would not have the Corinthians, think of men, above that which is
written, so much less of God contrary to that which is revealed: This is a
great evil upon the understandings of men by original sin that now the mind
is not contented with the rule God has given it; They think it a small and
contemptible matter to know no more then what may be known by the Scripture,
but they affect extraordinary things; This curiosity is that which filled the
Church once with so many Schoolmen and their Questions, as Egypt was once
with Caterpillars. It is true, School Divinity has its use, and so far as
they deal solidly, and improve natural reason in any point, they are very
admirable; but when once they fall into their useless, unprofitable and sublime
Questions, where neither the Word of God, or sure reason can conduct them, then
they vanish like smoke in the air: how rash are they in their Disputes about
Angels? With what nice conceits have they obscured the Doctrine of the Trinity?
Insomuch that we may see much of original sin in them, inclining and hurrying
of them to a bold and venturous determination of such things, which God has
not manifested; so that none of their seraphical, sublime, or angelical
Doctors, could begin their Disputations, as John his Epistle: That which we
have seen, we have heard, and our hands have handled; 1 John 1. 1. Though
therefore the Schoolmen have in somethings their great use, yet in their
difficult niceties, which are but as so many cob-webs, there they are as much
to be slighted; as one king did a man, who boasted, he could stand at a
distance and throw a grain of corn through the eye of a needle. Again this
original curiosity of the mind, venteth it self in all those Magic Arts and
Witchcrafts which have abounded in the world; as also in judiciary Astrology,
and such deceitful impostures, men affecting, as Adam did, to be like God, to
be able to declare the things that are to come. Act. 19* 19. They are called,
curious arts. Furthermore this curiosity of the mind is seen, in nauseating and
disdaining known things, and what are already discovered, and ambitiously
thirsting to find out some Veritas incognita, as others have done Terra
incognita, To bring such new things to the world, that were never known, or
heard before: It Is from this sinful curiosity, that men forsake the good Truths
of God, and run after heresies, errors, and whatsoever has novellisme in it:
so that he, who would examine himself about his regeneration, must look to the
renovation of his mind in this particular, as well as any other.

Fourthly, Original sin discovers it self in our minds, by the vanity that
they are filled with, 1 Cor. 3* 20, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise,
that they are vain; If the thoughts of wise men (without the Scripture) be
vain, how much more of men, who have no more then natural ability? And
certainly this must needs be a very heavy censure upon man, that he who has
the best parts, the greatest understanding, yet till grace sanctify, he is but
a vain man; His mind is a vain mind, his understanding is a vain understanding;
many ways the vanity of it might be discovered, as thus, The understanding of
man is naturally more affected with pleasing things, then with solid and sound
Truths; it is more affected with words, language, jests, and merry tales, then
with that matter which tends to spiritual edification; Is not this a great
instance of the vanity upon our minds? to regard leaves more then fruit, chaff
more then good seed, pictures and shows more then substances: whence arises
that delight in embroydered language, in plays and Comedies, and in Romances,
and such bubles, and empty vapors, but from a vanity upon man's mind? To be
pleased with stories, and merry tales, more then a powerful and divine Sermon?
Is not this, because man's mind is vain? Since man's fall, as the will, though a
noble part of the soul, yet does act dependently and slavishly to the sensitive
appetite; we will not what is good, and the acceptable will of God, but what
our sinful affections suggest to us: so the understanding, though the satred
faculty, (as it were) of the soul, yet acts dependently on the fancy, and so
what tickleth and pleases that, the mind also is most affected with. Austin
did much confess and bewail this vanity of his mind, whereby he did disdain the
simplicity of the Scripture, and desired to hear that eloquent Ambrose, not out
of love to matter, but to words; This is a childish vanity, like Children that
delight in a Book for the pictures that are in it, not the matter contained
therein. This vain mind has sometimes affected both Preacher and Hearer, what
applauded Sermons have there been, and yet nothing in them but descanting upon
words, and affecting a verbal pomp, being like the Nightingale Vox and preterea
nihil, like Puppets stuffed with bumbast, having no life at all within them? and
all was accounted prating that was not such a wordy preaching. And, truly,
this vanity has much infected the mind of hearers; men coming to the Word
preached, not as to hear the Oracles of God, with fear and trembling, but as to
the Schools of oratory, looking to the powdring of their words, and the
dressing of the language, as much as to the setting and ordering of their own
hair; Is not this a great evil and vanity, thus to regard the healing of the
finger, when the heart is deadly sick? If thy mind be renewed in this, it will
also appear, and for that vanity, there will be solid gravity.

Original sin fills the mind with exceeding great folly; So that no man
born a natural fool is more to be pitied, then every man who by nature is a
spiritual fool. Those conceited wise ones of the world, who condemn the godly
for a company of fools, they are fools in the highest degree, as may easily be
evinced: If so be ( Job 4. 18.) God is said, To charge his Angels with folly,
(and that, as some expound,) even the good Angels themselves, because that
wisdom they have comparatively to Gods, is but folly; how much more is this
true of man fallen, who has lost that wisdom God once bestowed upon him? If
you ask, Wherein does a natural man's folly appear? Truly in every thing he
does, Eccl. 10. 3, His wisdom: fails him, and he says to every one, he is a
fool; Every oath, every lie, every drunken fit proclaims a man to be but a
fool; If he had the wisdom of Gods Word he could never do so; especially the
folly of man by nature is seen these ways.

1. In making himself merry with sin. It is jollity and sport to him, to be
fullfilling the lusts of the flesh, and is not this folly, to be playing with
the flames of hell? as you see fools go laughing to the stocks, so do they to
hell, Prove. 10. 23, It is a sport to a fool to do mischief; herein then thy
foolish mind is seen, that thou can laugh and sport it so in the actings of
sin, which are the preparatoryes to those everlasting burnings in hell.

2. Thy folly by nature is seen, In preferring a creature before God; what is
this but the fools babble before the Tower of London, as the Proverb is? yet
this folly is bound up in every man, till grace make him wiser; he loves the
creature more then God, he had rather have a drop then the ocean, earth then
heaven, dirt then gold; Is not this greater folly then can be expressed? yet
till regenerated, such a fool thou art, though thou art never so wise in thy
own conceit.

3. We are naturally foolish, In that we attend only to those things that are
for the present, and never at all look to eternity; becoming herein like bruit
beasts, that regard only what is before them. Moses does in the name of God
wish, Oh that my people were wise (Deuteronomy. 32. 29.) that they would understand
their latter end! It is wisdom to look to the future; hence they say, Prudens,
is, qussi porro videns, he sees a far off; but take any natural man, does
all the wisdom he has, ever make him to attend to eternity? what will become
of him at the day of judgment? now he is at ease, and in good liking, but what
shall he do, when that great day shall come? he is far from Hierem's temper,
thinking he heard always that terrible noise sounding in his ears, Arise and
come to judgment; Oh thy folly then! who do in effect say, Give me that
which is sweet here, though hereafter I be tormented to all eternity.

4. Thy folly is abundantly discovered in this, that thou take no pains to
know the best things, the chiefest things, the things that most concern thee.
Naturally thou know nothing of God, or Christ, or the way to heaven, which
yet is the proper end for which God made thee; if folly did not reign in thy
understanding, thou would not be so careless herein: Thou art careful to
know how to live in this world, but not how to live eternally in the world to
come; Thou know how to buy and sell, how to plough and sow, but know not
the principles of Religion, which must save thee, Does not this proclaim thy
folly?

5. Original sin is discovered in our foolish mind, By the inconsiderateness
that it is guilty of. It Is want of consideration that damneth a man.
Intellectus cogitabundus est principium omnis boni, Psalm. 50. Oh consider this,
ye that forget God Did a man consider the majesty of God, the dreadfullness of
hell, ^he shortness of the pleasures of sin, the mortality of the body and
the immortality of the soul, How could he sin? This foolish inconsiderateness
makes man, though mortal, to procrastinate his conversion, he is always
beginning to repent, beginning to reform, Inter caetera mala, hoc habet
stultitia, se^per incipit vivere.

6. Not to enlarge in this, Thy folly in thy mind is seen, By thy imprudence
and injudiciousness; Thou do not judge godliness, the favor of God and
grace, better then the whole world; as the child thinks his nut better then
gold, Sapiens est cui res, sapiunt prout sunt; if thou were wise, things would
savor to thee as they are, earthly as earthly, heavenly as heavenly; so that
the folly of man naturally is seen in this, that he savoureth not the things of
God, he has no judgment to esteem of the true pearl, and therefore will not
part with the least thing to obtain it.

Sixthly, The mind has lost its superiority in respect of the other parts of
the soul, and its subordination to God; both which were the great perfections
thereof; For superiority and preheminency, the mind is now debased, and this
light is put now, not under a bushel, but a dunghill. God endowed man with
understanding, that it might be like a Queen in the soul, directing and
ordering all actions to true happiness, Though the will be chief in power and
efficacy; yet the understanding is in direction and counsel; Insomuch, That the
will is called caeca potentia, a blind power of the soul, being essentially
subordinated to follow the dictates of the understanding; and if the will be
thus subordinate, that is called a rational power participative, though not
formaliter: no wonder then if the sensitive and affectionate part of a man, his
love, his grief, his anger, these were not to rise or stir, but as the
understanding did give orders to them; Thus was the understanding of a man
placed in him, as the Sun in the Firmament, to give light to all the powers
of the soul; but now by original corruption it is dethroned, it is ejected out of
its power, and is made a servant to every lust that reigns in the will, and
the affections; hence it comes about, That whatsoever a man's corrupt heart
carries him unto, presently the mind of man, being like a bribed advocate,
pleads for the lawfullness and the necessity of it. It is true indeed, we
have a rule in Divinity, Nem^ potest credere, quia vult, No man can believe a
thing to be true, merely because he will, but yet the will and affections can
so divert the understanding, or put mists and pretenses before it, that now
it is become like the Sun in a foggy misty day, that cannot put forth its
light: so that if you do ask, What is the true original cause of all heretical
opinions, and corrupt practices? you may say, It Is because the mind does not
keep up its primitive power. As the reason given in the Judges, why so much
Idolatry and other wickedness was committed, was, because there was no King
(no Governor) in Israel, every one did that which was right in his own eyes.
Thus if you ask, Whence is that confusion in a man's opinion, in a man's
practices? It Is because the mind of a man is degraded, the will is carried out
to what it lists, every sinful affection and passion does what it pleases;
So that whereas all our affections and actions should have their first rise
from the guidance of the mind; Now our lusts and affections do first move,
and then the understanding is employed to defend and excuse the lawfulness of
them: Oh then bewail this sad desolation come upon thee! Thy mind and
judgment are become slaves and vassals to every unlawful way, to plead for
that, to defend that, to excuse that: Thus (as the Scripture) when it speaks
of a civil desolation, making a confusion upon the Governors thereof, says,
The heavens are turned into blackness, or, The Sun and Moon into blood; so
it is now upon the face of a man's soul; if reason and judgment were strong
enough to do their office, there would not be that insolency of the
affections, and rebellion in our wills, which does now wholly overpour us.

The second thing in this particular is, The subordination of it to God, and to
his Rule. The mind of a man did then wholly follow the Rule God had prescribed
it. To believe, to think, to judge, as the Rule was, but now it is become
heretical. It Is prone to choose an opinion of its own, a Doctrine of its own;
Although the word Heresy in it self, signify neither good or evil, and
therefore in Eusebius, Constantine applies it to the Christian Religion,
calling it heresy, as Tertullian does the Christian Religion Secta, a Sect;
yet in Ecclesiastical Writers, if not constantly in the Scripture, it is used
in an ill sense, and signifies an election or adhering to a way of our own
devising, and not that which is commanded by God. Tertullian calls Adam's sin
heresin, because committed of his own choice against Gods will: Insomuch that
though there may be many particular causes of heresies, as ignorance, pride,
discontent, covetousness, and such carnal principles; yet the main is, that
proneness in the mind to lift up it self against God and his Rule, having lost
its primitive subordination to God. This want of subordination to God and the
Scriptures, is notably seen in Heretics, who when they perceive Scripture
against them, rather then submit, they will be guilty of Scripture-slaughter,
as Tertullian called it, Marcion (says he) comes not with Stilo sed Machara,
draws his sword, and detruncateth a great part of Scripture: Others, though
not so audacious, yet because they will not submit, do not Materiam ad
Scripturas, but Scripturas, and Materiam accommodare, not submit their opinions
to the Scripture, but the Scripture to their opinions. Valentinus openly
professed, He did amend the Gospel.

In that it makes a man pro^e to deceive and cosen himself, so that sin is
presented as sweet or profitable, and good to be embraced, holy things are
presented as difficult and irksom; Especially this self-deceiving is seen in
the judging of our selves good and right, when indeed we are abominable and
loathing to God; Whence is it that every man's ways are clean in his own eyes?
Whence is it that every man is a Pagmalion in love with himself, or rather a
Pharisee to justify himself? Yea, as it is, Psalm. 50. 21. They judge of God
like themselves, loving what they love, pleased with what they please: As the
Ethiopians, though Christians, yet worshipping the Virgin Mary, paint her like
a Blackmore, because they are black: Now what a fearful pollution is this, to
deceive our selves about God, about sin, about godliness, our own souls? So
that when we can have a pretense, or a color to justify our selves, then we
rejoice: This self-deceiving is often taken notice of by the Scripture, 2. Pet.
2. 13. Gal. 6. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9. and Jam. 1. 22. it is (...), Deceiving your own
selves, putting a fallacy, or a false syllogism upon our selves; And indeed it
might be easily showed, how many false syllogismes a man imposes upon himself;
Does not Presumption argue a divisis ad conjuncta, from the means divided, yet
to obtain the end? Yea, in every prayer, in every religious duty the natural
man takes, Non causam pro causa, because he performs these duties, he
thinks he serves God, whereas it is not an holy principle, or gracious
motive puts him upon them, but formality, customarinesse, or some other
inferior motive; Thus every natural man deceives himself by false causes, he
thinks he repents, he loves God, he has a good heart, he shall be saved,
when alas all this while thou art deceived, and deceiving of thy self; Mourn
then under this native-pollution, that thou art so deceived in all things about
thy self, about the work of grace, about what is flesh, and what is spirit,
that thou art deluded in all things, and take counterfeit for that which is
true and genuine. Under this head we may comprehend all that craft and subtilty
in men (as in the Jesuits) to maintain Idolatry or Heresy; For the Devil as
at first, so still he delights to use Serpents, because they are more crafty
then others; The craft also in man naturally to do mischief, (for which they
are compared in Scripture to Foxes,) does declare, how original sin has all
over infected the mind.

Eighthly, The great pollution of original sin upon our minds is seen, In the
pronenesse to vain, idle, sinful and ^oving thoughts, so that these do
discover an unclean fountain of the heart more then any thing. Whence do these
sparks arise, but from that furnace of sin within thee? The Air is not fuller
of Flies; Egypt was not fuller of Frogs, then every man's heart is naturally of
idle, vain, foolish and impertinent thoughts; Thoughts, they are the immediate
product and issue of original sin; The first born, they are streams that come
immediately from the fountain: Now certainly, if a man had by nature an holy
sanctified mind, he would also have holy and sanctified thoughts. Think you
that Adam in integrity, or the good Angels are troubled with thoughts as we
are? For all the while a man is natural, he never had a good thought in him, he
might have a thought of good, but not a good thought; For as every Cogitatio
mali, is not Cogitatio mala. We may think of evil to abhor and detest, and
this thought of evil is good; So in a natural man, though he may have a thought
about good, yet it is not in a good manner, and therefore evil, though the
object matter be good; What then will prostrate thee, and make thee lie
grovelling upon the ground, loathing thy self, if this do not? Amongst the
millions and millions of thoughts which thou have, there is not one, but it is
either vain, proud, idle, or impertinent; yea our thoughts are not in our own
power, no more then the birds that fly in the air, but they arise antecedently
to our own will and deliberation; And certainly, if vain thoughts be such a
burden to a regenerate man, if they do captivate and inthrall him, which made
one cry out, Libenter (Domine) bonus esse vellem, sed cogitationes meae non
patiuntur, I would gladly be good, but my thoughts will not suffer me; No
wonder, if to the natural man, who is under the power of original sin, that
sinful thoughts hurry him away without any resistance.

Ninthly, Original pollution does greatly defile the mind of a man in the
mutability and instability of it? Insomuch that the judgment of every natural
man, destitute of true light and faith, which does only consolidate the soul,
is like a reed shaken with every wind; he is mutable and various, ready every
day, or every year to have a new Faith, and a new Religion; This makes the
Apostle inform us, That one end of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 14. is, That we be
not carried away with every wind of Doctrine; Such empty straws and feathers
are we, that any new opinion does presently seduce us; and therefore the
Scripture does press a sound mind, and an heart established with grace, which
is the special preservative against such instability. Aquinas makes this the
reason of the good Angels confirmation in grace, and that they cannot now
sin, because such is the perfection and immutability of their natures, that
what their understanding does once adhere unto, they cannot change. Indeed it
is thus with God, that his knowledge is unchangeable, but there is no reason to
attribute this to Angels, and therefore their confirmation in good, is not so
much to be attributed to any intrinsecal cause in themselves, as to the grace
of God establishing them; But how far short was man newly created of such
immutability? How much more then man fallen? From this pollution it is, that we
have so many apostates, that there are Seekers, that there are so many
Neutrals, that there are so many who think any, in any Religion may be saved.
It is true, there may be a just cause of changing our minds in Religion, as
when educated in Popery, or when we have received any heretical opinions, but I
speak here of that instability which is naturally in the mind of a man, that
though he be in the truth, yet there is a proneness to desert it, and to
discover much lenity in the matters of Religion. The Remonstrants go too far
this way, commending this sinfulness under the name of modesty and humility,
and therefore, though in Fundamentals they will grant we may say, This our
faith is, This we do believe, yet in other points (which though not
fundamentals, yet the errors about them may greatly derogate from the glory of
Christ and his grace, as also much prejudice the consolations of those who
truly fear God, as their opinions do.) They commend those expressions, Ita
nobis videtur, and Salvo meliorum judicio. It is our sententia, not our fides:
Now if this were said only in some points, disputed amongst the Orthodox, that
are at a great distance from Fundamentals, it might be received; but they
extend this further, if not to the foundation-stones, yet to those that
immediately join to them, and so do (...), remove such things that will in time
endanger the whole structure of Christianity, and so from Remonstrantisme
proceed to Socinianisme, which is adificari and ruinam, as Tertullian
expresses it ( De praesc.) Such an edification many unsettled spirits meet with.

Original sin does pollute the mind of a man with pride and vainglory, so
that he is easily puffed up with his own conceits, and altogether ignorant of
his ignorance. The Apostle Col. 2. 18. says of some, Vainly puffed up with a
fleshly mind. This Tumor, this Tympany in the mind has been the cause of most
heresies in the Church. The Gnostics boasted in their knowledge, and had their
name from it. The Eunomians did vainly and blasphemously brag, That they knew
God, as well as he knew himself. And some in these later days have not been
afraid to compare themselves above the Apostles for gifts and illuminations. So
that whereas every one should with wise Augur, say humbly, I have not the
understanding of a man, I am more brutish then any man: Or with Austin, when
one admiring his learning used this expression, Nihil te latet; he answered
again, Nihil tristius legi, because he knew the falsehood of it, because of his
ignorance even in innumerable places of Scripture: They equalize themselves to
Angels, yea to God himself. This pride, this self-conceit is a worm bred in the
rose, and the more parts men have, the more does this disease increase. Matthew
Paris relates of a great Scholar, much admired for his learning, who in his
Lectures once in the Schools, proving the Divine Nature, and also Incarnation
of Christ with mighty applause, did most arrogantly say, That Christ was
beholding to him for this Dispute, that he owed, as it were his Divine Nature
to his learning, as if he had not been God, if he had not proved it; upon which
blasphemy he was immediately stricken with ignorance, and such sottishness,
that he was afterward taught the Lords Prayer by a little child. This pride
of mind is worse then all other pride; And certainly that is a great effect of
original sin upon us, that we are apt to take such contemplative delight
about our own notions and apprehensions, being therein guilty of spiritual
fornication. This pride of mind is seen also in owning and defending even the
truths of God, not as his, but as they are our own opinions, out of which we
may raise our own glory, whereas truth is not mine, of thine, or a third man's,
but the Lords, Cave ne privatum dixeris ne a veritate privemur.

Eleventhly, Original sin polluteth the mind in regard of the difference and
diversity of thoughts and judgments of men in the things of God. Had Adam
continued in the state of integrity, all had been of one mind, of one way: In
Heaven also, when all imperfection shall be done away, they shall all think and
speak the same things; but now there are divisions and different ways in
Religion, one admiring that which another condemns, which proclaims that
man has a Babel upon his understanding. It is no wonder, that among
Philosophers there were such infinite Sects; for if you view that part of the
world which owneth the Christian Religion, what varieties, what differences,
what oppositions are there, and that though we have the Scripture to guide us?
This does evidently manifest, That the mind of man is filled with deep
pollution by original sin.

Twelfthly, The horrible pollution of the mind is seen in its aptness to
receive all the Devils impressions and delusions, so that the most horrid and
dreadful blasphemies that can be imagined, have yet been entertained and
broached by some men. Now the Devil could never possess the mind of a man so,
but because of this original corruption. Some there were called Caiani, that
boasted of Cain, and commended Esau, yea Judas, and that he did not sin in
betraying Christ. Some have called the holy Trinity, Triceps Cerberus. Some
have thought themselves Christ, and the Spirit of God. Now how could these
devilish delusions be ever believed, if the mind had been free from sin? The
Enthusiasmes; The Revelations that the Monasterii Anabaptis, as also John of
Leiden pretended to, upon which they acted resolutely and violently, may
abundantly teach us, what monstrous births the mind of a man will deliver, if
left to it self: So that what is said of the Devil incubus, bodily, is much
more true of the mind: What will not the understanding of a man believe, and
be resolute for, when it has once, ( Pleniorem gratiam a Diabolo) obtained
more of the Devils grace, as Tertullian speaks ironically of some Heretics,
De praesc.

Thirteenthly, In this is original pollution discovered, that the knowledge we
have, and the light we enjoy* whether imbred or acquired, without Gods grace we
are the worse for it; So that our understanding in us is but like a sword in a
mad man's hand, by it we fight against God, and set with all enmity against
divine things. The more knowledge without grace, the greater opposition to
Christ. The learned men very often have been the Patriarchs of all heresies;
They brought in a Stoieum, Platonicum, Dialecticum Christianismum, as
Tertullian speaks; They brought in a Platonical, an Aristotolical
Christianity: Insomuch that Religion has suffered far more from unsound
learning then ignorance, though indeed sanctified learning has been greatly
instrumental to propagate the Kingdom of Christ.

Lastly, The mind is polluted and weakened by original sin, even in the
knowledge of natural things: Insomuch that there is little or nothing known
certainly by us; Our knowledge comes in by the senses, and they (as Philo
alludeth) like Lot's children make their father drunk, they hinder us of true
knowledge. The Academici thought nothing was known certainly in natural things;
And Cerda on Tertullian makes Lactantius and Arnobius to incline to that
opinion; Certainly, our knowledge in natural things is very weak and confused.
The Devil indeed, though he has lost all spiritual knowledge, yea, and (as
some say) is wounded much in his natural abilities, yet still he retains much
knowledge, called therefore (...), but man has a body that does much clogg and
press down his soul, and hence his ignorance is greater.

Thus we have in a short Table represented the manifold pollution upon man's
understanding by original sin; more particulars happily might have been
instanced, but these may suffice to make us astonished and amazed at our
selves: Oh how incurable art thou when thy mind is thus defiled! that is the
watchman in thy soul to keep off all sin, and if the watchman be blind, how
hopeless is it? It Is this that makes such an obstruction in conversion, which
is wrought first upon the mind; while therefore that ignorance, that folly,
that unbelief reigns there, no Ministry, no Preaching does any good: Oh that
thou did know thy ignorance, what a beast thou art! How foolish and destitute
of all true wisdom? How quickly then would thou spread out thy arms to
receive Christ in the fullness of his Offices? Yea it is the corruption on your
minds that makes you not able to understand even this Sermon: Oh then be as
those blind men, crying and praying, Lord, that we might receive our sight!

CHAP. II.
Of Original Sin polluting the Conscience; Setting forth the Defilement of
Conscience, as it is quiet, stupid and senseless; And also when it is troubled
and awakened.
SECT. I.
TIT. 1. 15. But even their mind, and conscience is desiled.
HItherto we have been discovering original sin, as seated in the
understanding, the Metropolis (as it were) of the soul. We now proceed to
manifest it, as polluting the Conscience of every man by nature; and certainly
this is more lamentable and dreadful then the former; For if the understanding
be amongst the other powers of the soul, as gold amongst other metals,
conscience is the pearl or diamond in that gold; If the understanding be the
eye of the soul, conscience is the apple of the eye: who would not think that
our conscience like Job's messenger had escaped in the fall of Adam, bringing
us tidings of all the spiritual loss we had thereby, only that was not hurt,
but this Text will inform us, That from the head to the sole of the feet (as it
were) there was no place free, but that we are totum vnlnus, so many Lazarus's,
not one place without these spiritual ulcers.

For the understanding of the Text, we may take notice, that Titus exercising
his ministerial office now at Crete (whether as a settled officer and
Metropolitan, which some highly contend for, or rather as a temporary and
extraordinary officer, an Evangelist, is not here to be disputed.) Paul writes
this Epistle to him concerning his end, why he left him there, and also
exciteth him to a lively performance of his office, especially in a sharp and
severe rebuking of them, because of their doting still about Jewish fables and
ceremonies, (...), clearly without ambiguities, (...), so Varinus, or (...), so
Hesychius, or cuttingly (as it were) to go to the bottom of the putrified sore,
that no unsound core be left behind, so Illyricus. And to evidence the crime of
the Cretians the more, he brings a testimony from Epimenides, whom he calls
their Prophet by way of conception, for they esteemed him so, sacrificing to
him, for he pretended in furious fits to be like one acted with a divine spirit
and rapture. Now this famous brand he stigmatizeth the Cretians with, That they
were always liars, etc. And although Epemenides, being a Cretian, it might be
retorted that he lied in saying, The Cretians were liars, yet the speech is to
be understood not of every one, but of the general part, and therefore the
Apostle says, This witness is true; From whence Aquinas gathers, That
wheresoever there is any truth, a Doctor in the Church may make his use of it,
because all truth is of God. The use here is not so much for confirmation, as
conviction; if you ask, Why must these Cretians be so sharply rebuked for their
Doctrine about Jewish Ceremonies, seeing Romans 14. The Apostle does there
prescribe another deportment to such ( viz.) of for bearance and condescension?
The Answer is, Those that are there spoken of, were such as did err out of
infirmity and weakness, but these in Crete were such as did obstinately and
pertinaciously defend these false Doctrines, therefore they must be severely
dealt with, yet the end of this censure is medicinal, That they may be sound in
the faith, all error is a sickness and a disease.

The Apostle having thus informed about Titus his duty, he proceeds to some
Doctrinal Instruction about those erroneous opinions, instancing in one, which
was greatly controverted in the Infancy of the Church, and that is about the
choice of meats and abstinence from them. To obviate any corrupt Doctrine
herein, he lays down this weighty Proposition, To the pure all things are
pure, that is, to such who are sanctified by the Christan says, and are righly
instructed in Christian liberty, all things ( viz.) of this kind (not adultery,
fornication, or such sins) are pure to them, they may lawfully use them:
Every creature as the Apostle elsewhere, being sanctified by the Word of God and
prayer. This Truth he amplifieth by the contrary Proposition, To the defiled
and unbelieving, nothing is pure, this is more then if he had said, All things
are unclean, for that might have been limited, as in the former to things of
this kind, but saying, that nothing is pure to them, is signified hereby, that
all is pitch (as it were) that the, touch; That like a Leper, even good things
do not purify them, but they defile them: And then you have the cause and
fountain of this, Even their mind and conscience is defiled; No wonder the
streams are polluted, when the fountains are: By mind, is meant the speculative
part of our understanding, by conscience, the practical part; and therefore
having spoken of the pollution of the former, we now proceed to the later.

This Text is deservedly brought by Protestant Authors to prove, that all the
actions of unregenerate persons, and much more of Infidels, are altogether
sin, that there is not one truly-good action to be found amongst them, and
that because the mind and conscience is thus all over polluted. The Popish
Interpreters, because they are for the Negative, yea some going so far, as to
plead for the salvation of Infidels, though without the knowledge of Christ, do
limit the Text too much, as if it were only to be understood of those whose
minds were not informed with true knowledge, nor their consciences rightly
guided in those Disputes about Judaical Ceremonies, as if to such only all
things were unclean; but although these persons gave the occasion, yet the
Apostle makes an universal Proposition, and therefore he does not only say,
the defiled, but unbehevers, which comprehends all those that have no true
knowledge of Christ; and the reason is univocally belonging to every one, for
every man's mind and conscience without says is polluted, and cannot please God.

The Fountain thus cleared, this stream of Doctrine flows from it, ( viz.)

That the consciences of all men by nature are polluted and defiled; Even their
mind and constience (says the Text) signifying by that expression, that there
remains no hope (as it were) for them, when the foundations are thus removed.
To this defiled conscience in Scripture is opposite (...), a good conscience, 1
Pet. 3. 16. (...), 1 Timothy 3. 9 a pure or clean, and that by the blood of
Christ, Heb. 9. 14. (...), Heb. 13. 18, (...), Act. 24. 16. And this kind of
conscience only those that are regenerate have: But an evil conscience is
(...), as here in the Text (...), as Heb. 9. 22. (...), 1 Timothy 4. 2. There is
also (...), a weak conscience, but that the godly may have. The conscience were
are to treat upon is the defiled one, and that not so much as made more impure
and sinful by voluntary impieties, as what it is by nature in evey one; And
before we come to demonstrate the pollution of it, it is good to take notice of
the nature of it. The New Testament uses the word (...) about thirty times,
and that for conscience. In the Old Testament the Hebrew word Madani is once
rendered, Eccles. 10. by (...), but most commonly that which in the New
Testament is called conscience in the old is called Leb, the heart of a man: So
Davia's heart is said to smite him, apponere ad cor, and redire, and cor, are
nothing, but the acts of conscience, and thus sometimes in the New Testament, 1
John 3. 20. If our heart condemn us. It Is observed that the first signification
of the word Leb, is a conspersion, or meal sprinkled with water: Thus the heart
of a man is a lump (as it were) watered and sprinkled with some common
principles and apprehensions about God, and what is good and evil: As for the
nature of conscience it self, it is not good to be too nice in Scholastical
Disputes about it, remembering that of Bernard, There was Multum seientiae, but
param conscientiae in the world. It Is disputed, Whether conscience be a power
or an habit, or an act only? that it is not a power Aquinas proves, because
that can never be removed, or laid aside, or changed, whereas conscience may;
Some say therefore it is an habit, others, as Aquinas and Dr Ames, answering Mr
Perkins his Objection, Why it cannot be an act, that it is an act? But
certainly, as scientia is sometimes taken for that which is by way of a
principle or habit in man, and sometimes for that which is by way of act; So
also it is with conscience, it takes into its nature both that practical habit
(called by Aristotle, Intellectus, or the habit of first principles) and also
the actual application of them, for if conscience were not habitual, as well as
in act; There were no conscience in men when they are asleep, which yet cannot
be denied unto regenerate persons: So that as in Scripture, says and love are
taken sometimes for the habit of those graces, sometimes for the acts of them;
so also conscience is taken both for the principle, and the act it self; For to
the acting of conscience there is required (as all observe) a practical
Syllogism: Thus, Whosoever is a fornicator, a drunkard, a curser, cannot
inherit the kingdom of God: But I am such a sinner: Therefore I cannot inherit
the kingdom of God. Or on the contrary, To him that believes, and is of a
broken contrite heart, pardon of sin is promised: But I believe and am of a
broken heart: Therefore to me pardon of sin is promised. Thus conscience is
well called the practical understanding, for whereas the speculative has for
its object, that which is merely true; this looks upon it as ordinable to
action, as such a truth is to be brought into particular application. To every
acting then of conscience completely, there is required a Syllogism, either
interpretative or formal; And as Dr. Ames says well, Conscience in the major
Proposition is Lex, in the Assumption it is Testis, in the Conclusion it is
Judex. In the first Proposition, there it is by way of a Law, dictating such a
thing to be true; In the Minor it is a Witness, bearing witness either against
or for our selves; And lastly, it is a Judge passing sentence according to the
premises; And in that it is called conscience it does relate to another, a
knowledge with another, that is either our selves; so that conscience in its
actings is conceived as a person, as it were, distinct from us, and so that
witnesses with our hearts, what we are, and what we have done; Hence if a man's
conscience lay a sin to his charge, though all the world free, him, yet he
bears guilt and terror about with him, Quid proderit tibi non habere
conscium habenti conscientiam, or else, which is more probable, it is called
conscience, or knowledge with, in respect of God: So that in the actings of
conscience, there is a sense and apprehension of the knowledge of God, and his
presence; Therefore conscience does always bear some aspect to God, this God
will see, this God will punish, this God has forbidden, and therefore let me
betime take heed how I do it; So that while conscience has any stirrings and
vigorous actings there is some hope in a man. Although it be thus generally
received by all, that conscience belongs to the understanding, yet Durand makes
it something probable ( Lib. 2. Distinct. 39. Quast. 4.) That if it be not the
will, yet the will is necessarily included in the workings of conscience, so
that conscience does denote understanding and will also; For that act of
conscience which is called remordere, to bite and sting a man, to make him
grieve and be sad upon the committing of sin, must flow from the will.

Secondly, Although man has lost the Image of God, and be thus all over
polluted, Yet he has not lest, neither his soul, or the faculties thereof with
some imbred principles both speculative and practical, which can no more be
separated from the soul, then the beams from the Sun. Hence that habit of
practical principles, such as, that there is a God, that he is to be
worshipped, that Parents are to be honored, is called (...), a conservando,
because these are kept and preserved still, or rather as Martinius in his
Lexicon out of Hierom, because these do instigate and incline to keep us from
sin in our actions. The Scholmen commonly call it Synderisis, and say, It is
as much as con-electio, but this is, because of their ignorance of the Greek
tongue. These Relics of Gods Image are lest in us still, even as after some
great fire of a stately Palace, there remain some sparks long after; or in the
demolishing of glorious Towns, there will some rudera, some remnants appear of
such a building. It is true, This is questioned by some, Illyricus out of his
vehement desire to aggravate sin, denies there is any sense or knowledge of
a God left in a man more then in a bruit, and endeavors to answer those
places of Scripture, which are brought to prove those common principles, or
implanted knowledge in a man by nature. The Socinians also, (though plowing
with another heifer) do deny any implanted knowledge by a God, but that it
comes by same and tradition: On the other side Pelagians, Arminians, and some
Papists fall into another extreme, for they hold such principles about God, and
what is good, that they may be light enough to guide us to salvation. It is not
my work now to examine either of these, for the truth is between these two.
There are some implanted practical notions in us about God, and what is good,
against those that err in the defect, and yet they are no ways able to conduct
to eternal happiness against those that err in the excess. To prove this will
be to anticipate my self in the protract of this Discourse about original
sin; Therefore here only we take it for granted, That there are such
principles, as also a conscience to discern between good and evil, which though
it be greatly polluted, Yet this candle of the Lord, (as it is called, Prove 20.
27. searching the inward things of a man) is not quite extinct, Whether these
common principles, are naturally propagated as the body is, (as the Lutherans
say, who hold the Traduction of souls from parents) or, whether they are De
Novo created in the creation of the soul, as the dissentient party from that
opinion must hold, is not here to be debated, we may conclude, That the soul
has a natural testimony in it self about God, and therefore in sudden
calamities does immediately cry out to him, which made Tortullian say, O anima
naturaliter Christiana!

Thirdly, Because conscience does thus witness with God, and as it were in Gods
stead; Hence it is, That is has such a command and power over a man, that we
must not go against conscience: We may go against our wills, against our
affection, but we must not go against our consciences, no not when they are
erroneous, and though they dictate sin, as Romans 14. ult. Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin; and be that doubts, is condemned; conscience is but an
inferior Judge, God and the Scripture are superior to it; so that when
conscience prescribes any thing, and we come to know it is against Gods Word,
then we are to reject it, as the inferior Magistrates command is made void,
when the superior does countermand; but while the practical dictate of
conscience does abide, and we know not that God does forbid it, then we must
not go against it; and the reason is, because it witnesses to our apprehension
with God; and therefore to go against it, though it may not be materially a
sin, because in an error, and in a delusion, yet formally it is, because we
contemn God and his Authority over us: The very Heathen could say, (...),
conscience is a God to every man. It is true, that Atheistical Writer, ( lib de
Cive.) As he does most profanely determine, That it is a seditious opinion, to
hold faith and holiness are supernaturally infused and inspired; so also to
hold, that to discern between good and bad, just and unjust, is a duty
belonging to the conscience of private men, in what they are to act. What is
this, but to reach men Atheism by art and precepts? As Logic and Philosophy
are taught, and does it not condemn the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, as being
incompatible with obedience to Magistrates. Seeing then that conscience is thus
left in a man with so great power and authority, seeing by it, good is to be
done, and sin avoided, the pollution of it will be the more dreadful, and
lamentable: what hope is there of man's power to convert himself to God, when
the conscience is thus wasted by sin? If the watchman be blind, if the
witness be dumb, if the judge be corrupted, How can any saying reformation be
upon us? If the falt be unsavory, which is to season other things, what is it
good for, but to be cast away? this shipwreck of a good conscience, which all
made in Adam will undo us for ever, were not grace interposing.

SECT. II.
A more particular Discovery of the Pollution of every Man's Conscience by
Original Sin.
THe work next in order, is to discover the pollution of every man's conscience
by original sin, And

First, It Is covered over with the veil of Blindness.
There is naturally a blindness and a veil upon it, whereby it horribly
misjudgeth, and so deserves the Prophets woe, calling evil good, and good
evil, light darkness, and darkness light. Take the conscience of an Heathen,
not enlightened by Gods, Word, and what darkness covers the face of it? how
inthralled to Idols, as if they were a god that could either damn of save?
yea, the consciences of some Heretics have had such Egyptian darkness upon
them, that they have thought they have served God by doing most abominable, and
unnatural things; Insomuch that had not some of the Ancients, worthy of credit,
delivered such things about them, we could never have believed that the
conscience of a man could be so far blinded, as to think such things lawful,
Vid. Cerd. i^ Tert. de presc.
much less a worship of God. The Gnostics taught, That fornications and
uncleaness were frequently to be exercised, so as to avoid all conception, and
if a child did follow, they would draw it from the womb, beat it in a ^^rter,
season it with honey and pepper, and so eat it, saying, That in this manner
they did celebrate the great Passover. The Carpocratians also affirmed, That
every one was bound to commit sin, and that the souls were put into the
bodies, till they did fulfill the measure of their iniquities, applying that
in the parable to this purpose, Thou shall not go out till thou have paid the
last farthing. So the Montonists made a sacrifice of the blood of an infant a
year old, which they did with needles (in a most cruel manner) prick to death:
These also said, That it was as great a sin to pull a leaf off the tree, as
to kill a man. The Donatists would throw themselves from steep mountains and
drown themselves in waters, to make themselves Martyrs; what horrid blindness
was here upon their consciences? It is true indeed, these were not suddenly
made thus abominable, Therefore here was a voluntary contracted blindness upon
their conscience, and a judicial one inflicted upon them, God giving them up to
blindness, yet had there not been such imbred error upon the conscience, such
natural blindness upon it, it could never be improved to such height of
impiety: Oh then groan under this blindness that is naturally upon thy
conscience! That which should be the Pilot to guide the ship of thy soul and
body to an eternal haven, that knows no Compass, beholds no Star, but
being practically blinded carries thee to hell, while thou art thinking, thou
art failing to heaven: That which should be the rule to thy actions is all over
crooked and perverted: Thus every man's conscience is naturally in the dark, and
makes us fall into every ditch, because the blind leads us; so that while
the foundation is thus destroyed, there is no hope either of conversion or
salvation: Thou that wallowest in thy sins, thou that art upon the brinks of
hell, and yet rejoycest and make thy self blessed; Oh that thy conscience
were enlightened! Oh that the Lords candle within thee did give any light! what
a terror and an amazement would thou be to thy self? thou art no better then
a bruit, till this conscience in thee is able to inform, and direct thee.

Secondly, II. With Senslesness and Stupidity.
Conscience is naturally polluted, not only by the blindness, but also by the
senselessness and stupidity that is upon it. This is the evil polluted
conscience, lying in every man's breast fast asleep; so that though one sin be
committed after another, Though lusts as so many thieves come to steal thy soul
away, yet this dog does not so much as give one bark: Does not experience
abundantly confirm this? see you not most men going on in all evil and
wickedness, so that you would think they dare neither eat or drink or sleep,
lest so many Devils should come and carry them quick to hell? yet they have a
stupefied conscience, it never gives them one blow, or a check for it: how
comes this serpent in thy breast to be thus benumbed, that it does not give
one hiss? The expression you heard of an evil conscience, was a feared one,
That is (as some expound it) a senseless hardened one, like any part of the
body that by burning is made insensible: Others say, That as a putrified part
of the member of the body by incision is cut off; so (they say) it is a
conscience cut off from a man, that he has none at all. Others they allude
thus, As brands and marks of infamy are made by hot irons upon the shoulders
and faces of stagitious persons; Thus it is a conscience that is branded and
noted by all, whereby he is made infamous and a reproach, where he lives. All
these explications may well be taken in, and although the Apostle speaks
there of some enormous wicked men, more vile then ordinary, yet as Paul, Romans
3. does apply, to all men by nature, what the Psalmist had spoken of some
notorious, and most ungodly enemies of the Church: because the seed and root of
these is in all; so we may appropriate this feared conscience to every man
naturally, whereby a man commits gross and foul sins, and yet finds not one
prick or stab at his heart for it; What made David, when he had numbered the
people to have his heart smite him presently, but because his conscience was
sanctified and made tender by God, whereas thou can a thousand times fall
into the same gross-sinnes, and thy conscience gives thee not one lash for it?
Is not this because thy conscience is stupefied? so that it has made thee in
all thy sins, as Lot was, when made drunk by his daughters, He knew not in
the morning what he had done. Thus with the same stupidity and sottishness do
thou act sin, it comes from thee, as excrements from a dying person, and
thou have no apprehension of them: as in sleep the stomach does digest that
meat, which if waking would so molest it, that there would be no ease, till
exonerated: Thus while conscience is asleep, those things are committed, which
if it were tender, it would with fear and trembling fly from. O men bitterly to
be lamented and mourned over! Conscience which is set as a schoolmaster to
direct and reproove thee, is become a flatterer, or rather lies stark dead
within thee, that the Devil, and sin, in all the lusts thereof, may hurry
thee whether they please, and conscience does not contradict; so that you may
as well offer light to the blind, speech to the deaf, wisdom to the bruit
beast, as publish the great truths and commands of God to them, while
conscience is thus stupefied within them; Therefore in conversion the first
work of grace is to make this tender, and sensible, even of the least sin.

SECT. III.
The Blindness and Stupidity of Conscience discovered in the several Offices
and actings of it.
THirdly, Because this pollution of the conscience is expressed in the general,
(viz.) blindness and stupidity. Let us examine how this sinfullness is seen in
the several offices and actings of conscience, for which God has placed it in
the soul, And

1. One main work of conscience is, to apply, what we read in the Scripture as
generally spoken, conscience is to apply it in particular. When it reads the
threatenings and cursings of the law to such sins as thou art guilty of, then
conscience is to say, This belongs to me, This curse, This burden, is my
curse it is my burden: Because David did not let his conscience do its duty in
application. David could condemn sin in general, His wrath is kindled
against such sinners as himself in the general, Nathan was forced to be in
stead of conscience to him, saying, Thou art the man: Thus conscience, if not
polluted, when it hears any woe denounced against such and such sins, then
that stands up, and says, Thou art the man; hence God gives the commands by
particular application, Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not steal,
that conscience may say, This Commandment belongs to me; As natural bodies they
act by a corporal contact, so the Scripture works upon the soul by a
spiritual contact, and that is the application of conscience; Insomuch that if
we do a thousand times read over the Scriptures, if we hear Sermons upon
Sermons all our life, if conscience does not apply, all becomes ineffectual.
And this may answer that Question,

How it comes to pass that a man can commit those sins, which he knows to
be sins, which his conscience tells him are sins? Who are there so much
stupefied and besotted by sin, that do not in the general know, that the
ways they live in are wicked, that they provoke God, that they ought not to do
so? How then is it possible, that they should close with those sins that they
know to be so, seeing the will cannot will evil, as it is evil.

Now the Answer is, This arises from the defect of conscience, she does not
particularly make such a powerful application pro hic and nunc, as it ought to
do; There is therefore a general knowledge, an habitual knowledge of such
things to be sins; yea it may be a particular apprehension, that they are now
sinning and offending God; but this is only a speculative apprehension, it is
not a practical one produced by conscience in thee: Oh therefore that all our
Auditors were delivered from this original pollution of conscience, for
therefore we preach in vain, and you hear in vain, because no application is
made to your own hearts! None brings the truth, the command, the threatening to
his own soul, saying, This is my portion, none so guilty as I am in this
particular, and thus (as she said to the Prophet) Thou have brought my sins
to my mind; or as the woman of Samaria concerning Christ, He had told her of
all that she had done: Thus faith the applying conscience, This Sermon brings
my sins to my mind, This Sermon tells me of the wickedness at such a time
committed by me: It was the Prophets complaint of his hearers, None said, What
have I done? They did not make a particular application; Therefore till the
grace of God quicken the conscience, making thee to cry out, What shall I do, I
have sinned? Gods Word has found me out; It is me the Law condemns; It is me
that the curses belong to, as if I were mentioned and named, as if I had heard
a voice from Heaven, saying, Thou Thomas, Thou John, here is thy sin, here is
thy doom; Till (I say) this be done, all thy knowledge in the general, all the
Texts of Scripture in thy memory, they have no influence at all.

Secondly, Herein is the corruption of the conscience naturally seen, That
though it does apply, yet it is in so weak and cold a manner, that it has lost
its activity and predominancy over the affections and the will of a man:
insomuch that though conscience do speak, do rebuke, do apply, yet a man cares
not for it; The affections and the will are not kept in awe by it: Thus
although conscience in many does not so much as stir, it is stark dead, yet
in many it does sometimes apply, bringing home the Word of God to the heart, so
that he cannot but confess, if he does thus and thus he sins, but then
conscience is too weak, affections and passions like Amnon to Tamar are too
strong, and consuperate her, whether she will or no: Is not this the dreadful
condition of many, who frequent our Congregations, whose consciences condemn
them daily? Thou art such a sinner, thy ways are damnable, but they slight and
despise these applications of conscience, as rude Scholars the authority of
their Master; what care they for the Monitor in their breast? Like Balaam they
will press forward to their wickedness, though conscience stand like an Angel
with a sword in his hand to stop in the way. Romans 1. 18. The Apostle speaks
excellently to this purpose, They detain the truth in unrighteousness, they
keep conscience a prisoner, gladly would that do its duty, but they imprison
and shackle it; now this weakness is come upon conscience by original sin,
otherwise Samson like, nothing could bind that, but it would command the will
and affections, yea the whole man to obey it: Oh the pitiful estate then of
such men, who are sinners against conscience, profane against conscience,
whose lusts are stronger then their conscience! As it is with some poor
prisoners, they go up and down with their Keeper; Thus do these men, they go
from place to place, from company to company to commit their sins, and
conscience as their keeper follows them up and down, only they despise and
contemn the dictates of it, which will be woeful in the later end.

Thirdly, Though conscience may apply, Yet as it does it weakly and faintly, so
also seldom, and not constantly, nor daily. The Cock crew once or twice, before
Peter remembered himself; Conscience may apply once or twice, yet the noise of
lusts drown the voice of it. Therefore unless it speak frequently, unless it
be applying often, as the Prophet did three times to the dead child, there will
not be any spiritual life procured: Thus you have the consciences even of
natural men in some fits, under the expectations of some great and eminent
judgments: They find the power of conscience upon them, as Pharaoh, Ahab and
Felix, who trembled under Paul's preaching, but then this is a flash only; it is
like a sudden clap of Thunder that terrifieth for the present, but when past is
presently forgotten: Thus in fears of death, under some powerful Sermon, thy
conscience gives a blow, a sharp prick into thy heart, for the while thou art
in some agony, in some terror, but because conscience does it not often, never
giving thee over, till it has recovered thee, hence it is that thou returnest
to thy old stupidity again.

Fourthly, As conscience naturally does not its duty in applying, So neither in
witnessing, in bearing testimony to our actions, which yet is one great end why
conscience is put into a man. It is ordinarily said, Conscientia est mill
testes; conscience is a thousand witnesses, and so indeed when it does bear
testimony to a man's action, it is more then a thousand, it is more then all the
world; yea, it is not only mill testes, but mill tortores, a thousand
tormentors, but (alas) it is so defiled, that in many things, if not in all
things, it fails, and gives (at least) no true witness at all; For if there
were not this pollution upon it, With what a loud voice would it cry to thee,
saying, I know, and God knows, what are the sins that thou daily live in?
What little regard this witness has, appears, That if men can accomplish
their impieties, and none behold them, if there be no witnesses to confirm it
before men, they matter not at all, for the witness that conscience, and God
can bear against them: Oh this vileness of thy heart, that thou runnest from
the eyes of men, but not considerest the eyes of God, and of thy own conscience
that behold thee! Though indeed thy conscience is for the most part mute and
speechless, lets thee alone, do what thou will, it will not witness against
thee, but is bribed rather, and speaks for thee, and flattereth thee. Bewail
then the sinfulness upon conscience even in this very particular, that it does
not bear witness to thy evil actions, or when it does, it is so coldly, and
languidly, that thou can hardly hear the voice of it, whereas, as the Prophet
(which is like an external conscience in the Church) is, To lift up his voice
like a Trumpet, to inform of transgressions, and not to spare: Thus it should
be with conscience in thee; And as there is a woe to that people whose Pastor
is a dumb dog, no less is it to those whose conscience also is a dumb dog; So
that though the witnesses and testimonies of conscience against thy self, and
actions be troublesome and vexatious, thou can not eat, or drink, or sleep for
them, yet this is more hopeful, and may be more preparatory to conversion,
then when thy conscience will say nothing, or is corruptly bribed, saying to
thee in all thy actions, as Absalom did to every one that came to him, That his
cause was good; but above all these cold and soft whisperings of conscience, as
if that were afraid of thee, more then thou of it, are notoriously discovered
in the actings of secret sin; For if thy iniquities be committed secretly,
though thou live in secret uncleanness, in secret thieving and cosening in
thy dealings, so that the world does not know it, thou think all is well
with thee: Now how could this be, if conscience did roundly bear witness to
these secret sins? This would as much shame, affect and torment thee, as if
all the world did know what thou have done in private: Oh but this conscience
is muzzled! Or as was said of Demosthenei, when he would not plead for a
Clyent, but pretended a Quinsie in his throat, he did Argentanginam pati; Thus
thy conscience has swallowed a Camel into its throat, and so spares thee, and
lets it alone: Otherwise if conscience did his office, thou who live in
secret sins, would be more molested and disquieted by its continual
testimonies against thee, then if all the Congregation had been spectators of
thy private wickedness; Therefore the pollution of the conscience by original
sin, is fully proclaimed by all the hidden works of dishonesty, by all the
close, secret sins committed in the world; For were conscience ready to
testify, it would follow thee as close as the shadow to the body, as Asahel
did Joah: Oh then let such clandestine sinners be afraid! for though conscience
be now stupefied, yet this will one day be the gnawing worm in thee that will
never die.

SECT. IV.
The Corruption of Conscience in accusing and excusing.
THe next particular is, That in those actings of conscience which are said to
be accusation and excusing, even herein will appear wonderful pollution. It is
(as you heard) grossly defiled in application, and in bearing witness; now we
may hold it grievously wounded also in regard of these actings, Romans 2. 15. The
Apostle speaking of conscience, which is even in Heathens themselves, he says,
It bears witness with them, and thereupon their thoughts are accusing or
excusing one another. But if we do consider, how naturally conscience behaveth
it self in these workings, we shall have cause to be astonished at all the evil
which is come upon us; For in the duty of accusing is it not wholly silent? Do
not men run into all excess of riot? Do they not embrace any wickedness
suggested? Yet where is that Murmuratio and remorsus, as they express it? Where
is that regreting, that smiting of conscience which ought to be? Oh how busy
is the Devil (as when he possessed some bodies to make them dumb) so also to
make thy conscience dumb! It is judged by Divines to be an exceeding great
mercy of God, that he has left a conscience in a man, for if that had not some
actings, there would be no humane societies, the world would be like a Chaos as
it was at first, only conscience is a bridle to men, and a curb to their
impieties, but when this is so corrupted, that it cannot do its office; though
sins be committed, yet conscience will not accuse, will not condemn; What
hope does then remain for such an one? Conscience is called by Bernard,
Speculum animae, the souls Looking glass, by beholding thy conscience thou
may see, what are thy sins, what are thy duties, what is to be repented
of, what is to be reformed: Oh that those who look often into the glass for
their bodily faces, (so as to spy every spot, and to mend an hair if it be not
handsome) would more consult with this spiritual glass, their conscience would
show those deformities, those corruptions that they are not willing to take
notice of; only here is the difference, the material glass will faithfully
represent what thou art, it will not flatter; If thou art polluted, deformed,
it will discover thy face as it is, it will not flatter thee, but conscience is
a glass that may be corrupted to make thee appear fairer then thou art, but if
clean and pure, then it will not favor thee; But as you see it was with David,
when he had numbered his people, presently his heart smote him, such power it
will also have over thee: This accusation is called smiting, because of the
strong impression it makes upon the soul; Conscience is also called a Book,
and the Scripture may intend this as part, Revel. 20. 12. where at the Day of
Judgment it is said, Books shall be opened, and the dead were to be judged
according to what is written in those books; One of these books that must be
opened, and by which men shall be judged is conscience, that is the debt-book,
the Dooms-day-book; There is no sin committed, but there it is set down and
registered, and one day it will be found there, though now for the present thou
take no notice of it: As conscience is a book, so as Bernard said ( De
Inferiori domo) All books are to reform this book, all other books that are
written, yea the Bible it self, they are to amend this book of conscience. This
book thou art to read every day, yea conscience is not only a book, but it is
the Writer, the Recorder also; Conscience is the souls Secretary or Register,
and faithfully sets down every sin, Item, This day such oaths, such lies;
Item, Such a drunken fit; Item, Such omission of duties; Thus conscience should
do its work; But oh how negligent and sordid is conscience herein! What foul
acts may be committed, and yet not the least sting or gripe of conscience? We
have a remarkable instance of this in Joseph's brethren, when they had so
cruelly and bloudily dealt with their brother, throwing him in a pit, and as to
humane considerations' fully destroyed him, yet faith the Text, They sat down
to eat and drink; What presently after such an unnatural sin, to find no
Scorpions in their breasts, as it were, but to sit down and eat? Genes. 37. 25.
as if no evil had been perpetrated; What an adamant or rock were these men's
consciences turned into? And is not this the state of many men, and that after
the commission of such sins, which even nature may condemn for.

And as from the second act, which is excusing; here we have large matter to
treat upon, Who can comprehend the length, and depth, and breadth of the evil
of conscience in this very thing? To excuse, to clear, to justify a man's self:
Did not conscience thus in the Jews of old? Did not conscience thus in the
Pharisees? Does not conscience thus in the breasts of all civil and moral men?
Whence is it that they can say, God, I thank thee I am not as this Publican, I
am no drunkard or swearer, and therefore bid their souls, Take all rest? Is not
this because conscience is turned into a Camelion, to be like every object that
it stands by? Thus it is with their conscience excusing all they do, flattering
a man, saying. His estate is good and secure, they are not such sinners as
other men, whereas if conscience were well enlightened and informed out of Gods
Word, in stead of excusing it would impartially accuse and condemn.

Thirdly, Conscience is polluted in a further acting which it has, for when
application, witnessing and accusing will not do, then it terrifieth, which you
heard was smiting. Conscience falls from words to blows, Acts 2. 37. It is there
notably expressed, They were pricked in heart, (...), it was as if a dagger had
been stabbed into them, and thus it did work upon Felix, insomuch that it made
him tremble. Thus it did upon Cain and Judas; Now conscience naturally is
greatly polluted in this thing, for either it does not at all give any blows,
or if it do, it is with slavish servile and tormenting thoughts, that it makes
the sinner run from Christ, and does indispose him for any mercy and comfort;
But of this more in it is time.

Fourthly, Conscience has a further and ultimate work or acting in a man, and
that is to judge It is a witness, an accuser and a Judge also. There is a
Tribunal should be erected in every man's heart, where conscience is to sit as
Judge, and this Court of conscience is daily to be kept. This is no more then
when Psalm, 4. we are commanded To commune with our own hearts, and be still;
when we are commanded To search and try our ways, or 1 Cor. 11. To judge our
selves that we be not judged. This is the great duty which not only Heathens
commended Nosce teipsum, and Tecum havita, and which another complains of the
neglect thereof, In se nemo tentat descendere, but it is very frequently
commanded in the Scripture, as the foundation and introduction into the state
of conversion, as a constant duty in persons converted to prevent Apostasy.
But who is there that does keep a daily Court thus in himself? That which
Pythagoras, Seneca, and Heathens have admired, To examine our selves, What have
I done to day? Wherein have I sinned? In what have I exceeded? This Christians,
though enlightened by Gods Word, are horribly sloathfull and careless about:
When is this examination, this scruteny set up? When are thy actions, thy
thoughts called to the bar, and judgment given against them? Now this
judgment of conscience is seen about a twofold object, Our Actions, and our
Persons; our Actions, they are to be judged, Whether they be agreeable with the
Word of God, or no? Whatsoever thou undertakest, and art not persuaded of in
conscience as lawful, is a sin, Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin: Now examine thy actions, thou profane man; see whether they will bear
the Touchstone or no: Does thy conscience tell thee, such ways are lawful?
Art thou out of faith thus persuaded to do? Look over all thy thoughts, all thy
words, thy actions, and weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary; See whether
they be chaff or wheat; Judge them before God comes to judge them: As our
Actions, so our Persons, and the frame and constitution of our souls; and here
conscience is more unable to do its work, then in the former; For actions (at
least many of them) may be condemned by the light of nature, but when thou
come to search thy heart, to judge that, here is much heavenly skill and
prudence required: Did the hypocrite judge himself? Did the civil pharisaical
man rightly judge himself, what a mighty change would you quickly see on those,
who now bless themselves in their good condition? Had Judas judged himself?
Did hypocrites judge themselves? Oh the amazement and astonishment they would
be in to see themselves so soul and rotten in the bottom, when they were
persuaded all had been well and happy with them! Let conscience therefore set
up her tribunal in thy heart, often call thy self before thy self, thy guilty
sell before thy condemning self, thy sinful self before thy judging self; for
by reason of conscience a man comes to have two selves; God has placed it in
man, as an Umpire, or an Arbitrator, to judge the matter impartially between
God, and thy own soul, so that it may say that which Christ denied of himself,
God has made me a Judge and a divider, to give to man what belongs to him, to
God what belongs to God; but conscience being polluted, is not able to
discharge this office: Hence it is, that this Court cease, conscience does
not keep any Assize at all; There is no judgment executed within this
spiritual society: Therefore let us groan under the weight of original sin in
this respect also.

Fifthly, Herein conscience is greatly defiled by original sin, That it is
afraid of light, it is not willing to come to the Word, to be convinced, but
desires rather to be in darkness, that so a man may sin the more quietly,
and never be disquieted. John 3. 19. Christ says, This is the condemnation,
that light is come into the World, and men love darkness rather then light. As
it is with the wicked man, He hates the light (as our Savior, John 3. 20.)
because his works are evil. Truly thus it is, conscience being naught and
rotten, therefore it is unwilling to be brought to the light: Hence John 16. 7.
It is the work of Gods spirit to convince the world of sin; but this is that
the natural conscience cannot abide, it is unwilling to be searched and tried,
to be ransacked. This is the reason, why men are most pleased with a formal,
drousie, flattering Ministry, they rage at that which is powerful, particular,
heart-searching preaching; They do not love conscience should be touched upon,
to have that say, Thou arr the man, and all is, because conscience is afraid of
any light or conviction to come upon it; for if that be enlightened, then thou
can not with that delight and security commit thy sins, as thou would do;
Conscience then would belike Michaiah to Ahab. Thou will not abide it, because
it always prophesies evil to thee, and therefore this one thing may discover
the vileness of every natural man's conscience, in that it desires to be in
the dark, and that which the Church says to Christ, ( Awake not my Beloved
till he please;) They say to their conscience, Let not that be awakened, it
will take away my comfort, it will make me despair, and thus because they
wilfully keep a veil over their conscience, it is no wonder if they die in
their sins.

Sixthly, Herein conscience is naturally defiled, That it is subject to many
multiforme shapes and disguises, it does appear under so many vizours, that it
is hard to know when it is conscience, or when it is something else, far
enough from conscience, yet such is the guile and hypocrisy herein, that a man
does easily flatter himself with the name of conscience, when indeed it is
corruption in him. It is good to discover that which is a counterfeit
conscience, that which appears to be Samuel, and in Samuel's clothes, but is
indeed a Devil.

SECT. V.
A Discovery of a counterfeit Conscience.
FIrst, It may not be conscientia, but cupiditas, not conscience, but even a
sinful lust may put thee upon many things, yet thou flatterest thy self with
the scared title of conscience, saying, it is thy conscience, when if thou did
examine thy self, it would appear to be some corruption: A sad mistake and
delusion it is to have conscience, (and so God himself) abused, but yet it is
very often so; We see it in Saul, when he sacrificed, and so was guilty of
rebellion against God, yet he pretended conscience, that he had done well, and
all was to serve God thereby. Absalom when he was contriving that unnatural
rebellion against his Father, he pretends a vow he had made, and so he must
out of conscience perform that. Judas when he repined at the ointment poured
out on Christ's body pretended conscience and charity; but it was lust and
covetousness moved him: Oh then take heed of treachery herein, lest thou
pretending conscience it appear to be thy lust only.

Secondly, It may be thy Fancy and Imagination, which persuades thee, and not
thy conscience, man consisting of a body as well as a soul, his imagination and
fantasy has great influence upon him, especially when the body may be
distempered, as you see in melancholy persons, when humbled for sins, and
greatly afflicted, it is hard to discern when it is their fancy, and when it is
conscience that works in them. It is true, the prophasie ones of the world,
they judge all the trouble and wounds of conscience for sin to be nothing,
but melancholy and a mere fancy, because they never found the word of God
kindly working upon them, therefore they think there is no such thing in the
world, as a wounded spirit, but such will one day find that troubles of
conscience are more then melancholy, that it is a worm always gnawing, yea
that this is indeed hell, for it is because of a tormented conscience, that
hell is so terrible, yet though this be so, it cannot be denied, but that
sometimes in humbled persons there may be conscience and melacholly working
together, for the Devil he loves to move in troubled waters, and melancholy
is called Balneum Diaboli, but this may be cured and removed by medicinal
helps, whereas conscience is only pacified and quieted by the blood of Christ.

Thirdly, Custom, education and prepossessed principles, these may work upon a
man, as if they were conscience. Many men are affected in religious things, not
out of any conscience, but merely by custom; They have been used to such
things, brought up in such a way of serving of God, and therefore they cry out,
to have such usages still, and all because custom has prevailed over them;
These and such like things may appear like conscience in a man; so that our
conscience must be greatly polluted, when the very subject it self is not
known, when we cannot discern whether it be conscience or corruption that does
instigate thee, when we cannot Sentire illam, quae facit nos sentire,
Conscience that makes us perceive other things that it self is difficulty
perceived. for that it is not conscience, but some other corrupt principle that
moves a man, will easily appear in that it is mutable and changeable according
to outward advantages, that which was thy conscience one month, is not the
next, because there are outward changes: When Shechem would be circumcised, it
was not for conscience, but for Dinah's sake whom he loved. When Jeroboam
erected an Altar, it was not for conscience sake, but carnal policy; So that
the mutability of thy soul, turning as advantages do, this argues, it is not
conscience, but some other corrupt principle in thee, as when they cried
Hosannah to Christ, and afterward Crucify him.

SECT. VI.
The Pollution of Conscience discovered in many more particulars.
ALthough much has been said to the discovering of every man's polluted
conscience by nature, yet because conscience is such an Abyssus, a deep Sea,
wherein are creeping things innumerable, many depravations and defilements; our
work shall be still to make a further searching and diving into it: Whereas
therefore the last particular mentioned of the natural pollution of conscience,
was in regard of the multiformity of it, and diverse resemblances of conscience,
which yet were not conscience indeed, this brings in another particular
defilement of some affinity with it; And that is,

First, Suppose that it be not lust or humor, but conscience indeed that
puts thee upon duties, and those commanded, yet how hardly are they done for
conscience sake. It Is not any lust, but conscience makes many men pray, hear,
and perform such duties, yet it is not conscience that is the motive, it is
some other sinister and unlawful reason that insinuates it self; so that the
same duties may be done out of conscience to God by some, and from corrupt
sinful motives by others. The Apostle Romans 13. 5. pressing obedience to
Magistrates (because it might be thought that Christian liberty freed them from
any such yoke) he urges it, Not only for fear, but for conscience sake: So
that if it had been only fear to lose their estates, to lose their lives, and
not out of conscience to Gods Ordinance, though they did obey, yet it was
sinful and ungodly in them, because of their motive thereunto. This also the
Apostle Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 2. 19. whence he instanceth in (...), A
conscience of God, (or as we render it) A conscience toward God, as 1 Pet. 3.
21. (...), It is not to be understood subjectively, as if God had a conscience;
for although God have infinite knowledge, and in that sense may be said to be
conscious with our hearts of all the evil we have done, yea, knows more sin
by us then we do by our selves, yet we cannot attribute conscience to God,
because the notion of that is to denote the sense and aw of some superior, who
bears witness of our evil actions, and is able to condemn for them; conscience
therefore is in Angels, because they have a superior, they are not to be a rule
to themselves; and Christ also had an holy and undefiled conscience, which yet
because of our sins was greatly afflicted with the sense of Gods wrath; but God
having no Superior, therefore he has indeed infinite knowledge, but not
conscience; Hence when the Apostle calls it conscience of God, that is
objectively, a conscience which does respect the will and authority of God,
that does not look to men, to their applause and praise, but unto God: So that
herein will appear an universal pollution naturally upon the consciences of all
men, that the good things they do, the evil things they abstain from, is not
from mere conscience to God, but because of humane and earthly considerations:
How many come to our Congregations? How many frequent Ordinances? Is it because
of conscience to God, they have a reverential fear of him, they dare not
displease him? No, but only the Laws of the Land, or some outward constraint
makes them do so, it is not pure conscience: Thus also there are many devoted
sons of Belial to all profaneness, that would with all their hearts run
into all excess of rioting, into drunkenness and uncleanness, but they dare
not, they are kept off as a dog from the bone with a whip: All their desire is
toward it, but the penalty and justice which the Civil Magistrate will inflict
upon him, this makes him forbear, it is far from any conscience toward God
that does restrain them: Oh then bewail the corruption of man in this kind!
never in any duties carried out for conscience sake, never abstaining from sin
for conscience sake, but because of punishment and the judgment of others.
Therefore in private, though God sees thee as well as if it were at the
Market-crosse, they can run into all lewdness: Oh if it were conscience to
God, thou would ^ake heed of heart-sinnes, as well as of bodily, thou would
be afraid to sin in secret, as well as in public, because God is every
where, and knows all things, and thou have a conscience toward him! And no
wonder if conscience be thus predominantly polluted in natural men, for even in
the godly themselves, how often do they find proud, vain, self-seeking thoughts
insinuate into them? So that it is not only out of conscience to God they do
their best duties: Do not some vainglorious thoughts like so many thieves
secretly creep into the heart, and are ready to rob thee of thy treasure? It is
true indeed, to the gracious heart these are a burden, and therefore with
Abraham, they drive away these flies from the Sacrifice, yet they come again;
They do Repellendo tenere, and tenendo repellere, as Tertullian in another
case; they beat them back, and yet they hold them also: they strive with them,
and yet embrace them: Thus many a sinful motion and vain thought, is like
Bernard's unclean suggestion, which he found, Blande onerosa displicendo
placens, and Placendo displicens, kindly troublesome, and coming in with a
displeasing pleasure; Insomuch that the godly themselves find the weight of
original corruption upon their consciences in this respect, even till their
last hour; They do not, they cannot find their consciences so purely and
sincerely drawn out to God, in the duties they perform, as they do desire. Paul
indeed 2 Cor. 1. 12. says, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
we had our conversation in the world. And again, 2 Cor. 2. 17. As of God in the
sight of God we speak in Christ; Here was conscience and pure conscience, as to
any fundamental deficiency, yet not perfectly pure, for Gal. 5. he says, The
flesh lusts against the Spirit, so that wheresoever the Spirit is, there the
flesh in some measure lusts against it: Oh them let even the most holy bewail
original sin in their consciences, even in this respect! That council given
by Paul to godly servants, Colos 3. 17, 18. That what they did, they should do
it in singleness of heart, fearing God; They should do it heartily, as unto
God, not unto men. The same are all the people of God bound to do in their
service to God: Oh how unworthy is it in religious duties to have an eye to
man! who will praise or dispraise, if conscience were the motive, thou would
neither care for good or bad report; And this pure conscientious working is
especially to be attended unto by such who are in public Office; The Civil
Magistrate, if he punish an offender, not because he deserves it, but from
malice, or other sinister respects; Though he cry out and pretend conscience
and justice a thousand times over, yet God looks upon him as an unjust
Magistrate, though the thing he does is just. Thus it is also in the Ministers
of the Gospel, if they preach the Word diligently and constantly, but yet the
principal motives, are either vain glory, or a mereenary respect unto the
profit and temporal advantage more then the souls of people, and the glory of
God, here also that is done, which conscience requires, but not upon
conscientious motives; we do not these things as of God, in the sight of God.
But I must not be too long in this particular, although indeed we can never say
enough herein, it is such a close insinuating sin into all men's breasts.

Secondly, The natural conscience is grievously polluted by original sin in
regard of the limited and partial conviction, or illumination that it is apt to
receive. Conscience will receive light but at a little cranny or hole, it will
be convinced to do some things, especially if of no great consequence, but the
greater and more weighty things they are apt to neglect. This doughbaked
conscience, that is hot on one side, and cold on the other, is the temper of
most men: How seemingly religious and zealous in some particulars? And then for
dut^ies of greater concernment they are like clods of earth; Our Savior
charged this partial conscience upon the Pharisees, Luke 11. 42. They tished
mint and rue, but the things of mercy and judgment they neglected; The
Chief-priests also they were afraid of defiling themselves by entering into the
common hall, and yet had no scruple about shedding the innocent blood of our
Lord Christ? And what is more ordinary then this? May ye not observe many
persons as much moved with rage upon the removal of any needless or
superstitious Ceremonies, as the Athenians were about their Diana, and yet for
gross profaneness and all manner of excessive riot, they are never moved at
that, they have no zeal for God's glory, though iniquity abound in every place?
Does not all this discover the hypocrisy and rottenness of such a conscience?
Take heed then thy conscience is not like some creatures begotten of putride
matter, that in their former part have life, but in their later have nothing
but earth or slime; So, in some part thy conscience is alive, and in other
things it is dead: If thy conscience tell thee, It Is thy duty to pray, to hear,
to keep up Family Duties, and yet withal suffers thee to do unjust, unclean,
and other dishonest things of impiety; This is not right, it is not regenerated
as yet: So on the other side, If conscience bid thee, Be just and upright in
all thy dealings, be merciful and tender to fit objects of charity, and herein
thou art ready, but thy conscience does not at all press thee to the duties of
the first Table, to sanctify the Sabbath, to keep up Family Duties, to walk
contrary to the sinful course of the world, then it is plain that as yet thy
conscience is in the gall of bitterness, it has but some partial conviction,
not a total and plenary one.

Thirdly, The conscience of a natural man in this also is greatly polluted, In
that it is very severe and easily accusing of other men's sins, but it is
blind about its own, it sees no evil in it self, while it can aggravate the
sins of others. Thus conscience, as in other respects, so in this also is
like the eye, which can see all other things, but not it self, Matthew. 7. 3.
Such a corrupt conscience likewise our Savior charge upon the Pharisees,
when he calls them Hypocrites, and bids them, Pull out the beam in their
own, and then the more in other men's. The Apostle also Romans 2. 1. begins
that Chapter, Therefore thou art inexcusable (O man) who judge others, and
do the same things thy self. What is more ordinary then this, to be
Eagle-eyed, to spy out the faults and sins of others, and as blind as a mole
about thy self? David was very zealous against that injurious man Nathan
represented in a Parable, and in the mean while did not think that he was the
man, that this was his sin. Judah also was severe against Tamar, who had
played the whore, till she sent him the staff and bracelets, that he might see
he was the man. Thus you see even godly men are greatly blinded about
themselves; no wonder then if the natural man be wholly in darkness: Oh then
pray, and again pray for light to shine into thy own heart! Let conscience turn
its eyes inward once more, know the worst by thy self. Think with Paul, I am
the greatest of all sinners, with Tertullian, Peccator sum omnium natorum, a
sinner with the brand and mark of all sins on me, at least in motion and
inclination, say, I see those sins in my self, which the world does not, none
can judge and condemn me more then I can do my self, but the contrary is in
every man's natural conscience, he thinks himself better then others, he
blesses himself in his good heart, and is a severe censurer of other men's
sins; Thus he has those Lamiae of eyes, that he takes up when he goes
abroad, and lays aside, when he comes home.

Fourthly, The conscience naturally is defiled, Because of the ease and
security it has, though if it were awakened, and could do its duty, it would
not let thee have any rest day or night. And this is one of the main
particulars wherein original sin discovers it self in the conscience; all
life, all spiritual tenderness and apprehension is taken away, that whereas
conscience is especially seen in the reflex acts of the soul. To know our
knowledge, to judge the actions of the mind and the heart, yea and to judge
those judgments; now we can no more do these things then very beasts do, and by
reason of this there is a great calmnesse and quietness upon the soul. Dives,
who had his soul, Take its ease, found no gripes of conscience: And thus it is
the condition of all men, whereas conscience would or should pierce them
through, and be like so many thorns, not in the side only, but all over the
body; now it is fallen asleep, and the man is at rest in his sins, though he be
on the borders of hell. Thou may call this a good conscience, and bless thy
self, because it does not trouble thee, it does not accuse thee, whereas indeed
it is a senseless conscience, like a dead member that will feel no pain, if it
were on the contrary, then it would be a good conscience, if it did accuse,
bear witness and condemn thee, then it would be a good conscience; for this is
a Rule in Casuistical Divinity, Conscience may be moleste mala, and yet honest
bona; and then on the other side, it may be peccate bona, and yet honest mala,
Conscience in respect of its troubling and condemning may be evil, and yet in
respect of its sanctification good, being awakened by Gods Spirit; and on the
other side, it may be good, as sometimes we call it, that is quiet, not
terrifying, yet in its constitution, be dead and unregenerate: Do not then
flatter thy self, that good conscience thou boastest of, is a bad and evil one,
a dead, a senseless one: Can that be good, which is not enlightened, is not
regenerated? Oh how much better were thy conscience, if it did smite thee,
terrify thee, make thee eat with trembling, and drink with trembling! This
accusing conscience is far better, and more preparatory to true peace, then
that quiet secure conscience of thine; so that thou art indeed to mourn over
thy conscience, as being dead within thee.

Lastly. As was said of the understanding speculative, so also the same is true
of it as practical, which is the conscience, it is grossly defiled originally,
Both because it has lost its subordination to God and his Word, the true rule
of conscience, and also its superiority over the will and affections. So that
if we look both ad supra, and ad infra, it is greatly defiled; Toward God it
does not keep its subordination, but naturally falls into two extremes, for
sometimes it takes other rules then the Scripture; as we see in Popery, How
horribly is conscience inslaved by the mere commandments of men, where there is
no Scripture? Or else on the other side, rejecting the Word wholly as a rule,
as those Libertines, who do press it as a duty to be above conscience, and
that a man is perfect, when he can sin, and his conscience never smite him
for it: Many Volumes would not serve to enlarge sufficiently upon conscience
its pollution, in both these extremes, and as for the affections and will,
conscience has now lost its power, it cannot rule these beasts, it cannot
command these waves: Hence you see so many live in sins against conscience,
their lusts are stronger then their conscience: They sin, and they know they
sin, and yet are not afraid to commit them: How often in their addresses to sin
does conscience meet them, as Abigail to David informing of the grief of heart,
yea the torments of hell that will be hereafter, yet they will violently go
forward: Thus conscience in the crowd of lusts is trodden down, as that lord
was, when there was so much plenty.

SECT. VII.
The Defilement of Conscience when troubled and awakened.
HItherto we have been declaring the defilement of conscience naturally by
original sin, as it is quiet, stupid, and senseless. The next thing to be
done (wherein shall be concluded both this Text, and particular Subject of
conscience) is to discover, how greatly it is polluted, and that when troubled,
or awakened. In this particular likewise it will appear devoid of true
goodness, and any spiritual qualifications; conscience troubled for sin
without Evangelical principles, is like the raging sea, whose waves are tossed
with tempests and storms, vomitting forth nothing but froth and foam, And

Herein is the corruption of it manifested, that when it does accuse, when it
does trouble, is does it preposterously, not seasonably, and opportunely: For
when is the fittest time for conscience to interpose, to put forth its
effectual operation, but before the sin is committed? To meet a man, as the
Angel did Balaam with a drawn sword, before he curse the people: But this it
seldom does, only when the sin is committed, when God is dishonored, when
guilt is contracted, then it accuses, and that not so much as acting under
God, to bring about true peace by repentance and faith, but as the Devils
instrument to bring to despair, and so from one sin to plunge into a greater:
Thus it was with Judas, how many powerful and penetrating arguments did he
meet with, to awaken his conscience? He had thunderclaps enough to raise and
awaken his conscience, though dead, and yet for all that, it never smites him,
it never accuses him, till he had committed that abominable and unnatural sin:
What predictions? What warnings had Judas to make him fly from this sin? our
Savior told his Disciples, One should betray him, yea particularly he
describes Judas, he tells him, He was the man; our Savior forewarned him of
the fearful estate of that man, who should betray him, that it had been better
he never had been born; and if anger or threatening would not break him; Our
Savior used love to melt him, He washed his feet, as well as the feet of other
Disciples, but still conscience in Judas is like an Adamant, and when all this
will not do any good, but Judas comes with a band of soldiers, as the captain
and head of them, he sees some fall down for astonishment and amazement at the
presence of our Lord Christ, yet this neither does startle him, he has not so
much as any regretting and remurmurating thoughts, but goes on desperately to
accomplish his design, and now when all is done, when every thing his wicked
heart desired was brought to pass, then his conscience like a roaring Lion,
begins to awaken out of sleep and to break its chains in pieces; Then he
cries out, I have sinned in betraying of innocent blood; Oh had conscience
suggested this before; when the motions to this sin were first kindled in his
breast, had he then cast them out of doors with indignation, this is to betray
the innocent, this is to become guilty of blood! The very thoughts, the very
motions are damnable and abominable, And he bolted them out with hatred, as
Ammon did his defloured Tamar, then had conscience been regular and also
prevvented his future confusion. but it never pricketh, never condemns, till
the fact be past, and then when it did so, it was upon the Devils design, to
bring him to final despair. This may be seen also in David a godly man, though
the issue of conscience its accusation was more comfortable; when David out of
vain and ambitious ends, desired to number the people, though Joab withstood
it, 2 Samuel 24. which might exceedingly have shamed, David, that a mere mortal
man should see that sinfullness, which he did not, yet he will proceed, and the
people are numbered, but as soon as David had done it, then his hear smote him,
when it was done; it smote him not, while it was a doing, the nine months were
spent in numbering of the people; Why not before, then it had prevented the
deaths of many thousands? But thus it is, conscience will not seasonably and
opportunely bear witness against sin Consider then the deceitfullness and
falseness of thy conscience herein, all the while thou art contriving sin,
purposing, yea and acting of sin, nothing does trouble thee, but at last,
when sin is committed, then it arises with horror and terror; And do we not
see this constant pollution of conscience in most dying persons, when summoned
by God, and arraigned by death, when the sentence of death is upon them? Then
their conscience flies in their faces, takes them by the throat, oh send for
the Minister, let him pray for me, let all that come to me, pray for me. Thus
conscience is stirring now; oh but how much better were it, if in thy health
time, if in thy strength and power, then conscience had been operative? To have
heard thee then cry out, oh my sins! oh I am wounded at the heart! oh pray
for me! then there had been better grounds to hope, thy conscience was awakened
upon true and enduring considerations, such as would continue always, living
and dying, whereas such are but sick-suddain fits of conscience, and commonly
turn into greater hardness of heart and obstinancy afterward.

Secondly, Conscience troubled does naturally discover its pollution, By the
slavish, servile, and tormenting fears which do accompany it: So that whereas
the proper work of conscience is, By Scripture Light to direct to Christ, so
that the troubles thereof, should be like the Angels troubling of the pool of
Bethesda, and then immediately to communicate healing; Now it is the clean
contrary, These wounds do fester, and corrode more; The conscience by feeling
guilt, runs into more guilt; so that whereas we would think, and say, Now
there are hopes, now conscience stirs, now he begins to feel his sins, we
see often the contrary, an obortive, or a monstrous birth after such travailles
of the soul; and wherein does it manifest it self more then by tormenting
tears about God? So that if it were possible, the conscience troubled would
make a man run from the presence and sight of God never to be seen by him:
Thus you see it was with Adam, when he had sinned, his conscience was awakened,
he knew what he had done, and therefore was afraid at Gods voice, and run to
hide himself, such a slavish, servile temper does follow the conscience, when
wounded for sin. Now all such tormenting fears are so many manifest
reproaches unto the goodness of God, and his mercy revealed; The hard thoughts,
the accusing imaginations, that there is no hope for thee, that thy sins are
greater then thou can bear, or that God will forgive: these dishonor the
goodness of God, these oppose his grace and mercy, which he intends to exalt
in the pardon of sin. Insomuch that the Atheist, who denies the Essence of
God, is in this respect less heinous then thou, who deniest the good Essence of
God, He denies his natural goodness, thou, his moral goodness, as it were. Is
not the great scope of God in the Word to advance this attribute of his mercy,
especially in Christ he has made it so illustrious, and amiable that it may
ravish the heart of a poor humbled sinner, but a slavish conscience about sin
rob; God of this glory? So that although it may be the Spirit of God by the
Word, that convinces thee of thy sin, and affects thy conscience, yet the
slavishness and servility of it, that is the rust and moth which breeds in
thy own nature, that is not of Gods Spirit.

Thirdly, The troubled conscience discovers its natural pollution. By the
proneness and readiness in it, to receive all the impressions and impulses of
the Devil. That as in the secure conscience the Devil kept all quiet, and would
by no means molest; So on the contrary, in the troubled consience, there be
endeavors to heighten the trouble, to increase the flame; and he that before
tempted thee to presumption, that God was ready to pardon, that sin would
easily be forgiven, now he uses contrary engines, provokes to despair,
represents God as severe, and one, who will never forgive such trangressions,
that there is no hope for him, that he is shut out of the Ark, and so must
necessarily perish: Thus you see he wrought upon the troubled conscience of
Judas, and of Cain, one goes trembling up and down, and cannot cast off the
terrors and horrors which were upon him; The other is so greatly tormented with
anguish of soul, that he hangs himself: In what whirlepooles of despair, In
what self-murders, and other sad events has a troubled conscience agitated and
moved by the Devil cast many into? Now all this arises, because the wounded
conscience being not as yet regenerated, does hearken more unto the Devil, then
unto Gods Spirit; The Spirit of God through the Word of the Gospel, speaks
peace to the broken in heart, offers oil to be poured into such wounds,
holds out the scepter of grace; but the troubled conscience hears not this,
believes not this, but what the Devil, that soul-murderer, and Prince of
darkness does suggest, and dart into the thoughts, that is received and
followed; Hence it is that so many have been under troubles of conscience,
under terrors of spirit for sins for a season, but all this pain in travel
was only to bring forth wind and emptiness, all has either ended in tragical
and unbelieving actions, or in a bold and more hardened obstinacy; and the
great cause of this has been the Devils moving in these troubled waters, he
has presently interposed to mar this vessel, while upon the wheel. Know
then, that when thy conscience is awakened and grieved, then is the Devil very
busy, then he tempts, he suggesteth, but keep close to the Word, see what
the Spirit of God calls upon thee to do; get out of the crowd of those
Satanical injections, and compose thy self in a ferene and quiet manner, to
receive the commands of God in his Word; for the Spirit of God that calls to
believe, to come in, and make peace with God, but the Devil he presses a final
departure from God.

troubled conscience is internally polluted, By that ignorance and incapacity
in knowing of what is the true christian-liberty purchased by Christ. I speak
not as yet of that main and chief liberty which is freedom from the curse of
the law through the blood of Christ, but in many doctrinal and practical
things. The Apostle Romans 14. speaks much of the weak conscience, which has
not attained to that solid judgment, as to know its liberty and its freedom
from Judaical rites, and all other Commandments of men about the worship of
God: Indeed the notion of Christian-liberty may quickly be abused to profane
dissoluteness, but yet the true Doctrine about that, was one of the greatest
mercies brought to the Church in the first reformation; for there the
conscienees of all were grossly entangled and miserably inthralled: yea, their
Casuists, who took upon them to resolve and direct conscience, they were the
greatest tormentors of all, insomuch that they then seemed to be in a
wilderness, or rather under an Egyptian bondage, wherein were many laws and
Canons* many Doctrines and opinions that were as Luther expresses it about one
homicidissimae: Now to this bondage the conscience of a man is more naturally
prone, then unto any obedience to the true commands of God. Indeed the
conscience of man naturally is miserably polluted about the knowledge of those
ties and obligations that are upon it, for sometimes it contracteth and,
limiteth them more then it ought: Hence it is that a man, yea a godly man may
live in the omission of many duties, in the commission of many sins, and yet
not know that he does so, and all because we do not study the extent of the
obligation of conscience, and from this it is that many good men have
endeavored to grow in more knowledge, to study the commands of God obliging of
them, and upon enquiry have found cause to do those things they never did
before, and also they would not for a world walk in the same paths they once
did. Thus Melancthon remembering his superstitition while a Papist, Quoties
cohorrui, etc. How often does horror take bold on me, when I think with what
boldness I went and fell down before Images, worshipping of them? This is one
great pollution of conscience, not to know its divine obligations that are upon
it: But then on the other side, the conscience smitten about sin, is many
times prone to stretch its obligations beyond the due line, they judge sins
to be where there are none. They make duties where God has not required, and
all because the troubled conscience is like a troubled fountain, a man cannot
see clearly the face, neither are we then able to judge of any thing truly. It
is a rule in Philosophy, Quicquid per humidum videtur, majtu apparet; Every
object through an humid, ormoist medium, appears greater then it is, thus
also does sin and duties through a grieved wounded conscience: therefore for
want of the true knowledge of our Christian-liberty, there is a scrupulous
conscience, called so, because as little stones in the shoe hinder the feet in
going, so does the scrupulousness and timerated thoughts much annoy in a
Christian walking. These commonly are without end, as one circle in the water
begets another, or (as Gerson resembles it,) like one Dog that barketh,
sets all the Dogs in the Town on barking, so does one scruple beget another,
and that many more: Now although a scrupulous conscience may be for the main
tender and good, yet the scrupulousness of it arises from the infirmity and
weakness thereof, and makes the soul paralytical in all its actions; These
scruples make a man very unserviceable and to live very uncomfortably, and
although God in great mercy does many times exercise the truly godly sadly with
them, thereby to humble them, to keep them low, to say with Agur they have not
the understanding of a man, to be kept hereby from gross and foul sins, yet
they are to be prayed against, for these scruples are like the Egyptian Frogs
always croaking, coming into the chamber, and in at every window, thereby
disturbing thee in thy duty. If thy conscience were sound and clear, the light
thereof would quickly dispell these mists.

Again, From the blindness of a troubled conscience, comes also the sad and
great doubtings upon the heart, whereby the soul of a man is distracted and
divided, pulled this way and haled that way, Rom 1. 14. The Apostle speaks at
large about a doubting conscience, and shows how damnable a thing it is to do
any thing doubting, whether it be a sin or not. A doubting conscience is more
then a scrupulous, for Divines say a man may go against a a scrupulous
conscience; because the conscience is for the main resolved that such a thing
may lawfully be done, only he has some fears and some jealousies moving in
him to the contrary. But a doubting conscience is when Arguments are not clear,
but a man stands as it were at the end of two ways, and knows not what to
do: now if conscience were well enlightened and informed out of Gods Word, it
would not be subject to such distracting doubts, but because of its natural
blindness, therefore it is at a stand so often. Hence

In the last place, it becomes from a scrupulous doubting to a perplexed
conscience, so ensnared that what way soever he takes he cannot but sin, if
he do such a thing he sins, and if he does it not he sins, as in Paul,
who thought himself bound to set himself against Christians, if he did
persecute them it is plain he did sin, if he did not he thought he sinned. It
is true, Casuists say, Non datur casus perplexus, there cannot be any case
wherein there is a necessity of sinning, because a man is bound to remove the
error upon his conscience, but yet the ignorance and blindness of man does
bring him often into that perplexed estate.

There remain two chief particulars, wherein the pollution of a natural and
troubled conscience is observable. which are

In the sixth place, A proneness, to use all unlawful means, and to apply
false remedies for the removal of this trouble.

Seventhly, A direct and open opposition to what is the true evangelical way,
appointed by God for to give true peace and tranquillity to such a conscience.
Before we descend to these particulars, It is good to take notice of some
general Observations, which will greatly conduce to clear the particulars.

What a blessed Thing it is to come well out of the pain of a troubled
Conscience.
FIrst, That it is a most blessed and happy thing to come out of a troubled
conscience, in a goood, safe, and soul-establishing way. For this womb of
conscience, when in pain and travail, is apt to make many miscarriages, yea
sometimes it is so far from having any joy, that a man-child is born (I mean
the true fruit of holiness produced) that there is a monster brought forth in
the stead thereof. Does not experience and Scripture confirm this, that many
have come out of their troubles of conscience, with more obstinacy and
willfullness to sin again? That as the wind blowing upon coals of fire,
which might seem to extinguish the fire, does indeed increase it: Thus these
pangs, these gripes of conscience which sometimes they have felt, that made
godly friends say, Now there is hope, blessed be God, that makes them feel the
burden of sin: These hopeful workings (I say) do at last end in a senseless
stupidity; Pharaoh for a while, and so also Belshazzar and Felix trembled;
Conscience in these did give some sharp stings, but (alas) it came to no good
use, so rare a thing is it, to come in a gracious manner out of these waves and
storms upon thy soul: Experience also does give in full testimony to this; How
many do we see that for some time, yea (it may be) years have had as it were
an hell within them? They have eat their bread, and drunk their drink with
trembling and astonishment; They have been even distracted with the terrors of
the Lord; but if you observe the later end of such, they have at last grown
secure and stupid, as if the Spirit of God had never visited them in such a
dreadful manner: So that we may say to many, What is become of those troubles
thou did once groan under? Where are those fears, those cries, those
agonies, thou had then? Where are those zealous and fervent workings of heart
which did so burn within thee once? Alas, after these meltings and thawings a
greater frost and cold has come upon them; That as sometimes frequent and
constant aguish fits do at last end in a consumption: Thus frequent troubles of
conscience upon some fits and seasons, do sometimes end in a plain dedolency
and stupidity of conscience, never to be troubled more. God has left thee to
be like an Adaman^ and stone, so that though thou sinnest never so grossly, yet
now thy conscience is seared, and thou can be bold and rejoicing in the midst
of thy impieties. Thus you see it is a great consequence for any one laboring
under the troubles of conscience, diligently to consider, how he comes out of
them, for now is the time of saving or damning of thee, now is the time thou
art in the fire, either to be purged and refined, or to be consumed: Oh pray,
and get all thy godly friends to pray, that these troubles may be sanctify,
that they may be blessed to make a through change upon thee! Better never have
had such a wounded conscience, such a troubled heart, and then to return to
thy vomit again; for every sin committed by thee after these troubles has an
high and bloody aggravation; Thou know how bitter sin is; Thou have tasted
what gall and wormwood is in it; Thou have been in the very jaws of hell,
have had some experience of what even the damned feel, and will thou go to such
sins again? will thou put these Adders into thy breast again, that have
almost stung thee even to despair? Therefore set a Selah, an accent (as it
were) upon this particular, thou who have been a troubled sinner, and see how
thou come to be freed from this spiritual pain.

A great Difference between a troubled Conscience, and a regenerate Conscience.
IN the second place, You must know, That there is a great difference between a
troubled conscience and a regenerated, or sanstified conscience. The conscience
may be exceedingly troubled about sin, have no peace or rest because of
sin, yet be in the state of original pollution, yet be destitute of the
Spirit of Christ: This mistake is very frequent, many judging the troubles of
conscience they once had to be the time of their conversion to God, though ever
since they have lived very negligently and carelessly, without the strict and
lively conformity of their lives to the rule: whereas we see in Cain, in Judas,
these had even earthquakes (as it were) upon their consciences, They had more
trouble then they could bear, yet none can say, they had a regenerated
conscience. It is true indeed, these troubles of conscience may be introductory
and preparatory to the work of conversion, but if ye stay in these, and think
to have had these is enough, ye grossly deceive your own souls, Act. 2. 37, 38.
When Peter did in such a particular, and powerful manner set home upon the
Jews, that grievous sin of killing the Lord Christ, it is said, They were
pricked in heart; Here their consciences were awakened, here were nails (as it
were) fastened by the Master of their Assembly into their souls; yet when they
cry out, saying, What shall we do? Peter does direct them to a further duty,
which is, to repent; Those troubles then, those fears and agonies, were not
enough, a further thing was requisite for their conversion. Thou then who art
troubled rest not in these, think not this is all, but Press forward for
regeneration, without this, though these troubles did fill thy soul, as much as
the Lecusts did Egypt, yet thou would go from begun torments here, to
consummate torments hereafter. It is true, a gracious regenerated conscience
may have its great troubles and agonies, be in unspeakable disquietings, but I
speak of such who are yet only in innitiatory troubles, who are (as yet) but in
the wilderness, journying toward Canaan; all these troubles do not infer
regeneration, but are therefore brought upon thee, that thou may be provoked
to inquire after this new creature.

What may be the Causes of the trouble of Conscience, which yet are short of
true saving Motives.
IN the third place take notice, of what may be the cause and motives which may
make thy conscience awakened and troubled, which yet are not from true saving
principles.

1. The commission of some gross and heinous sin against conscience; this may
work much terror. The very natural light of consciene in this particular is
able to fill the soul with fears, Romans 2. The Heathens had their consciences
acusing of them. We read of Nero, that after he had killed his mother
Agrippina, he was so terrified in his conscience, that he never dared to offer
sacrifices to the Gods, because of the guilt upon him, yea, and as Tertullian
(lib. de anima cap. 44.) observes from Suetonius, after this parricide, he who
in his former times never used to dream (it is noted of him as a rare and
strange thing) was constantly terrified in his dreams with sad imaginations.
Thus you see natural conscience upon the committing of some gross sin, has
power of it self to recoil and with heavy terror to overwhelm a man. Some also
do relate of Constantine, that having been the cause of the death of his eldest
son Crispus, upon groundless suspicious, was greatly tormented in his
conscience, not knowing what to do, and thereupon was advised to receive the
Christian Religion, in which alone there could be found an expiation for so
foul an offense.

2. The trouble of conscience may arise from some heavy and grievous judgment
that has overtaken us. Conscience may lie asleep may years; the sins thou
have committed long ago may be almost forgotten, and yet some judgment and
calamity, falling upon thee afterward, may bring them to mind: Thus Joseph's
brethren, whose consciences were so stupid (as you heard) that upon the
throwing of their brother into the pit, they could sit down as if nothing a^led
them; many years after, when they were in anguish of mind by Joseph's severe
carriage toward them, Genesis 42. 21. Then they said one to another, We are very
guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us; so
that some unexpected calamity may be to us, as the handwriting on the will to
Belshazzar, making conscience to tremble within us.

3. God as a just Judge can command these Hornets and Bees to arise in thy
conscience. It is plain, Cain, when he set himself to build Towns, thought to
remove that trembling which was upon him, but he could not do it; how many have
set themselves with all the might they could to be delivered from this anguish
of conscience and could not? because God is greater then our conscience, if he
command terror and trembling none can expel it. This troubled conscience is
threatened as a curse to such, who did break the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 65* 67.
The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart -- and sorrow of mind -- In the
morning thou shall say, would God it were day -- for the fear of thy heart.
Here we may observe, that God can, when he pleases, strike the heart of the
most jolly and profane sinner with such a trembling conscience, that he shall
not have rest day or night; and when God, after much patience abused, does
smite the soul with such horror and astonishment many times: This never tends
to a gracious and Evangelical humiliation, but as in Cain and Judas is the
beginning even of hell it self in this life. So fearful a thing is it to fall
into the hands of the living God, when provoked, Heb. 10. 31. For in such (as
ver. 27.) there is a certain fearful looking for the indignation and wrath of
God, which will devour the adversaries.

4. This troubled conscience may, and does often come by the Spirit of God
convincing and reprooving by the Word, especially the law discovered in the
exactness and condemning power of it. Joh. 16. 8. The Spirit of God does
reproove or convince the world of sin; Now conviction belongs to the
conscience principally; and indeed this is the ordinary way for the conversion
of any; Gods Spirit does by the Law convince and awaken conscience, making it
unquiet and restless, finding no bottom to stand upon; it has nothing but
sin, no righteousness to be justified by; the law condemns, justice
arraigneth, and he is overwhelmed, not knowing what to do; This is the work
of Gods Spirit; and of this some do expound that place, Romans 8. 15. Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but of adoption; It is the same
spirit which is called the spirit of bondage, and of Adoption, only it is
called so from different operations; It Is the spirit of bondage, while by the
Law it humbles us, fills the conscience with fear and trembling; not that
the sinfulness or slavishnesse of these fears, opposing the way of faith, are
of the Spirit, but the tremblings themselves; and it is the Spirit of Adoption,
when it rebukes all tormenting fears, giving Evangelical principles of Faith,
Love and Assurance; Now these fears thus wrought by the Spirit of God in the
Ministry of the Word, though they be not always necessary antecedents of
conversion, yet are sometimes ordained by God, to be (as it were) a John
Baptist, to make way for Christ.

Lastly, These troubles of conscience may arise ( through Gods permission) from
the Devil: For when God leaves thee to Satan's kingdom; as it was the case of
the incestuous person, to be buffeted by him, tempted by him, you see he did so
far prevail with him, that he was almost swallowed up with too much grief:
Therefore when God will evangelically compose the conscience by faith in
Christ's blood, he takes off Satan again, and suffers him not to cast his
fiery darts into us any longer.

The false ways that the wounded Conscience is prone to take.
THese things explained, Let us return to consider the pollution of natural
conscience in the two particulars mentioned, whereof

The first is, That the wounded conscience for sin is very ready to use false
remedies for its cure. These stings he seeleth are intolerable, he cannot live
and be thus, he takes no pleasure in any thing he has, but he comes not to
true peace, for either they go to carnal and sinful ways of pleasure, so to
remove their troubles, or to superstitions and uncommanded ways, of devotion,
thinking thereby to be healed: The former too many take, who when troubled for
sin, their hearts frequently smite them, they call this Melancholy and
Pusillanimity; Tush, they will not give way to such checks of conscience, but
they will go to their merry company, they will drink it away, they will rant it
away, or else they will go to their merry pastimes and sports: Thus as Herod
sought to kill Jesus as soon as he was borne, so do these strive to suffocate
and stifle the very beginnings and risings of conscience within them: Oh
wretched men prepared for hell torments! Though now thou stoppest the mouth of
conscience, yet hereafter it will be the gnawing worm; It Is this troubled
conscience that makes hell to be chiefly hell; It Is not the flaming fire, it is
not the torments of the body that are the chiefest of hels misery, but the
griping and torturing of conscience to all eternity; This is the hell of hels.

Others, when none of these means will rebuke the storms and waves of their
soul, but they think they must perish, then they set themselves upon some
superstitious austere ways, as in Popery, to go on Pilgrimage, to enter into
some Monastery, to undertake some bodily affliction and penalty, and by these
means they think to get peace of conscience; but Luther found by experience the
insufficiency of all these courses, That all their Casuists were unwise
Physicians, and that they gave gall to drink in stead of honey.

This pollution of a troubled conscience is seen, In it is opposition to Christ,
to an Evangelical Righteousness, and the sway of believing. Conscience is
far more polluted about Christ and receiving of him, then about the commands
and obedience thereunto; for naturally there is something in conscience to do
the things of the Law, but the Gospel and the Doctrine about Christ is wholly
supernatural and by revelation: Hence although it is clear, That the conscience
truly humbled for sin ought to believe in Christ for expiation thereof; Yet
how long does the broken heart continue ignorant of this duty? Their conscience
troubles them, accuses them for other sins, but not for this, of not
particularly applying Christ to thy self for comfort, whereas thou art bound in
conscience to believe in Christ, as well as repent of sin; I say, thou art
bound in conscience, and if thou do not by particular acts of faith receive
Christ in thy arms, as Simeon did bodily, but then spiritually, thy conscience
is to trouble thee, and to accuse thee for it; But how averse and froward is
the troubled conscience in this particular? How hardly instructed
evangelically? How unwilling to rest upon Christ only? Their conscience that
is very tender about other sins, thinks it no sin not to apply Christ,
yea it disputes and argues against it; but at last such broken hearts know,
that they are to make conscience of the premises, as well as the precepts,
conscience of faith as well as repentance, Heb 9. 14. The Apostle there
teaches us, That it is the blood of Christ, which purges the conscience. Run
not to any thing, but to the blood of Christ; when thou art slung, behold this
Serpent; Let thy conscience be Evangelical, as well as Legal; The Gospel is
Gods Word, as well as the Law, and by that thy conscience is obliged to lay
hold on Christ for pardon.

CHAP. III.
Of the Pollution of the Memory.
SECT. I.
2 PET. 1. 12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the
present Truth.
THe original pollution of the Mind and Conscience has at large been declared;
We proceed now to the Memory, which belongs also to the intellectual part of
a man: And as Philosophy informs us, That it is the treasurer which
conserveth the species, so Divinity will inform us, That it is an evil
treasure, or shop, wherein are stored up all kinds of evil.

The Text mentioned will suppeditate fit matter for this Doctrine. And First,
We must diligently explain the words, wherein we may take notice,

1. Of the illative particle, or note of inference, [Wherefore.] He had
exhorted them, To give all diligence to make their calling and election sure, A
necessary duty. We strive to make our outward estate, and the evidences of that
sure; but make sure of Heaven, make sure of an interest in Christ; for this
assurance will be a cordial to thee in thy greatest extremities, it will make
thee above the love of life, and the fear of death. This duty he encourages
unto by the consequent benefit thereof, Hereby an entrance shall be abundantly
ministered unto you, into the everlasting kingdom of Jesus Christ; And having
laid this foundation, he brings in the infere^e in my Text, Wherefore I will
always put you in remembrance of these things. These truths are so necessary,
so excellent, that you are to have them always in your mind; and withal, your
memories though regenerate are so weak and sinful, that you need perpetual
Monitors and prompters to possess your souls with these things.

In the second place, we have the Apostle Peter's care, purpose and diligence
expressed, (...), I will not be negligent; The Vulgar Latin renders it,
Incipiam, I will begin Estius thinks it did read (...) for (...), but that
word is never used, and therefore Estius does from the Latin go to the Greek
Copies, which is a practice contrary to the Tridentine Doctrine. The word
(...), is used for to neglect, to have no regard, to slight and make no matter
of a thing, Heb. 2. 3. only when the Apostle expresses his care negatively, I
will not, we must remember that rule given by Interpreters, that Adverbs of
denying do often express the contrary with the greater Emphasis, I will not be
negligent, that is, I will be very diligent and industrious.

Thirdly, You have the Object matter about which this diligence is exercised,
and that is (...); The word signifies to bring to mind, to cause to remember,
(...) signifies any short writing, whereby any thing is brought to our mind:
The word is used in other places, which will be improved in pursuing the
Doctrine. This is enough for the present that the holy Apostle does not disdain
to become a Monitor and Remembrancer unto them, being in this an instrument of
the holy Ghost, whose work it is to bring things to our mind, which are
forgotten.

Fourthly, You have the aggravation of this from the time, He will put them in
remembrance always; He will be the good Prophet that will lift up his voice
and not cease; They must not think his importunity and frequent admonitions
needless and uncivil; They need this duty always from him, and therefore in
season and out of season, he will suggest it to them.

Lastly, There is a further aggravation from the qualification of those he will
thus remind, Though ye know and be established is the truth; This is
considerable, they had the true knowledge of these things, if they had been
ignorant, if they had not yet understood these things none would wonder at this
diligence, but though they know these things, yet he dare not omit this
importunity. Again, though they did know, yet they might be wavering and
staggering, ready to apostatize from this they did know; No, they are (...),
established, firmly settled and fixed, and yet their minds and memories need
many divine helps to excite and stir them up, yea this duty upon their
memories is so great and necessary, that the Apostle further amplifieth himself
herein, as if enough could not be said about it; For at the next verse, he
gives us a reason of this faithfulness and diligence, (...), I think it fit,
or just and righteous; It did belong to him as an Apostle, he could not do what
was his duty, if he did fail herein, and that not for once, but continually, as
long as he was in this Tabernacle, he calls his body a Tabernacle, that is,
Nomen pastorale, and militare, it denotes the shortness and brevity of his
abode in the world, and then the great hardship and difficulty he was to
conflict with; It implies, he was but a stranger here, as all the godly are;
and therefore whereas the Cretians called those places they had on purpose to
receive and lodge strangers in (...), the same word did the Church use and
apply to the Burial places of believers, signifying hereby, that they were
pilgrims and strangers: He uses also a significant word for his death, (...),
which is applied to the people of Israel, when they came out of Egypt, a place
of bondage, and the Ironsornace. so is this world to the godly, therefore death
is an (...). Now in this expression also is couched a reason, why he will not
cease to put them in mind of these truths, for he shall not be long with them,
he will work while he has day; he remembers that command of our Savior,
Negotiamini, work be diligent merchants to increase spiritual gain, while I
come.

Again, There is another latent reason of this duty in the word (...), to
stir up; It is used of those who awaken any out of sleep, Luke 8. 24. So that
this supposes even the memories of the most godly to be, as it were, dull and
sleepy, very heavy and negligent about what they ought to be diligently
exercised with But yet the Apostle has not said all his mind herein, for verse.
15. he professes this care of his for the good of their memories shall extend
even after his death, I will endeavor that after my decease, you may have
these things always in remembrance. Now that would be done by these very
Epistles, they would be as continual memento's to them. See then here the godly
zeal and faithful diligence of a godly Pastor, it extends to the future as
well as the present, he is afraid after his decease, all he had preached should
be forgotten; And does not experience sadly confirm this? After the death of a
godly Minister, How quickly are all his labors, all whose precious truths he
had made known forgotten, as if they never had such a Preacher amongst them?
However, if these soul-saving truths be forgotten, Peter will take care that
the sin should not lie at his door, he will be faithful to do his duty. And
Chap. 3. 1. take notice how again he takes up this profession of his care and
zeal to help their memories. He wrote both these Epistles to stir up their
pure minds by way of remembrance. Their pure minds (...), such as are
discovered and tried (as it were) by the Sunnebeams, the least more, any vain
thoughts or sinful motions are discovered and abandoned, yet though they have
such pure minds, he writes Epistle upon Epistle to stir them up by
remembrance; and as if all this were not enough to quicken up their memory, the
Apostle Jude writing to the same persons does almost write the same things
verbatim, which the Apostle Peter had written in this second Epistle, and verse.
4. he proclaims this to be his end, To put them in remembrance, though once
they knew this; It was for their memories sake by way of exhortation, not for
their understandings by way of instruction. Now from all this we may gather,

That such is the weakness and sinfulness of the memory, and that even in the
regenerate, that they need daily divine helps to provoke it to its duty. And
whereas the sinfulness of our memory may be two ways, either actually by a
wilful forgetting of holy things, and a careless neglect of them; or
original, whereby the memory through Adam's fall, as well as the other parts of
the soul, are become all over unsanctified, and has no sutablenesse or
proportion to divine objects and holy duties. I shall speak of this later,
though as expressing and emptying it self into actual and wilful
forgetfulness, for of this original and native pollution of the memory, must
we understand this Text in a great measure, which the Apostle by frequent
filing would get off, as so much rust, seeing he writes to those that are
sanctified, and as also he speaks of this as a permanent and an abiding
weakness in them; Now in the regenerate all contracted habits of sin, are
expelled by virtue of the new birth; And as for actual sins, they are
transient, so that there remains no other defilement, but original, and the
relics or immediate products thereof: If then the most holy do need quickening
helps to their memory, because of the dullness and slownesse in it about holy
things; It is plain, the memory, as well as the other faculties of the soul, is
depraved by original sin; and if in the sanctified person the memory has
this partial and gradual sinfulness in the unregenerate, and natural man, it
must be all over polluted and made unsavory about any good thing. Observe,

That the memory of every man by nature is wholly polluted by original sin.
It cannot perform those offices and acts for these holy ends, as it was at
first enabled to do in the state of integrity. It will be very useful and
profitable to anatomize the sinfulness of the memory, as we have done of the
other intellectual powers, for it is from the pollution of this part that all
wickedness is committed. The Scripture makes this the character of all wicked
men, That they forget God. Psalm. 9. 17. implying, That if we did remember God,
his Greatness, his Power, his holy Will, we should not fall into any sin:
Insomuch that we may in some sense say, All they evil is committed, because of
thy evil and sinful memory, had thou remembered such and such threatenings,
such and such places of Scripture, they would have preserved thee from this
impiety.

SECT. II.
What we mean by Memory.
TWo things must be premised before we enter into the main matter:

First, What we mean by the memory. Aristotle wrote a little Book about Memory
and Remembrance (De Memoria and Reminiscentia) and from him many have taken up
large and useless Disputes herein. It is not my purpose to teach you with
these thorns, it is enough that there is acknowledged a sensitive memory, which
is common to men with beasts, and an intellective, though that be questioned,
but against all reason, for the soul separated does remember, as appears in
that Parable, where Abraham said to Dives, Son, remember thou have received
the good things of this life, Luke 16. 25. Angels also must necessarily
remember, because all things are not present to them, therefore past things
they cannot know, but by way of memory: God is said in the Scripture often to
remember, but that cannot be properly, because to him all things past and
future are as present, so that he cannot be said to remember properly, no more
then to foreknow only such expressions are used by condescension to our
capacity. Aristotle distinguishes between Memory and Remembrance, (...), and
this (he says, as far as is yet observed) no creature can do but man. When
therefore I shall speak of the Memory, I shall understand it as it is
Remembrance, and as it is Intellectual; for in man we may say his memory is in
a great part the understanding, knowing things as they are past. Therefore
Austin, and the Master of Sentences following him (though this be disclaimed by
many that came after) make three powers or faculties in the rational part of a
man, his Understanding, his will and Memory, which they call the created
Trinity, and by it, (they say) is resembled the blessed and increated Trinity;
But I shall not dispute this, for I shall speak of Memory as the same with the
understanding only in this particular, as it is carried out to things that are
past, for that is the necessary object of Memory, that it must be past, we do
not remember a thing present, or a thing future.

SECT. III.
A twofold weakness of Memory.
IN the second place, While we speak of the weakness of the Memory about good
things, we must take notice of a twofold weakness, a Natural weakness, and a
sinful weakness; a Natural weakness is that which arises from the
constitution of the body, and unfit temperature of the brain, for though the
actions of the understanding be immaterial, to know and to remember, yet they
require the body as the Organ and the Instrument; So that as the most
artificial Musician cannot discover his skill upon an Instrument whose strings
are out of order, so neither can the understanding of a man put forth its noble
actions, when the body is out of order; Hence we read that some diseases, or
other events have deprived men of their memory, so that they have forgot their
own name. By this we see, That the soul does act dependently upon the body,
being the form informing of a man, and giving his being and operations to him.
Now it is useful to know this distinction; for many good people, especially
when grown in year, do much complain that their memory is gone; They cannot
carry away so much of a Sermon, or from good Books, as once they did, and this
does much grieve them, they look upon themselves as drones, and not Bees, that
carry home honey from every flower, but this may support them, that this is a
natural affect in the memory, not a sinful one; For as Aristotle observes (
Lib. de Memoria and Reminiscentia.) neither in children, or in old men, is
there such a capacity for memory, in children, because of the too much
moisture; And therefore it is (says he) as if a man should imprint a Seal in
the water, which because of its fluid nature would receive no impression, nor
in old men is there such a capacity of memory, because of their dryness and
siccity, as if a man should imprint a seal upon a dry piece of wood, it would
not receive any form or character. If then in thy old age, thy memory fails,
know this is a natural imbecility, as sickness and pain is not a sin. Others
again they abuse this distinction, for when they are urged to holy duties,
called upon to remember what has been preached, then they excuse themselves
with their bad memory, God help them they have an ill memory; but if thou have
a memory for other things, jests and merry tales, or businesses of profit, and
no memory for holy things; This is thy sin, thou have no memory in the these
good things, because thou have no heart, no delight about them, as is more to
be showed: Yea, I must add, that though a natural weakness in the memory be
not a sin, yet it is the fruit of sin, and so ought deeply to humble thee,
for thy memory would have had no such defects and weaknesses, if Adam had not
fallen: As therefore diseases and death, though they be not sin, yet are the
effects of sin, and therefore we are to humble our selves under them, so thou
art to do under thy imperfect memory, though sickness or old age has much
impaired it.

SECT. IV.
OUr work is to discover the sad and universal pollution of the Memory. And by
the Memory we mean only the mind, as it extends its actions to things that are
past; And thus the Scripture speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 1. To stir up your pure
minds by remembrance. Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject, etc. Mind is
there for memory: Thus Austin also makes memory in a man, to be either the
soul, or the power and faculty of the soul: Thus the Latin Etymologers make
Memini reminiscere, to come of Men's, yea Minerva made the goddess of learning,
is, Quasi Mineriva, a memini. And common speech amongst us makes mind and
memory all one, as when we say, It was quite out of my mind. etc. So that both
the Scripture and the judgment of the learned, yea and the use of the vulgar
will allow us to speak of the memory, as nothing else but the mind considering
of things as past.

SECT. V.
The great Usefulness of the Memory.
BUt before we speak to the discovery of this Memory, it is good to take notice
of what use and consequence it is, that so when we shall consider the dignity
and serviceablenesse of the memory, we may then bewail the sinfulness thereof,
for when that is made sinful, it is as if a fountain were poisoned, of which
all must drink: or as the air pestilential, which all must receive in their
nostrils: if the memory be corrupted then all is corrupted; Hence (as you
heard) all wicked men are said to forget God. Memory is of so great use, as the
Heathens made a goddess of it, yea they make it to be the mother of the Muses
of all Arts, of all Wisdom and Prudence; No tongue can either express the
serviceablenesse of it, or the nature of it, not the serviceablenesse of it;
For if there were no memory, there could be no discourse, no civil society; if
there were no memory, a man could not take heed of any danger, or prevent any
mischief; hence they attribute it to the forgetfulness and stupidity of the
Fly, that when it is flapt off from the meat, and was in danger of death, yet
it will immediately fly to it again: Thus would man without memory plunge
himself into all misery; If there were no memory, there could be no learning,
no humane sciences, for memory is made the mother of them; Yea, if there were
no memory, there would be no Religion, no Worship of God, or service of him:
Thus both the natural, civil and religious life of a man would be destroyed
were there not a memory; So that we are infinitely bound to praise God for this
power left in us, and as deeply to humble our selves, that it is so corrupted,
that it cannot do its proper acts in a spiritual way at last, thereby to
promote our happiness, our memory helps to damn us, not to save us.

SECT. VI.
Of the Nature of it.
ANd as for the Nature of memory, though Aristotle and others after him, have
undertaken to say much about it, yet Austin does much bewail the ignorance and
weakness of a man in this thing, ( l. 10. conf.) calling it, the unsearchable
recesses and vast concavities of the memory, saying, It is in vain for a man to
think to understand the nature of the Heavens, when he cannot know what his
memory is: Under this difficulty (he says) he did labor and toil, and yet
could not come to any sure knowledge. This is certain, that the things we
remember are not in our souls themselves; when we remember such a tree or
stone, the tree or stone is not really in us: Hence (says Austin) we may
Doloris laeti reminisci, and Laetitiae dolentes reminisci, Remember with joy
former sorrow, or with sorrow former joy: Yea (he says) we may Oblivionis
reminisci, we may remember our forgetfulness; Now if these things were really
in us, it could not be but that sorrow remembered would make us sorrowful, or
forgetfulness remembered make us forgetful. The objects then remembered are in
us by way of Species or Images, the Phantasmata are there conserved, and when
by them we come to remember, then they are (...); Hence (they say) that
sometimes a man thinks he remembers, when he does not, yea he cannot tell
whether he remembers such a thing or no, because (say they) the Phantasma is
thus absolutely presented, and not as (...); Even as a man may look upon a
picture, either absolutely, as having such lineaments and color, or
relatively, as an Image, whereby we come to remember such an one. But these
Philosophical notions about Phantasmata and Species are so obscure, that it is
better with Austin, to acknowledge our ignorance of this noble and admirable
power in the soul, whereby it does remember things; whatsoever it be, though
given us as an admirable and useful gift, yet now it is grossly polluted, and
is the conserver of all evil and vanity.

SECT. VII.
Demonstrations of the Pollution of the Memory.
THat the memory is thus polluted will appear,

1. By several discoveries thereof. And

2. By the particulars wherein.

In the former way, herein we have a full demonstration of the depraved nature
In that we need the Spirit of God to sanctify and help it; So that one work or
office of the Spirit of God is to be a remembrancer unto us about holy things;
It Is the gift of Gods Spirit to give thee a good memory, to make thee able to
remember holy things: This is clearly and unquestionably affirmed, John 14. 26.
The comforter which is the holy Ghost, I will send in my name, and he will
teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have said unto you. Here we see the Spirit of God has a twofold office or work
to do:

1. To teach us holy things: We are blind and unbelieving, not knowing
spiritual objects, till Gods Spirit does teach us; But this is not all, suppose
we be taught and instructed, is all done then? Do we need the Spirit of God no
more? Yea. Therefore

2. The Spirit of God puts it self forth in a further work, which is to
bring the things thus taught to our remembrance. As then the mind in respect of
understanding and knowing cannot do any thing about what is spiritual without
the Spirit of God, so neither can the mind about remembering: Certainly if the
memory of it self could do these things, the Spirit of God would be in vain: If
the Moon and Stars could give so much light as to make a day, the Sun would
be in vain: Hence the children of God do evidently find and feel the work of
Gods Spirit upon their memories, as well as their understandings, for in their
temptations, how ready to be overwhelmed? how ready to be swallowed up with
such thoughts? and then the Spirit of God does seasonably re-mind the soul of
such Promises, of such comfortable Arguments; So also upon the temptation to
any sin, the Spirit of God does interpose and prevent it by making them to
remember such a threatening, such a place of Scripture, and this stops them
from the evil they were ready to do, for they are the Disciples themselves,
though sanctified and made so eminent to whom this Spirit of remembrancing is
promised as useful and necessary; If then the Spirits presence and assistance
be thus necessary even to a regenerate man's memory, this argues the natural
defilement and impotency of it to any good thing, for where nature is able,
there the Spirit of God is not necessarily required.

A second Discovery of the pollution of the memory may be from the end of the
Scripture, why God would have it written, so as to be a perpetual monument to
his Church. Among other ends this is one, to be a memorial to us, to put us in
continual mind of the duties required of us: Thus the Apostle Peter
indeavoureth to make believers always remembering of the Gospel by those
Epistles he did write to them. It is true, the Orthodox do justly refuse that
of Bellarmine, who will make the Scripture to be only utile communitorium, as
if that were the chief end, why the Scriptures were written, viz. to serve for
our memory only, and not to be a rule of our faith, for he himself does
acknowledge it to be a partial rule: But the principal and chief end, why the
Scriptures are delivered to the Church is to be a Canon and Rule to it, so that
the Church must not believe, worship or live, otherwise then the Scripture
commands: This is not a partial but a total Rule, neither may any thing be
added to it, or detracted from it. But yet we grant also, That the Scripture
may have other secondary and subservient ends, whereof this is not the meanest,
to be useful to our memory; And certainly, one great cause of so much evil
committed by thee, is forgetfulness of the Scripture; The Apostle James, Chap.
1. 25. does notably instance to this purpose, for he compares a forgetful
hearer of the Word, to one that looks in the glass, and going away
straightway forgets what manner of man he was; If therefore we did abide and
continue looking in this glass, take notice what we are by the direction of
the Word, how quickly would we reform? He that does make a practical use of
remembering the Scripture, so as to regulate and order his life accordingly can
never miscarry. To have the word of God in thy memory against such and such a
temptation, would prevent all the evil thou fallest into, John 15. 20. when our
Savior would encourage his Disciples against the hatred of the world, he
says, Remember the Word that I said unto you, the servant is not greater then
his master; Remember this truth, and that will make thee suffer more willingly:
So John 16 4. These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye
may remember that I told you of them; To remember Scripture in the season, to
have the Word of God in thy mind, when a temptation like Joseph's Mistress is
soliciting of thee, this will cause, that no deadly thing shall hurt thee; for
the word of God is a two edged sword. it is an hammer, it is fire, it is the sword
of the Spirit, by it both the Devil, and all temptations are subdued, Christ
overcame the Devil by Scripture. Now if that be not in thy memory, then it
cannot be any ways serviceable to thee in the time of need. Exercise your
memories therefore in the Scripture, and that not for memories sake, much less
for ostentation, to show what a good memory you have above others, but for a
practical and holy use; Treasure up such a place against thy drunkenness, thy
whoredoms; Treasure up such a place against pride, earthlinesse and covetous
desires; What a precious and excellent memory is that which is like a mine of
gold, or an Apothecaries shop, that can from the Scripture presently fetch what
Antidotes against sin, or cordials to revive that he pleases? And truly our
memory should be filled up only with Scripture considerations. This is the
cabinet and choice closet of thy soul; If a man should take his cabinet that
was for jewels and precious stones, and fill it only with mud and dirt, would
it not be exceeding great folly? No less is it, when thy memory is full of
stories and merry tales, and in the mean while rememberest not what God says
in his Word, which would be so useful to thee for thy souls good, acknowledge
then the goodness of God to thee in providing the Scriptures as an help to thy
memory, and withal know that seeing the Spirit thought it necessary to commit
them to writing, hereby is fully declared the pollution and sinfulness of thy
memory; For in Heaven, when the memory will be fully sanctified and perfected,
then there will be no more use of the Bible, we shall not then need to read the
Scriptures to quicken up our minds, for all imperfection will then be done away.

several parts of the word of God are peculiarly so ordered, that they might be
the more easily conserved in our memory. Thus when any great deliverances were
vouchsafed to the Church, those mercies were made into Psalms and Songs, that
for the meters sake, and the pleasantness of the matter, all might have them in
remembrance: This method did signify how dull and stupid our memories are, and
how apt to forget the benefits and mercies of God, and therefore our memories
are to be helped therein: Thus the 119th Psalm, is put into an alphabetical
order, thereby to further our memory about it, yea there are two Psalms, Psalm.
8. 1. and Psalm. 70. 1. which have this Title, To bring to remembrance; And the
matter of those two Psalms contains a complaint under afflictions and earnest
importunity with God for deliverance. The Spirit of God by instruments made
them to be composed for this end, that afflicted and troubled souls should
have them in remembrance; and indeed we may say of every Chapter, as well as of
those Psalms, A Chapter to bring to remembrance; yea, of many Verses, A Verse
to bring to remembrance; And because the memory is so slow and dull about holy
things, you may read of a peculiar command to the Jews in this case; and
although the same obligation does not belong to us, yet it teaches us all,
what forgetfullness and oblivion is ready to seize upon us about holy things,
Numb. 15. 39, 40. God does there command Moses, to speak to the children of
Israel, that they make fringes in the borders of their garments throughout
their generations. It was a perpetual Ordinance; And why must this be done, To
remember all the Commandments of God: This was Gods special command? The Church
under the Gospel may not in imitation hereof prescribe Ceremonies, or appoint
Images to stir up the dull memory of man. The Popish-Church commends their
Crucifixes and their Images upon this account, because so helpful to the
memory, being the Laymens Books; But (though the memory be greatly polluted,
yet) it belongs not to man, but to God as part of his regality, to appoint what
he pleases, to stir up and excite the memory in holy things; God has
appointed other things, the Word, and Ministry, and Sacraments for our memory
(as is to be showed,) and therefore this is a devotion which God will reject,
because not having his superscription upon it.

Fourthly, That the memory of man is naturally polluted is plain, By the
Ministry appointed in the Church of God by Christ himself, for one end of that
is, to bring us to remembrance. Thus you heard the Apostle Peter speaking, he
thought it meet (...), just and righteous while he was in the flesh, to put
them always in remembrance of these things: so Jude also: Thus Paul injoyneth
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 14. Of these things put them in remembrance: so 1 Timothy 4. 6.
If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ. He is not a good or faithful Minister of Christ, tha
is not diligent to put you in mind of Scripture-things: The Ministry is not
only to instruct the ignorant, to convert the profane, but also to put int
mind those that do know, and are converted. They are like Peter's Cock, upon
his crowing, Peter was brought to remembrance, and he went out, and wept
bitterly. Every Sermon we preach should bring thy sins and thy duties to
remembrance. The Spirit of God (you heard) had this office to bring things to
your remembrance, and the Ministry is the instrument by which he does it.
Alexander would have a monitor to be always prompting this mementote esse
hominem; And the Romans, when riding in glorious triumph, would have some to
remember them of their mortality. But Christ has provided a more constant help
for thee, to have spiritual watchmen and remembrancers, who are never to cease
minding of thee; Say not then, what should I go to hear a Sermon for, I know
already as much as can be said? For though that be false, yet if it were
granted, you must know, the Ministry is for your memory as well as judgment,
and who needs not to have that often quickened to its duty?

Fifthly, In that Christ has appointed Sacraments in the Church, which among
other ends are to quicken up and excite our memory; it is plain, that they are
polluted, that we are prone to forget all the benefits of God, though never so
precious; Sacraments have for their generical nature a sign; They are signs,
and that not only obsignatives and in some sense exhibitive, but also
commemorative; hence in the very Institution of the Lord's Supper, we have this
injunction, Do this in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11. 24. Not that the
commemoration of Christ's death with thankfullness and joy, is the total and
adequate end of the Lord's Supper, as the Socinians affirm, making us to
receive no new special influences of Gods grace thereby upon our souls, or any
renewed exhibitive Communion of Christ with his benefits to us, but merely a
commemoration, of what benefit is past: As (say they) the Israelites, when they
celebrated that public mercy of deliverance out of Egypt, had not thereby a
new deliverance, but only there was a celebration of the old: Thus they would
have it in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. But the principal and chief end
of the Lord's Supper, is to conveigh further degrees of grace and comfort to the
true receivers, yet we acknowledge it also a special and great end in the
Sacrament to be commemorative, and that Christ hereby would have our memories
quickened about that infinite love showed to us in dying for us, Now what can be
more demonstrating the naughtiness and sinfullness of the memory then this very
thing? For, who would not think that Christ's voluntary giving up of himself to
such an accursed and ignominious death for us, would always be in our minds?
Such signal and transcendent expressions of love would be with us rising, and
waking, and going to bed, That though the Devil and the world did never so
importunately crowd in with their suggestions, yet this should always be
uppermost in our hearts and affections; but Christ by this very institution,
does hereby manifest, what dull and stupid memories we have, and that about the
greatest mercies that we are capable of: Would it not be strange if a
malefactor should forget his pardon, or Rahab forget the scarlet thread in the
window, that was to be the preservative of her life? yet our forgetfullness is
greater, when we do not remember our Savior, and his sufferings for us. And
for the other Sacrament of Baptism; how greatly is our obligation by it
forgotten? how grossly we do forget that covenant with God, and the dedication
of us unto God, renouncing the Devil and his lusts? That was appointed to be a
commemorative sign; But how sinful is our memory? for we do (as it were) need
another sign to put us in mind of that, and so in infinitum, what little power
has the memory of these Sacraments upon us? Yea, how little do they come in
our mind, thereby to improve our duties and consolations?

If we consider, how it was with Adam in the state of integrity, he was made
right, Eccl. 7. which does extend to the spiritual perfection of all the parts
of his soul; As his mind was endowed with all necessary light and knowledge, so
his memory also with all strength and vigor; so that forgetfullness of any
thing that was his duty, was no more incident unto him, then any other sin;
It was not, because naturally he had a bad or a forgetful memory, that made
him break the Law of God; for if God had created him found and perfect, in all
other parts of his soul, only left him to a weak and frail memory, he could not
have been happy, either in temporal or spiritual considerations: As his soul
was thus perfected, so his body was in a found and well tempered constitution,
having no redundancy of humors thereby to hinder the operations of the soul by
memory, he was not subject to diseases or old age, or any thing else, that does
empair the memory of man, but now our sun is become a dunghill, and our gold
dross: As original sin has pestilentially insected all parts of the soul, so
the memory has not escaped this pollution; for where it is naturally able,
there it is spiritually impotent; when it might remember, if improved and put
upon, there is it negligent, and careless: how many say, They cannot remember
any good thing delivered to them? press them about the Scripture, and the good
truths of God preached to them, and they will justify themselves by pleading
the badness of their memory, whereas it is for want of a good heart, and a good
will; if thy affections were ardent and burning about these things, thy memory
would be more retentive of good things then they are. Besides, little do you
know, what your memory would do, if you did put it upon frequent exercise, few
know what their memories could do, if exercised about holy things, because few
are industrious and active to put it on work. Austin (lib. 4to de origin
animae.) relates of his friend Simplicius, how he was desired to repeat verses
out of Virgil backwards and forwards, and also the Prose of Tully, with an
inversed order, and this he did to their great admiration, yet Austin says,
That Simplicius did solemnly protest, that he never did so before, neither had
he ever tried, whether his memory were able for such an exercise or no. By this
example. we see, that none know what their memories would do, if they did more
carefully and diligently put them upon it. But grant that the memory be
naturally impotent, though this you heard be not formally a sin, yet it is
the fruit of it, and so matter of humiliation. Learned men say, That what fit
constitution and temperature is required in the brain for a sound and solid
judgment, the contrary is for a good and strong memory, and therefore (they
say) it is, that a strong judgment, and a strong memory, seldom go together;
As (says Erasmus) the beast Lynx has a most acute sight, but is a most stupid
and forgetful creature: Now if this be so, then this arises from Adam's fall,
for no doubt Adam had both a perfect judgment, and a perfect memory, and it
comes through original sin, that the body is so distempered, that what
helps for one faculty of the soul, impedeth and hinders the other. The Sum
of this particular is, That wherein our memories do now come short of that,
which Adam's memory while perfect was able to do, that is either expressly and
formally a sin, or the immediate issue and punishment of sin.

SECT. VIII.
Wherein the memory of man is polluted.
THis sure foundation then being said, Let us proceed to show, Wherein the
memory of man is so greatly polluted; And that will appear,

First, Very remarkably, If you consider all the several objects which by the
Scripture we are daily to have in our memory, and we are naturally in a
constant and daily forgetfulness of them. Only it is good to take notice of a
distinction which Vossius (De Origin Idolat. lib. 1. cap. 11.) observes out
of Bonaventure, That there is a twofold forgetfulness, 1. When the very
Species or Images of things are quite obliterated and deleted, this may be
called a natural forgetfulness. 2. When though the Species be retained, and we
do remember, yet through carelessness and negligence, we do not attend to that
duty, which should flow from our memory, and this may be called a moral
forgetfulness: And indeed we have too much experience of this later kind of
forgetfulness, for how many are there that do remember Sermons, that do carry
in their minds several Texts of Scripture, and that against those very sins
they do commit daily? Now in the Scripture language this is forgetfulness,
such are said not to remember, because they do not what they ought to do upon
their memory. In both these considerations I shall speak of the pollution of
the memory.

The first and most signal object of our memory, which the Scripture speaks
of, Superior. objects.
is God himself; God is not only the object of our faith, and of our love, of
our minds and wills, but also of our memory; We should always keep up the
remembrance of God in our thoughts, 1. God.
and this would be a most potent Antidote against all kind of sin; Therefore
is all evil committed, because we do not remember God at that time, Deuteronomy. 8.
18. Moses does there command the people of Israel to take heed of trusting in
their own righteousness and goodness, or of attributing their wealth and
riches to their own power. But (says he) thou shall remember the Lord thy God,
implying, That the Sun and the night can no more stand together, then the
remembering of God, and carnal confidence can; the ambitious man, the voluptuous
man, remembering God, would find it to be like thunder and lightning upon the
soul; This would immediately stop him in his ways of iniquities: Thus 2 Samuel
14 11. that suborned woman of Tekoah in her disguised Parable to David,
complaining of some that would rise up against her, to destroy her son, she
desires the King to stop the revengers wrath by this Argument, Let the King
remember the Lord thy God: Thus when thou art solicited, enticed to any evil,
way, Remember thou God, the infinite God, the just God, the omniscient God, the
dreadful and terrible God in all his ways of anger. Nehemiah also makes use
of this Argument to quicken up the Jews against sinful fear and cowardice in
Gods work, Nehem. 4. 14. 1 said to the Nobles and Rulers of the people, be ye
not afraid of them, but remember the Lord which is great and terrible. This God
complains of, Isa. 57. 11. Thou have not remembered me, nor laid it to thy
heart, and therefore were they so propense to all their abominations. These
Texts may suffice to inform, that our memories ought constantly to be fixed
upon God, and no sooner do we let him out of our mind, but immediately some
sin or other is committed. But how unspeakably is the memory of every man
naturally polluted herein? When is God in their thoughts? Amongst those
millions and millions of objects which thou do remember, when is the great
God, the just God, the holy God thought on? May you not see it by the bold
impiety and undaunted wickedness of all unregenerate men, that they remember
not God? Yea the godly themselves find in part this pollution upon their
memory. Whence arise those carnal fears, those dejected thoughts, Is it not
because you forget the greatness and goodness of God? Bewail thy
memory-sinfulnesse, as well as other sins.

2. As the Scripture prescribes the object of our memory ( viz) God himself, so
it does instance in one time more then at another; Though at all times God is
to be remembered, yet in one time of our age, though there be greatest cause,
yet our lusts and desire after other things do greatly hebetate our memory; We
have the injunction from Solomon himself, Eccl 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator
in the days of thy youth; Here you see who is to be remembered, and when he is
to be remembered, God is to be remembered, and that in the time of our youth, But
do not the strong effects of original sin heightened also by actual sins
discover herein most palpable impiety in young persons, they remember their
lusts, their pleasures in the days of their youth, and God is never in all
their thoughts: Oh where may we find a young Timothy, that was acquainted with
the Scripturee from his infancy! Where an Obadiah, That feared God from the
youth? Do not most young persons live so negligently about holy things, as if
they were allowed to be dissolute, as if the things of Heaven and eternity did
not belong to them, as if Solomon had said the contrary, Do not remember God in
the days of thy youth, be not so strict and precise, but follow thy pastimes
and pleasures? Thus the very memory of God and holy things is a burden to young
persons; They think Solimon spoke far better, Chap. 11. 9. when he says,
Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, let thy heart cheer thee, and walk in the
ways of thy heart, remove sorrow and evil away; They like this well; This is
good, but there is a sting in that which follows, Know thou that for all
these things God will bring thee to judgment; This will quickly damp all thy
youthful jollities. Let then young persons especially bewail the sinfulness
and forgetfulness of their memory herein; This is the best and most
flourishing time for your memory, now it is put upon to learn either Mechanical
Trades, or the Liberal Arts, your memories are most drawn out in inferior
things, but take the advantage to employ it more about holy things; You hear
old persons complain, they have lost their memory, they grow forgetful,
therefore fix your memories upon good things while you may.

3. The Scripture commends the Word of God likewise as the object of our
memory. 3. The Scripture.
Timothy had learnt the Scripture from his Infancy: The word of God was for
this end (amongst others, as you heard) committed to writing, that so we might
the more readily have it in our memories, Mal. 4. 4. the Prophet commands them
to remember the Law of Moses with the statutes and judgments, yea they were to
have such a ready and familiar knowledge of the Word of God, that when they
were rising or walking, they were to be speaking of them, Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8, 9. we
may there see what care is taken that the Law of God should be always in their
mind; but do we not evidently behold the cursed and wretched pollution of man's
memory in this particular; Why is it that little children will remember any
Songs sooner then the principles of Religion? Why is it that many persons who
are not able to remember any thing of the Scripture, or the Sermons they have
heard, yet can remember Ballads and Songs, they can remember their youthful
pranks, and talk of them with delight, but they cannot give any account of the
good truths that in their younger years were preached to them? When do ye hear
such say, Such a Sermon wounded me at heart, it sticks still upon me, I shall
never forget it? Now is not the sinfulness of the memory greatly to be
bewailed in this particular? If it were holy and sanctified it would take more
delight and joy to remember Scripture-truths then any thing else, whereas now
thy memory is like a sieve that lets the corn and weighty grain fall through,
but the light refuse stuff that it retains: Thus what is solid and would do
thy soul good, that quickly passes away: Oh that we could not fay, our Sermons
pass away as a tale that is told, for those you do remember, and you will
carry a long while in your mind, empty, frothy things those abide long with
you! Would you not judge it madness in the Husbandman, if he should pluck up
and hinder the growth of his corn, and let cockle and tare, with other weeds
flourish? Thus thou do about thy memory, throw away the flours and keep the
weeds, whereas thy memory should be like the holiest of holies, nothing but
what is select and sanctified should enter therein.

4. That I may not be too long in these instances, The works of God, whether in
his mercy, 4. The works of God.
or in his wrath, they are to be the object of our memory. Thus the Scripture
speaks often of remembering his mavelous works. Matthew. 16. 19. Christ
reproves his Disciples, because they did not remember the miracle of the
loaves; All the great mercies to his Church, all the severe judgments of God
upon those that hate him, should be kept in constant remembrance from
generation to generation: But who sees not the sinfulness of our memory in
this particular? What liar remembers Ananias and Saphira's judgment? What
unclean person Zimri and Cosbi? What drunkard Belshazzar's handwriting on the
wall?

SECT. IX.
Inferior Objects of Memory.
WE are discovering the particulars, Wherein the memory of man is so greatly
polluted; we have instanced in the Object of it, which is God, and the things
immediately relating to God; These things we constantly forget, though God gave
us a memory chiefly for these things. In the next place, there are Objects in
the inferior region (as it were) which the Scripture commends to our memory,
and about that also we shall find our minds never exercised therein. That I
may not be infinite, I shall select some few of those Inferior Objects. And

First, 1. Sin past.
It is a duty often urged in Scripture, To exercise cur memory about our sins
past, to bring them to mind, and accordingly to humble our selves and repent.
But is not every man's memory naturally polluted herein? How many sins are
there committed many years ago? How many youth sins which thou never have a
bitter remembrance of? It is not wormwood and gall to thee to think of thy
former vanities: Thus the memory well exercised is the introduction to
repentance. A man can never repent that does not first remember; Can he humble
himself for that which he has forgotten? Ezekiel. 16. 61, 63 God there makes a
gracious Covenant and promise of pardon and forgiveness to the Israelites; and
then he shows, that this fire of his love shall melt and thaw their hearts,
though like iron, they shall be ashamed and confounded, but how is all this
done? by remembering. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, so
that it is impossible to set upon the work of repentance and conversion to God,
unless first thy memory be excited up, unless thou look upon thy former life,
and remember this have I done, and thus I have lived, such sins and follies
come into my mind, yea in true repentance thy sins will always be in thy
memory, when eating, or drinking, or walking, thou will be thinking, Oh the
wretch that I have been! Oh the beast and fool that I was in such and such
impieties! Thus Joh and David remembered the sins of their youth, Psa. 51. 3.
David acknowledging that murder and adultery which he had committed a year
before, yet he says, My sin is ever before me. Thus you see in repentance,
the memory is wonderfully quickened, brings those sins to mind that have
been committed many years ago, and therefore you have the expression, 1 King.
8. 47. of a people repenting, If they shall bring back to their heart, so it is
in the original, we render it, If they shall bethink themselves; By this we
see, that in true conversion there is a bringing back again of our sins to
our hearts, that whereas we had forgot this and that sin which might be
charged upon us; Now we begin to arraign our selves, and bring in a severe
indictment against our own souls, for such and such transgressions: Oh then,
mourn bitterly for thy evil and wicked memory herein! How many sins, how many
iniquities even like the sand on the seashore might come into thy mind and
amaze thee, giving thee no rest, till thou had obtained the pardon of them?
But thou art so far from this, that rather thou strivest and labourest to put
them out of thy memory; If thy sins come to thy mind, presently thou
divertest thy thoughts, turnest thy memory to other things; and thus as the
noise of the Cart-wheel, because nearer to us, makes us not bear the noise of
thunder at that time, so other things more delightsome and pleasing, being next
in our memory, we wholly forget what might turn to our salvation: Hence it is
that natural men love no good conference, no reproof, no powerful preaching
that may bring their sins to remembrance, but say as the woman to Elisha, 1
King. 17. 18. What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? Art thou come
unto me to call my sin to remembrance? So that herein our desperate pollution
is seen, that we bring not our sins to our remembrance, yea we voluntarily
forget them, use all the means we can, that we may never have them in our minds.

Secondly, 2. Examples of others*
The bad or good examples of others we should remember, and accordingly imitate
or avoid them: All the examples of wicked and godly men, should be so many
Monuments, so many Memorials to us: The Inscription upon Senacherib his Tomb
was, (...), Whosoever looks on me, let him be godly, by remembering the wrath of
God upon me for my evil ways. Our Savior ( Luke 17. 32.) commands us to
Remember Lot's wife; In her we have such an instance of Gods wrath, that it
ought never to be forgotten, and therefore, says Austin, turned into a pillar
of falt, that she might season us; God had delivered her out of Sodom from the
fire and brimstone ready to have consumed her, and withal he charge her not
to look back, but she either out of curiosity, or out of a worldly affection
and desire to her goods that were left behind looks back, upon which God does
immediately punish her in this wonderful and unheard manner; Now our Savior
applies this to every one who takes upon him the profession of Christ,
leaves off his former conversation, but afterward returns to it again: And
is not this the condition of too many, that do not only with Lot's wife look
back to Sodom, but even go back into Sodom again? How terrible will the later
end of such be? Remember this dreadful instance, you who for a while give over
your profaneness and impiety, but afterward fall to it again, such are not
fit for the Kingdom of Heaven: Thus also we should take notice of all the good
examples we meet with in the holy Scripture, what good men there were, how they
lived, and how God blessed them; Our memories should be a good treasury,
whereby we should be abundantly furnished to do the good and avoid the evil,
Lege Historiam ne fias Historia, but rather remember Histories and examples,
lest God make thee an example: Thus Heb. 13. 7. they are commanded to remember
such who had been guides to them, and to follow their faith, considering the
end of their conversation; How holy, blessed and comfortable it was, the godly
Ministers and holy Pastors God has given to his Church, you should diligently
remember, taking notice how God was with them in their Doctrine, in their
lives, in their deaths; This would much prevent that Apostasle of many into
errors, and following after heretical persons; Do but remember how wonderfully
God was in the spirits and lives of many holy Pastors in the Church, who did
bear witness against such errors, as many now are led aside with: Who would not
desire to live the lives, and die the deaths of such holy gracious men?

Thirdly, Another object of our memory commended in Scripture is, The former
works of Gods Spirit which happily have been upon us, 3. The former work of
Gods Spirit upon us.
but we have decayed and revolted. This were alone necessary for many a man,
and especially in these times; Remember what love thou did once bear to the
Ordinances; Remember what delight and sweetness thou did once find in them,
but now thou have cast them off Thus the Apostle remindeth the Galatians, Gal.
4. 15. Where is the blessedness you once spoke of? Once they did so rejoice in
Paul's Ministry, accounted it a blessing of an eminent nature, but now began to
slight it. There are also many who have formerly been zealous and active for
good things, they manifested their good desires about the things of God to all
the world, but now they are become like so many clods of earth, they have
forsaken the better part, which with Mary once they did choose, and are either
turned dissolute or earthly, crawling upon the ground like so many worms: Thus
these flourishing trees are quite withered, having neither fruit or leaves:
Thus the Church of Ephesus, guilty of partial Apostasy, Revel. 2. 5. is
enjoined To remember from whence she is fallen; and this counsel is to be given
to many persons, Remember it was otherwise with thee once; Remember it was not
so with thee, as it is now; The time has been thy heart has been much
affected with the word of God preached; The time has been thou had
family duties, and daredst not to neglect the family worship of God; But now,
What is become of all this Religion, You that began in the Spirit, do you not
end in the flesh? Especially your memories are often to be stirred up and
quickened, who have been under many fears and dangers, who have been at the
point of death: Oh what thoughts, what resolutions have you made against sin!
What bitter thoughts and apprehensions had you about your former evil ways?
But (alas) how quickly are all those agonies of soul forgotten? In this your
memories are very much polluted, that all your vows, all your promises to God,
all your fears and terrors are forgotten: Thou that art now embracing of thy
lusts, entertaining thy Dalilah's again, Oh remember what thou did think of
these things, when thou did look upon thy self as a dying man! Oh remember
what woes and wounds were upon conscience! What confident expressions, if ever
God did recover thee again, if ever thou were delivered again, all the world
should see thy repentance and Reformation? These things thou should
remember, and shame thy self, yea be confounded and never able to open thy
mouth to excuse thy self.

Fourthly, 4. Our end, and the day of Judgment.
The Scripture does propound to our memory, as a special object, never to slip
out of it, The consideration of our later end, the day of death, the day of
Judgment, these things are to be constantly in our memory. The neglect of this
is made by the Prophet Jeremiah a bitter instance in his Lamentations
concerning the people of Israel, Lam. 1. 9. She remembered not her later end,
therefore she came down wonderfully; Here the forgetting of her later end is
made the cause of all those strange and wonderful judgments which come upon
them: Thus Isa. 47. 7. Babylon is there arraigned for her pride and arrogance,
And she did not lay the judgments of God to heart, neither did she remember
the later end of it; And how pathetically is Gods desire expressed, Deuteronomy.32.
29. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their later end; Here you see the sum of all godliness is expressed, in
considering our later end: No wonder then if men who forget their death, and
the day of Judgment be violently carried on to all excess of riot; For what
should stop or stay them in their paths? Whereas did thou remember, (as
Solomon advises his young man) That for all this thou must die, thou must be
brought to judgment; This would bind him (as it were) hand and foot; Quicken
then up thy memory, whatsoever thou forgettest, do not forget that thou art a
mortal dying man, that the day of judgment is coming upon thee, which thou
can not avoid; The memory of this would make thee fly from every enticing
sin, as Joseph did from his mistress.

Lastly, 5. The afflictions of others.
The Scripture requires, That we should remember the desolation and troubles
that are upon others, especially the Church of God. So that although it be
never so well with us, though God give us our hearts desire, yet the
remembrance of the afflictions and straits of others should make us mourn and
pray for them: Thus Col. 4. 18. Paul calls upon them to remember his bonds:
So Heb. 13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them: What an hard
and great duty is this, yet if thou art not a dead member in the body; if
spiritual life be in thee, thou will remember the sad condition, the afflicted
estate of many of Gods children, when thou enjoyest all thy soul longs for.
It was thus with good Nehemiah, he was in the Princes Palaces, he wanted
nothing for his own advantage, yet he mourned and was sad from day to day,
because he remembered how it was with Jerusalem: See how impossible a thing
almost David: makes it to forget Jerusalem, Psalm. 137. 5. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If I remember thee not, let my
tongue cleave to the rooff of my mouth; If I prefer not Jerusalem above my
chief joy; here is a gracious worthy spirit; see what David resolves shall be
in his memory more then the chiefest good in this world; he will forget his own
friends, his own joys, yea his own self, sooner then the Churches good: now
may not even a godly man bewail his forgetfullness herein? Thou mindest thy own
estate, thy own family, seek thy own self, but how little is thy memory
about the affairs of the Church? Thou do not remember how many afflicted
Joseph's, how many impoverished, Lazar's there may be in the Church of God? how
many exiles and banished persons; how many desirous to take up the crumbs that
fall from thy table; Did we remember the afflictions and straights of others,
it would put us more upon prayer for them, and it would also make us walk more
thankfully and humbly for our mercies then we do? And thus you see, though the
memory be a vast treasure, though it has infinite recesses and capacious
receptacles, yet the Scripture has prescribed matter enough to fill every
corner (as it were) and if the memory were thus frighted, if it were such a
good storehouse, how happy would it be? whereas naturally it is like a cage of
unclean birds, and a den of thieves. I proceed therefore to show (as it was to
Ezekiel about the Jews) still more abomination in this memory of ours.

SECT. X.
The Memory is polluted in respect of its inward vitiosity adhering to it.
SEcondly, As the memory is thus defiled about its proper objects, so there is
much inward vitiosity adhering to it; And this we may take notice of, as a main
one, The dullness, sluggishness, and stupidity of it, especially as to heavenly
things: who can give any other reason, why good things, holy things, should not
be remembered as well as evil and sinful things, but only the native pollution
of the memory? And from hence it is, that there is such a lethargy (as it were)
upon the memory; for if Peter, 2 Pet 3. 1, writing to those who were
sanctified, and that had pure minds, yet he thought it meet to stir them up,
a metaphor (as you heard) from men asleep, who need to be awakened; how much
more does the memory of a natural man need stirring and exciting? There is then
a wonderful stupidity and sleepiness (as it were) upon the memory, it is even
rusty (as it were) and unfit for any use; men do not exercise and put their
memories upon practice, little do they know what they could remember, if they
did mind it, and exercise themselves to remember what is good; Thou complainest
of a bad memory, of a slippery memory, No, it is thy laziness, it is thy bad
heart, it is thy want of diligence; Thy memory would be as good, and as active
for holy things, as it is for earthly things, if you did put it in practice
more, but the memory being naturally dull and stupid, thou let it alone,
thou never improvest it, never awakenest it, and so through thy forgetfullness
thou come eternally to perish; This lethargy upon thy memory, though a sad
disease, yet might be cured, if thou were real and industrious about it, much
praying, and much practicing of it in holy things, would make it as expedite,
and as ready about good things, as ever it was in any evil things.

In the third place, The memory is naturally unsanctified in this particular,
that wherein it can or does remember, (...).
there it produces not suitable operations, nor does it obtain its end. The
end of remembering what is good, is to love it, to practice it, and to imitate
it; The end of remembering evil, is to loath it bitterly, to repent of it, and
to fly from it: Now herein our memory is grossly polluted, that it never
obtains this blessed and holy end, whereas if our memories were never so
admirable, as that of Symonides, or Appelonius Thyaneus, when he was about an
hundred years old, yet if our memory be not effectual, and operative, to make
us more holy and heavenly, this is a sinful and defiled memory: And for this
reason it is, that wicked men are said to forget God, because though they do
remember him, yet they do not perform those duties, to which their memory
should be subservient. For as the end of knowledge, is action, so the end of
memory also is to be doing; and as it is said, If ye know these things, happy
are ye, if ye do them; so when ye remember these things, it is a blessed thing
to put them in practice. But how often do we see by experience, that where the
memory is naturally very good, there morally it is very bad and sinful? Do you
not meet with many that can remember the Scripture, remember Sermons, yet never
remember the practice of them? whereas God has given us memory, for the same
end he has given us a knowledge, which is to direct and help us in our
operations. That as in beasts, they have a sensitive memory in them to preserve
their natural being, The Ox remembers his Masters crib; the bird remembers
her seasons, and all this for natural preservation; The Be remembereth the
place of her hive; The Ant her nest, (though some Philosophers, because of the
great siceity of the constitution of those creatures, attribute it to a natural
instinct, rather then memory:) so this should be much more true in men,
therefore does God bestow on us an intellectual memory, that thereby he might
spiritually preserve himself, making use of that which is advantageous to his
soul, and avoiding all that which is destructive. As then we are not to know
only that we may know, or to know thereby, making ostentation that others may
take notice of it; so neither are we to remember, that we may remember only, or
to brag of our memory, that others may wonder to see what a strong and
retentive memory we have, but that thereby we may be more promoted, and
advanced in heavenly things: Let all such tremble under this consideration, who
have very quick and sure memories about the Scripture and the Sermons they
hear, yet are very ungodly in their lives, and walk in a contrary way to all
that they do remember. This argues thy memory is not a sanctified memory, that
it carries not on the work of grace in thee; for which end only it ought to be
employed. It is observed that two sorts of men need a good memory; First, The
liar, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, now every professing Christian living
wickedly, is a liar, for with words he acknowledges him, butin works he
denies him; insomuch that thou who lie thus to God, should remember thy
professions and obligations, the second sort is, of greatest accomptants, such
who have great sums to cast up, and to be accountable for, these also had
need of great memories, and such is every man: Oh the vast and numberless
particulars of which he is one day to give an account to God! Oh what a
proficient in holiness might thou have been, if all the good things thou
remembrest were in a practical manner improved, if thou could give a good
account to God of thy memory, for that you are to do, as well as of the
improvement of other parts of the soul! As God at the day of judgment will
have an account of every talent he has given thee, of thy understanding, of
thy will, how these have been employed, so likewise of thy memory; What is that
good, that holiness, thy memory has put thee upon? and this also you who are
young ones and servants, living in godly Families, are diligently to attend to,
for you think this is enough, if you can remember a Sermon, or Catechistical
heads, so as to give an account to your Governors; if you can satisfy them,
you think this is enough, but thou art greatly deceived, for therefore art thou
to remember, that thou may do accordingly, Thou art never to forget this or
that truth, that so it may be ready at hand to direct thee in all thy ways:
and this is indeed a divine act of memory. There are those who teach the art of
memory, and give rules to perfect a man therein, but divine and holy operation,
is the end of the Christian art of our memory.

Fourthly, The pollution of our memory is seen, In that it is made subservient
to the corrupt frame and inclination of our hearts. We remember what our hearts
are set upon, what our affections are earnest for, whereas our memory should
precede and go before them, for the intellective memory is the same with the
mind and understanding of a man; for although to remember be not properly an
act of knowledge, yet this intellective memory we make the same with the mind
of a man, as it extends to things that are past. The memory then is to make way
for the heart and the affections, to be directive to them, whereas now for the
most part it is made a slave to the corrupt heart; for if the understanding in
it all is hegemonical, and primary actions has lost its power, how much more is
this true in the memory? For the most part therefore the badness of the heart
makes a bad memory, and a good heart a good memory; men complain they cannot
remember, when indeed they will not remember; their hearts are so possessed and
inslaved to earthly things, that they remember nothing but what tends
thereunto: This is the ground of that saying, Omnia quae curant senes
meminerunt, Old men remember all things, their hearts are let upon, all things,
they do earnestly regard; They can remember their bonds, the place where their
money lies, because their hearts are fixed upon these things, but no holy or
good things can lodge in their memories: The rule is, Frigus est matter
obiivionis, Coldness is the mother of oblivion, as is partly seen in old men;
and thus it is even in old and young, their hearts are cold, earthly, lumpish,
even like stones about holy things, and therefore it is no wonder if they
remember them no better; so that we may generally conclude, That the cause of
all they blockishness and forgetfullness about divine things, is thy sinful
and corrupt heart, if that were better thy memory would be better. We have a
notable place, Jer. 2. 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number. Can a bride
forget her attire and ornament? it is impossible, because her delight and
affections are upon it, but (says God) My people have forgotten me, days
without number. Why so? because I am not that to them, which ornaments are to a
bride (says God) if they delight in me, rejoice in me, if they did account me
their glory, then they would never forget me: By this you see, that therefore
we forget God, and his ways, because our hearts are not in love with him; Can
he that is powerfully conquered by love of a friend forget his friend? Does he
not always remember him? Is not a friend alter ego? Is not the lovers soul
more where it loves then where it animateth? Thus it would be also with us in
reference unto God; therefore we have bad memories, because bad hearts: It is
true, some natural causes may either deprive us wholly of, or greatly enervate
the memory: Thus Messalla that famous Orator, judged to be more elaborate then
Tully, two years before his death, forgot all things, even his own name.
Hermogenes also that famous Rhetorician, who wrote those Rhetorical
institutions which are read with admiration of all, and this he did when he was
but eighteen years old, and some six years after grew merely stupid, and
senseless, without any evident cause of whom it was said, that he was; Inter
pueros senex, and inter senes puer. Thucidides (as Vostius reports. ( Orat.
institut. lib. 6.) speaks of such an horrible pestilence, that those who did
recover of it, grew so forgetful, that they did not know their friends,
neither remembered what kind of life or profession they once followed; So that
natural causes may much weaken the memory; but if we speak in a moral sense,
then nothing does so much corrupt the memory about holy things, as a sinful
and polluted heart.

The pollution of the memory is seen, In that it is not now subject in the
exercise of it to our will and power. We cannot remember when we would, and
when it does most concern us, whereas in the state of integrity, Adam had such
an universal Dominion over all the powers of his soul, that they acted at what
time, and in what measure he pleased: Thus his affections were subject to him
in respect of their rise, progress and degree; and so for his memory, he had
all things in his mind, as he would: Some indeed question, Whether Adam did
then Intelligere per Phantasmata? But that seems inseparable from the nature
of man, while upon the earth, and living an animal life, though without sin.
No doubt his soul being the form of the whole man, did act dependently upon the
instrumentality of the body, though such was the admirable constitution of his
body, that nothing could make the operations thereof irregular. Adam then had
nothing which could either Physically or Morally hinder the memory, but all was
under his voluntary command, whereas such an impotency is upon us, that if we
would give a world, we cannot remember the things we would; Hence we are force
to compel our selves, by one thing after another, to bring to our minds what is
forgotten, for in remembering there is some dependence of one thing upon
another; as rings, if tied together, are more easily taken hold of, then when
they lie singly and loosly. And this Austin (lib. 10. confess.) makes to be the
Etimology of the word Cogito, Cogito a cogo, as Agito ab ago, Factito a facio,
as if to cogitate were to force and compel things into our minds. Let us then
mourn and humble our selves under this great pollution of nature, that those
things which are of such infinite consequence, which are as much as our
salvation and eternal happiness are worth, yet we do not, we cannot remember.

The memory being not under our command, it falls out, that things come into
our minds, When we would not have them, yea when it is a sin to receive them.
How often in holy duties, in religious performances, do we remember things,
which happily we could not do, when the fit season and opportunity was for
them? Do not many worldly businesses come into our minds, when we are in
heavenly approaches to God, that as Job. 1. when the sons of God came and
appeared before God, then Satan came also and stood with them? Thus when thou
art busy to remember all those Scripture-arguments, which should humble thee
in Gods presence, which should exalt and life up thy soul to God, How many
heterogeneous and distracting thoughts do crowd in also, so that this worldly
business, and that earthly imploiment comes into thy remembrance? Insomuch
that the people of God, though their memories are sanctified, and so cleansed
in much measure from original filth in the dominion of it, yet do much groan
under this importante and unseasonable remembering of things; for hereby our
duties have not that united force and power, as they should have, neither is
God so glorified in our addresses to him, as he ought to be, Psalm. 86. 11.
David there prays, That God would unite his heart to fear his Name; And the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. does therefore speak so warily and tenderly in the case of
marriage, That they might serve the Lord without distraction; And no doubt
dividing and diverting thoughts are as troublesome to the godly heart in holy
duties, as the croaking frogs were to Pharaoh, when they came up into his
chamber: Say then with indignation to all those intruding and violent thoughts,
which make thee not hoc agere, instant in the duty thou art about, stand aloof
off, and be gone; Bolt the door upon them, as Ammon on Thamar; What does Saul
among the Prophets? How comes these uclean things into the holiest of holies?
Let the fear of God be like the Porter or Watchman, to keep out all things that
would then come into thy memory, Liberet me Deus (said he) ab hom^pe unius
tantum negotii, when thy heart minds only one thing, when it is God only thy
soul is fixed upon, and thou art not diverted otherwise, such duties are
effectual and prevail much. Thus you have at large heard the many ways,
wherein this noble and useful part of the soul is grossly polluted, what a
Sepulcher (as it were) it is, wherein are contained nothing but loathsome and
abominable things. Come we then to make some Use of it. And

Use 1. Is the memory thus defiled about holy and divine objects? It is so
forgetful of what is good? Then we see it is no matter of wonder, if the most
people, who sit under the continual means of grace do abide, and continue in
their wicked ways, as much as if never any Prophet had been amongst them For
they go away from all Sermons, remembering no more then stones in the wall; They
are the Apostles forgetful hearers, Jam. 1. and so presently let all things
slip out of their minds; Thus forgetfulness (of which you hear so much) is the
mother of all that disobedience and wickedness many live in. The Apostle gives
a good exhortation, Heb 2. 1. We ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things Which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip out of our
mind; We must give earnest heed: All your thoughts, and care, and study should
be, how to keep the good truths of God in your mind, and that always, lest
that every thing thou hear should fasten upon thee, even till thou come to
the grave. The Greek word also (...) is emphatical; The Margin makes it from
vessels that leak; Others from wet and bloached paper, upon which we cannot
write anything. Let us then look to our memories more then we have done, pray
for the sanctification of them, seeing by the evil thereof the Ministry is made
ineffectual. And because the memory is thus weak, we see the necessity and
usefulness of a twofold custom, of writing of Sermons, and of repeating them
afterward in the Family; of writing (for whatsoever some pretend to the
contrary, yet) it is a special means to make a thing be more fixed in our
memory; and this was the reason why God would have the King of Israel, write
the book of the Law, and that with his own hand, because hereby he would
remember it more tenaciously. And as for repeating of Sermons (besides that it
is part of the Sanctification of the Sabbath) it does greatly help to make the
Word ingrassed into us; So that those Families where there is no repeating of
the Word preached, do plainly discover, that they regard not the retaining of
it in their hearts, and so are not afraid to be found in the number of
forgetful hearers.

Use 2. If the memory be thus defiled, then this also shows the necessity of
parents duty, in the constant instruction and teaching of their children in the
principles of Religion; children have not understanding to serve God with, and
therefore their memory, which is easily quickened in them, must be the more
drawn out, that so they may serve God as they are able: It Is good seasoning
these vessels betimes with wholesome liquor.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Pollution of the Will of man by Original Sin.
SECT. I.
JOHN 1. 13. Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God.
THe original pollution of the Understanding, Conscience and Memory, has been
largely and fully discovered; We now proceed to the other part or power of the
rational soul, which is the will; That is in the soul like the primum mobile in
the Heavens, that does carry all the inferior orbs away in its own motion, or
like the fire among the elements that does assimulate every thing else to it
self. This is the whole of a man; A man is not what he knows, or what he
remembers, but what he wills; The understanding is but as a Connsellour; The
will is as the Queen sitting upon its Throne, exercising its dominion over the
other parts of the soul; The will is the proper subject and seat of all our
sin, and if there could be a Summum malum, as there is a Summum bonum, this
would be in the will. Seeing therefore that our will is the master power of the
soul, and is to that, what the heart is to the body, the principle of all
motion and action, the more we find this will, thoroughly infected with sin,
the greater will our misery appear: Neither may thou fear that the doctrinal
discovery of that poisoned fountain in thee, and the representation of thy
soulness and loath somness upon thee may discourage thee, but hereby thou will
be brought to loath thy self, and admire the riches of grace in Christ, which
shall pardon and glorify such a noisome wretch as thou art by nature. Indeed
Lorinus (Comment. in 17. chap. Act.) relates of Ptolomy King of Egypt, that
he banished one Hegesius a Philosopher and eloquent Orator, because he did so
pathetically and sensibly Declaim upon the miseries of man's life, that many
were thereby cast into such grief, that they made away themselves; but our end
in discovering of this universal leprosy of sin upon us by nature, is to
bring us into an holy despair of our selves, a renouncing of our righteousness,
that so Christ may be all in all.

Come we then to make inquiry into the original pollution of our will, which is
a subject of very large territories; The Disputes about it are voluminous, but
I shall be as brief, as the nature of this truth will permit, and whereas
concerning the will, we may consider the nature of it absolutely, in its proper
works and operations, or relatively in its state, as free or enslaved. I shall
treat of both, because herein original sin has put forth it self more then
in any other parts of the soul. And

First, I shall begin with the will absolutely considered, as it is the great
and mighty part of the soul, and that from this Text, which because of the
different thoughts of learned Interpreters, does deserve a diligent
explication. And

For the Coherence of it, you may take notice of the sad and bitter event
described by the Evangelist, of Christ's coming as light into the world; Though
he came to his own, and that as a Physician to the sick, as a Savior to such
who were lost, yet his own received him not. Now lest it might be thought this
rejection of Christ was universal, he adds, Some did receive him, and (...)
dclareth the unspeakable benefit and privilege vouchsafed to such. So that in
the words we may take notice,

1. Of the Subject, who are thus honored and highly blessed by Christ, Such as
received him, and what this is, is explained, viz. Such who believe on his
Name. In this is comprehended all our Evangelical Duty, and that both inwardly
and outwardly, only faith is expressed, because this is virtually all. This is
the seed and the root, the soul and life, the salt that seasoneth the whole man.

2. We have the Privilege or Benefit, which is said to (...), the right or
dignity of being the sons of God, for so the word (...), is to be understood,
and therefore Popish Disputes about the power of free will in holy things from
this place. is wholly impertinent, only the difficulty is,

Quest. How they who believe in Christ can be said to have this privilege
given them of Sonship, seeing that they could not believe, unless they were
first born of God, and so the sons of God?

Answ. Some therefore do understand this Sonship in respect of that future
glory, which in Scripture is sometimes called Adoption, and 1 John 3. 1. Then
it will properly appear that we are sons of God; But we may well enough
understand it of our Adoption and Sonship even in this life, and this is said
to be obtained by faith, because in our sense and feeling there must be
believing, before we come to know this privilege does belong to us; or else
though faith and Sonship be together in time, yet in order of nature one
precedeth the other.

Thus we have the Subject and the Privilege; But in the next place, we have
the Description of the efficient cause, for it was not their own power and
freewill that made them believe; Therefore the efficient cause is set down,
first, Negatively, and then Positively; Negatively, by removing those false
causes that men might imagine; and we have a threefold enumeration of them,
Not of blood, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man. Diverse
Interpreters go diverse ways, though much to the same sense: Some think the
Evangelist by blood does not in the general mean natural generation, and then
afterward distribute it into two particulars, not of the will of the flesh,
that is of the woman; Nor of the will of man, that is not of the man. Others
(supposing the general) interpret the distribution thus; Not of the will of the
flesh, that is not naturally; Nor by the will of man, that is, not by humane
adoption, for so some are made legal sons amongst man. Others, they think all
these enumerations are but to signify one thing, and therefore the opposition
to all is God; But we may not think the holy Ghost does so industriously reckon
up these several ways, but that some special thing is intended by every one;
Although, as Erasmus observes, the emphatical Article is not in the original.
By blood therefore we understand any dignity or excellency of birth, it is
bloods in the plural number, either by an Enallage, and so an Hebraism, as
Maldenate; Or else because of the long succession by birth: And this may well
oppose the carnal opinion reigning both with Jew and Gentile, for all know how
the Jew boasted in his birth, because he was the seed of Abraham, therefore he
thought the favor of God necessarily annected to him; And for the Gentile,
What a vanity and sinful humor is in persons to be proud of their birth, that
they come of noble parents? For, although this be an outward civil dignity
amongst men, yet it makes nothing at all to their spiritual dignity, yea many
times hinders it, according to that observation, Heroum filiinoxae,
Regeneration then does not come according to such civil and political respects.

2. Not of the will of the flesh] that is, not of the natural will and choice
of (...) he has no power or ability in him so much as to will a better
condition then (...) is in.

Lastly, Not of the will of man] that is, not by the will of man, though
perfected and adorned with many acquired perfections; Not by the will of a
Plato, or an Aristotle, or a Seneca; So that here is a twofold will denied
from efficacy in grace, the will considered in its natural abilities, or in its
acquired abilities: Thus 2 Pet. 1. 21. The prophecy in old time is said, Not
to come by the will of man, but the will of God; The will of man is there
supposed to be in some raised and eminent ability above what it naturally has,
and therefore opposed to the will of God in a more peculiar and extraordinary
manner putting forth it self. Thus we have all false causes removed, and the
true one affirmed, which is God himself.

So that this Text does plainly triumph over all the proud opinions of
Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians and Papists, who either give whole or part of
the work of conversion to the will of man; For the Evangelist is very diligent
to exclude the will from any efficiency herein, under any respect whatsoever.
Observe,

The will of every man is naturally so polluted, that it cannot produce or
cause our regeneration. It is not by the will of the flesh, or by the will of
man, that we are born again.

SECT. II.
Propositions concerning the Nature of the Will.
BEfore we come to lanch into this ocean of wormwood and gall (for the polluted
will, polluteth all other things) Let us say something to the nature of the
will, not enlarging our selves, either as Philosophers or Divines do in this
point, but select only what is fit for our purpose.

First, Therefore consider, That God has appointed and ordered in nature, that
every apprehensive power should have an appetitive power proportionable
thereunto. The apprehensive being like the eye to discern and discover the
object; The appetitive like the hand to embrace it: Thus the Angels, as they
have an understanding to know things, so they have a will to desire them; In
beasts there is a sensitive apprehension by imagination, and a sensitive
appetite accordingly. Now because man in his soul is like an Angel, and in his
body communicates with beasts, therefore he has both a twofold apprehension,
intellectual and sensitive, understanding and imagination; and also a twofold
appetite, a rational one, which is the will, and a sensitive one, which is the
sensitive appetite in a man, wherein the passions and affections are seated;
The will then is in a man his rational appetite, following the proposition and
manifestation of the understanding: For if a man did know what was good, or
what is evil, and no appetite to embrace the one, or avoid the other, he would
be no better than a stone or a statue for all his reason. We see then why God
has placed such a power in the soul, as the will is; It is that the good which
the understanding manifests may be embraced and entertained, and the evil it
does discover may be shunned, Whether this will be distinct really from the
soul it self, and from the understanding is a Philosophical Dispute, and will
not tend to your edification.

Secondly, Though it be the appetite in a man, yet it is a rational appetite,
it is subjected in the rational soul. There is a threefold appetite,

1. Natural, which is in the motion of inanimate things, as in the stone to
descend downwards, this is called an appetite, though properly it is not so,
because it does not follow knowledge, but is consequent upon the form
immediately.

2. There is the sensitive appetite, which moves upon the knowledge of sense,
and this is both in beasts, and also in men, yea naturally we live and desire,
even all the motions of the soul are according to sense, and so in this respect
man is become like the bruit beast: But of this afterward.

3. There is the rational appetite, and that is called the will, and this is in
man only; a beast has not properly any will, no more then he has
understanding, so that the will of a man is a noble and high faculty in him,
appointed to follow reason, and to be regulated by it in all things; and
therefore Austin says, Voluntas tantum est in bonis; The will is only in good
things; If a man love evil or desire evil, this is not voluntas (says he) but
cupiditas; It does not deserve the name of the will, but of lust, but common
speech is otherwise, there is a bad will, a corrupted will as well as a good
will, only when we say, the will is a rational appetite, that must not be
understood formaliter, but participative, as they say, that is, the will does
not know, does not reason, but is directed thereby, therefore it is called
coeca potentia, a blind power, and if you say, it is blind, How then can it see
the good proposed? I answer, it follows the good proposed, not because it
knows it, but because of its essential subordination to the understanding;
Hence it is that to have a good will, it is so requisite to have a sound mind.
Ignorant and blind minds are always accompanied with corrupt and polluted
wills; There cannot be a sanctified will, where there is not an enlightened
mind; This should make the ignorant and stupid to tremble in their estate they
live in: This should make you prize knowledge above gold and pearls, as also to
wait upon the Ministry with diligence, seeing that by knowledge the will
comes to be made holy.

Fourthly, we are the more to inform our selves about its depravation, by how
much the more noble and excellent it is. It is hotly disputed between the two
factions of Thomists and Scotists, which is the more excellent faculty, the
understanding or the will; The Thomists are for the understanding; the Scotists
for the will, but these two cannot absolutely and in every respect be commended
before each other, only in respect of power and efficacy, the will is more
eminent, for the understanding it self in respect of its exercise is subject to
the dominion of the will, and the will also is properly the original and
fountain of all good or evil in a man; for though the understanding has actual
sinfulness, and the affections, yet this is because of the will either
directly or indirectly; so that to an actual deliberate sin there is required
some kind of voluntarinesse, either expressly or interpretatively, either in se,
or in causa; Original sin (you heard) was voluntary in some sense, although
we need not judge of that by Aristotle's rules, who was ignorant of any such
thing. Therefore Julian the Pelagian triumphed in his Aristotelical Philosophy
against original sin, despising his Ecclesiastical Judges, as not knowing
Aristotle's Categories; as if (says Austin) he desired a Synod of
Peripateticks rather than Judges in the Church; but though original sin, with
the indeliberate motions thereof, have not the actual personal will of a man,
yet all other sins have, so that the pollution of the will, is in effect the
pollution of the whole man. Hence

In the fifth place, There is this difference between the understanding and the
will in relation to its objects, The understanding does receive the species of
the object, to it self, not the objects themselves; and therefore when we know
or understand evil as an object, this does not defile the understanding, but is
a perfection of it. Thus Godknoweth all the evil committed in the world, yet
his knowledge is not polluted thereby, Scire malum, non est malum, but the will
that goes out to the objects as they are in themselves, and thereby loving of
them, is what the object is. Thus if we will sin it is sin, and not if we
know sin, because the will goes out to a sinful object as it is in it self,
so that above all keepings we are to keep the will, for what that is placed
upon, it presently becomes like it; If thou love the world, or earth, thou
art earth, thou art of the world: Hence all the while sin is kept out from
the will, though it be in thy mind, though it be by suggestion to thee, yet
because there is no consent, it is not thy sin but thy misery. I speak not of
the motus principatus, which are antecedent to our will, but of suggestions
only offered from without, but when the will yields, when that consencs, it
becomes thy evil immediately, as poison while it is in the remote parts of the
body may not kill, but when it strikes to the heart, then it is mortal. Thus
sin in temptation, sin in suggestion does not destroy till the will receive
it, so great a matter is it to look to this power of the soul. For

In the sixth place, Because of this rule and dominion the will has therefore
it is called the universal appetite of the whole man. We see all the other
powers of the soul have their peculiar and proper inclination, The eye to see,
the ear to hear, the understand to know, but the will is to will the good for
the whole person, therefore it is not limited to one good object, more then
another, but bonum in communi, the good in general is the object of it, so that
the will is the universal appetite and inclination of the whole man; now if
this great wheel that moves all, be irregular and out of order, what good can
be expected in the less wheels, if the foundation be destroyed, how can the
building be established: Let then your attention, your thoughts and affections
be greatly quickened, while we anatomize all the evil of the will. This is the
most grievous and most dreadful instance of all the pollution original sin
infecteth us with.

In the 7th place, When we speak of the pollution of the will, The wera [will]
may be take ambigously; for sometimes thereby is denoted, the power to will,
someomes again the very act of willing, and sometimes the object that we do
will, is often called our will: Thus when the Scripture speaks of Gods will,
it does sometimes mean the object willed, and this is often called Gods will,
sometimes the act of willing, thus ( if God will) and sometimes that power
whereby he does will, not that there is, Potenis volendi properly in God, for
all power is, Perfectibilis per actum, whereas every thing in God, is actum
purus, only we speak so of God, according to our capacity. Some indeed have
questioned, Whether we may porperly attribute the word [will] to God; or
metaphorically only? but seeing that simply to will, is, Perfectio simpliciter
simplex, and absolute and most simple perfection, therefore it is not to be
denied to God; for as the Psalmist says He that makes man know, shall not be
know? Thus he that makes man will, shall not he will? only will is not in God,
as it is in man, for man's will is carried out to a good desired, or not
enjoyed. In our will there is, convenientia and indigentia; First, A
convenience, or sutebleness between the faculty and the object, and therefore
we will it: And then there is an indigency or want of it; Now Gods will being
the same with his Essence, is absolutely perfect and sufficient, but the
created will in man is otherwise, and this will since man's fall, whether taken
for the power to will, or the act of willing, or the object will^d, is
altogether a corrupt and a diseased will, there is nothing found or good in it;
Although our purpose is to speak of the will as a power in the soul, yet prone
to put it self immediately into actings.

In the eighth place, The will having this great dominion over the whole soul,
and being the universal appetite of a man, therefore it is that in it is seated
obedience or disobedience to God. Obedience or disobedience to God is not
properly, at least not primarily, or radically, in any part but in the will. It
is true, all the other parts of the soul in regeneration are made holy and
sanctified, and thereby in their way conformable to the will of God, yet
obedience and disobedience are primarily acts of the will; so that as the will
is qualified, so is a man said to be obedient to God: A good will is the good
tree, that makes the fruit good, and a bad will is the bad tree that makes
the fruit bad. As then all the evil or good of a tree comes from the root, so
does all the evil or good of a man come from his will; For till this be
sanctified, till this be renewed, nothing can be good in a man; Therefore if
you examine, what is the cause of all the impiety, and all the wickedness that
most commit, it is because their wills are corrupt, their wills are rebellious;
Their minds, their consciences many times, tell them they ought to do
otherwise, only their wills are slubborn and contumacious, Joh. 5. 40. Ye will
not come unto me that ye may have life: So in the Parable, Mat. 21. 29. when
the son was commanded to go, and work in the vineyard, he says, I will not,
It is then the will of man, that is the desperate and implacable enemy to all
the things of God, men may delude themselves with reasons and fair glosses, but
it is their will, and only their unsanctified will, that makes them continue
in such opposition to God; now the will is therefore the root of all obedience,
of disobedience in a man, because that is like the Centurion in a man's soul,
whatsoever it bids this, or that power of the soul do, it does; what it bids
the mind think, it thinks; what it bids love to love, it loves; what it bids
the hand move to, it moves to; for there are two acts of the will wherein it
demonstrateth its dominion, The Elicite acts, and the Imperate; Elicite are
those which the will does immediately produce, as election, intention, consent,
etc. and herein it has full power, yet so, as that it is in subordination to
God; The Imperate acts, are those which are produced by other parts of a man,
yet from the command of the will, so when we move our hands or our feet, these
are imperate acts of the will; Thus when we turn our mind from one object, and
place it upon another, this is an imperate act of the will: The affections also
they are in some measure under the command of the will, but not so absolutely
as the body and the motions thereof are. By which you see that all things in a
man are reduced to his will, and therefore the more active and universal this
is, the greater is the defilement thereof.

In the ninth place, The will in regard of its constitution at first, has for
its object that which is good; And in the state of integrity it was always a
true real good, but in this state of revolt from God, the will cannot indeed be
carried out to any thing but what is good, only it is but an apparent good, a
disguised good, it is a true and real evil. As the object of the understanding
is truth, and it cannot give its assent to that which does appear to be false,
so the object of the will is good; neither can the will have any motion or
tendency to any object, which has not the color (at least) of some good. As
the Devil appeared in Samuel's clothes, and so was believed to be Samuel; Thus
does all the evil in the world, which does at any time seduce and draw the will
aside, it has the mantle and covering of good; It being impossible that the
will should desire evil* as it is evil. It is true, some deny, that bonnus is
the object, adiquate, and general of the will; but they say, good is the object
of the will, as it is prosequntiva, prosecuting and desiring; but malu^^ is the
object of the will, as it is persequntiva and aversiva, as it does repel and
dislike, so evil is the object of the will; For displicency and hatred are acts
of the will, and the objects of these is evil. But we speak of the will now, as
it is a rational desiring appetite, satisfying it self with love of some
object, and if this be not good, either real or apparent, the will can no more
tend to it, then the eye to music, or the car to colors; only by original
sin, herein arises our unspeakable miserey, that the good which the will
does now embrace, is only a counterfeit specious gilded good, no true real
good; They are but seeming goods, and real evils; Like the Glowworm that
shines in the night, and is nothing but an earthly worm; Like a rotten Post or
Tree, that in the night seems to be glorious, but in the day we know what it
is: Thus if we could take off the visor, the painting from those objects, we
place our wills upon, we shall see nothing but damnable guilt, and real
abominable evils, which will at last damn our souls, Per falsa mala itur ad
vera bona, per falsa bona itur ad vera mala; by that which is speciously good,
we come indeed to that which is truly evil; and by that which is apparently
evil, we come to what is substantially good.

Lastly, In the will (according to those that are exercised in School Divinity)
We are to conceive in it suitable and proportionable affections, to those we
call passions in the sensitive part. Thus in the will (as it is a rational
appetite) there are love, joy, desire, fear and hatred. This is plain, because
in Angels there are such affections; so also in the soul separated, there is
love and joy, earnest desire for the coming of Christ, and its reunion to the
body; by which it appears evidently, that besides those passions in a man,
which work by a corporal transmutation, there are these spiritual and
immaterial affections, or rather actions, and operations of the will; So that
the will loves, the will rejoices, the will desires, etc. This is the more
to be attended unto, because hereby this pollution of original sin, will
appear the more extensive and diffusive; The love of the will, the desire of
the will, the joy of the will are become abominable.

SECT. III.
. 1.
The Corruption of the Will in all its several Operations.
THese Doctrinal introductions thus subtracted, Let us proceed to open this
noisome Sepulcher, this dead and defiled will, which has been spiritually dead,
not as Lazarus four days, but ever since Adam's fall, and therefore must needs
be stinking and unsavory to a spiritual discerning. And let us

First, Take notice of its defilement in all its several operations, which the
will abounds with; And we find them out of the Schoolmen thus marshalled; The
will (say they) may be carried out to good simply, and absolutely as good, and
then it is only a bare volition, which is either inefficacious and conditional,
called velleity or efficacious and absolute, then it is volition in the
general; or else it may be carried out to good relatively, as it is finis, an
end, and then either this end is enjoyed and possessed, which makes the act of
the will, called fruition, or else it is desired and purposed to be obtained,
which makes another act of the will called intention.

In the next place, The will may be considered, as it operates about the means
to its intended end. And

1. There is a yielding unto and embracing of such a mean propounded to that
end; and this act in the will is called consent, for the understanding that
does properly assent, and the will consent. This act of the will to consent
unto a thing is of great importance in Casnistical Divinity, for there may be
suggestions and fiery injections of diabolical temptations, but if the will
does not consent, as you see Christ's holy will did not in his combat with the
Devil, they do not become our sins. Of this consent more in its time.

2. If there be several means conducible to such an end, then comes another
act of the will, called Election, or a choosing of one thing rather than
another, that which consulation is in the understanding, Election is in the
will.

Lastly, When the Will has thus intended the end, and chosen efficaciously its
means, then is there the last act of the will, which is called usus the use or
the application of all the other powers of the soul, to bring this end about.
It uses the understanding, it uses the affections, it uses the whole body to
accomplish it.

Thus you see what are the several operations of the will; It is now necessary
to take all these singly by themselves, to show how grossly the will is
disordered, and by that you will be convinced, that the corruption of the will,
is indeed the corruption of the whole man, which made Austin frequently define
sin by a mala volunt as, and that which is good by a bona volunt as, because
of the dominion the will has in the whole man.

. 2.
The Corruption of the Will in its general Act, which is called Volition.
FIrst therefore, Let us begin with the general act, which is called Volition,
the bare willing of a thing, which you heard, was either conditional and
imperfect, or efficacious; for the former kind, How much corruption is there in
the will, and that both about sin, and also about good? About sin, What
secret wishes and wouldings are there in a man naturally, that sin were not
sin, Vtina^n hoc non esset peccare, said he, that thy pleasures were not
sins, that thy unlawful profits were not sins, there is this secret
corruption in the will, whereby it would have the nature of things changed,
vice to be virtue, and virtue to be vice. Some indeed dispute, Whether there be
any such actings of the will as may be called velleities, and not volitions?
But experience teaches there are, so the Apostle, Rom 9. 3. I could wish my
self accursed, there is an incomplete act of the will; When the Psalmist says,
The fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psa. 14. 4. that is in his
wish, in his incomplete will; for absolutely a man cannot will that which is
impossible; If then we do but observe the motions of the will in this respect,
we shall find the number of these sins, to be like the sand upon the sea
shore: Oh the many secret ungodly wishes that do by swarms rise up in thy will,
which though thou take no notice of, yet God does and will accordingly judge
thee!

As thus the will is sinful in one way by its incompeat acts, so also when it
comes to what is good, when it should in a powerful, lively and efficacious
manner be carried out to it, it is very remiss and languid; insomuch that they
are but velleities, they are the sluggards wishes, that desires and yet
starveth himself, because he never puts out his hands to work; Is not this
half and faint willing of the things that are good, the root and cause of most
men's destruction? Preach to them, press them about repentance, about
conversion to God, and they promise you they will do it, and God give us his
grace to do it, and no more is done; whereas thou should will what is good
with all thy might and strength, above gold and silver, above life it self:
These wishers and woulders in Religion never make true converts. But of this
more in its time.

. 3.
The Corruption of the Will in its Absolute and Efficacious Willing of a thing.
COme we then to the next act of the Will, which is an absolute and efficacious
willing of a thing, and here no tongue of men and Angels can express the
depravation of it; For if we do consider the true proper and adequate object of
the will, it is God only; He is the supreme and universal good, having in him
after an eminent manner all good whatsoever; So that no object can fill the
capacity of the will but God only. The good things of the creature can no more
fill up the will, then the air can the stomach of an hungry man; but if we
consider how it stands with our will, as it is now corrupted, of all objects
it is most averse to God; Hence the Scripture describes every wicked man by
this, That he hates God, not under the notion as he is good, but as he is
holy, as he is a just Judge, who will punish every wicked transgressor; Know
then, and bewail this unspeakable defilement upon thy will, that it is most
averse to its proper object, no stone does more naturally descend to the
center, then thy will should tend to God, Amor men's pondus meum, illuc feror,
quocunque feror, A man's love is his weight; now if thy love be spiritual, that
weighs thee to God, but if thy will be carnal, that presses thee to carnal
objects.

2. Thy will is corrupted in respect of its object, because all the creatures
are to be willed by thee, no otherwise then they tend to God, or lead thee to
him, whereas naturally we will the creatures, for the creatures sake, and so
make it instead of a God to us: As the Sun being the primum visibile, all
things are to be seen by the light thereof; so God being the primum amabile,
the first and chiefest thing to be beloved, all things are to be loved with a
participation from it: But who may not groan under our corruption herein? Every
creature we desire, we are apt to terminate our selves upon that, and to go no
further; Do we will health, parts and the comforts of this life, in reference
to the glory of God? So that herein we may see the depth of our corruption: It
was not thus with Adam in his integrity; There is not a creature, that thy will
is pitched upon, but thy soul commits fornication with it; Leave not the
meditation of this point, till thy heart in an holy manner break within thee.

. 4.
The Corruption of the Will in its Act of Fruition.
THe next Act is that which is called Fruition; An operation (you heard) of the
will, when it does possess a thing, as its ultimate end, end resting in it, as
a center, and desiring no further; For as the stone cannot of it self hang in
the air, but must descend to the earth, and there it rests: So the will of
man moves up and down in a restless manner, like Noah's Dove, till it find out
an object wherein it does acquiesce with fullness of content. Now there is no
object that we may thus frui, enjoy ultimately, and for it self's sake, but God
only. That distinction of frui and uti, to enjoy and use only, which Austin
first excogitated, the Schoolmen are large upon; To enjoy a thing, is to have
it for its self sake, referring it to no further end, for the Rule is,
Appetitus finis, is infinitus, The soul never has enough of that which it
ultimately desires, but yet desires nothing else but that. As in Philosophy
it is said, Materia semper appetit formam, the Matter does constantly desire
new forms in sublunary things; Hence is that frequent alteration, transmutation
and generation, but in the heavenly bodies, the matter (they say) is satiated,
desires no other, because of the great activity and perfection of that form;
Thus it is in moral things, the heart of a man, while carried out to any
earthly thing, cannot meet with its complement and fullness of blessedness, and
therefore like the Horsleech still cries, Give, give, Sen caret optatis, seu
fruitur miser est. It is a Sheol that is always craving, only when terminated
upon God, because he is bonum quo nihil melius, there cannot be any good
desirable, which is not transcendently in him; therefore the sanctified will
does enjoy him only: Thus David, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and none in
earth in comparison of thee; In Heaven David had none but God, not Angels nor
Archangels, Heaven would not be Heaven, if God were not enjoyed. Indeed
Divines do commonly call the enjoyment of God in Heaven fruition, and that is
immediate, complete and perfect fruition, but yet even in this life, believers
partake of God, have communion with him, and do enjoy him. It is indeed by
says, not yet by vision, but the object of faith is as real and operative in
the soul, though not to such a full degree, as the object seen Thus you see,
that according to the true order and constitution of things, God only is to be
enjoyed, he only is to be loved, and desired for his own sake, and all things
else in reference to him. But on the breadth, the depth and length of our
natural defilement therein! What spiritual Geometry can measure the dimensions
hereof? For does not every natural man enjoy something or other, which is as a
God to him? Why is Covetousness called Idolatry? Why are some said to have
their belly a God? Is not all this, because they love these things, and enjoy
these things for their own selfe's sake? Whereas we ought only to use them, as
instruments of Gods glory, and advantages of grace, not to abide or dwell in
them; They are to be taken as Physic, which is not received for its selfe's
sake, but because of health; So that were it not for health, a man would never
use it: Thus it ought to be with us, in all the comforts we have in this world,
to use them no further then they are subservient to our spiritual condition; we
are ex officio discendere, not cupiditate ruere, such a crucified and
circumcised heart the Apostle exhorts to, 1 Cor. 7. The time is short, those
that marry must be as if they married not, those that rejoice, as if they
rejoiced not If a man desire a garment, he would not have all the cloth in the
Country, but as much as serves for his garment; So neither are we to desire
wealth, riches, honors, any comfort without end, but as much as will conduce
for Heaven. The travailer will not burden himself, no not with gold and silver,
who has a long journey to go; Oh then call off thy will again and again? Say,
Why art thou fastened here? Why stayest thou here? Look further, look higher,
This is not God; As the Angel did on a sudden so ravish John, that he was
ready to worship him, but the Angel forbad him, saying, I am thy
fellow servants, worship thou God; So these creatures had they a voice would
speak, when thou art at any time ravished with the excellency of them, do not
love us, love God; do not delight in us, delight thou in God, we are but thy
fellow creatures, yea not so much, but inferior and more ignoble then man.
Jansenius (Lib. 2. de statu naturae lapsae.) following his Austin, will not
allow us any love to any thing but God; we may use it (say they) but not love
it; yea he rejects that assertion, we may love the creatures, but moderately;
this is (says he) as if we should say, there is a moderate covetousness, a
moderate pride; and we must grant, that the Scripture does many times speak of
the love of the creature, as absolutely and intrinsecally a sin. Thus, Love
not the world, nor the things of the world, 1 John 2. 15. He does not say, Use
not the world, but love not the world; and thus, The love of money is the root
of all evil, not the having of it or using of it. But this seems to be too
rigid and stoical; and it is indeed a mere Question De nomine; for, take love
in the sense they do, for the willing of a thing, for its own selfe's sake,
thus it is intrinsecally a sin to love any creature, it is spiritual
Idolatry, and a breach of the first command, but then the Scripture does allow
us to love the creatures, so we do not love them more then God. Thus Husbands
are commanded to love their wives, and we are to love our Neighbors as our
selves; So that to love the creatures is our duty, we should sin, if we did
not, only the excess and inordinacy is sinful, and this we are guilty of,
when we enjoy any thing but God, Now though none will acknowledge themselves
guilty of this sin, yet every natural man does enjoy some creature or other,
his will is fastened upon something that is not God: It is true, this sin is
very secret and subtle, the godly themselves have much ado to find it out in
their own hearts; the will of a man is such an unsearchable Abisse of all evil,
but do not thou crawl on the ground like a worm any longer, Set thy affections
on things above. It is indeed a Question worthy much enquiring into, How a man
shall know whether he does enjoy a creature or use it only, when it is a
Sarah, when an Hagar only? And here the godly themselves are often in great
uncertainties; The root of things lies hid under ground; The first Letter
commonly which begins a Book has so many gaudy flourishes about it, that it
is hard to know what it is: Thus also it is in our hearts and conversations;
what is the Summum bonum, the great wheel that moves all, the ultimate rest of
our soul, it is very difficult to find out; but it is not my work now to dive
into this, it is enough that we know, The will of every man is naturally so
polluted, that it enjoys a creature in stead of God, it cannot will, love,
and embrace him as the chiefest good. Proceed we then to the next act of the
will about the end, and that not as possessed and enjoined, but (...) be
obtained and acquired, and that by some means, which we call Intention, and we
shall find the will horribly corrupted in this respect also.

. 5.
The Pollution of the Will in its Act of Intention.
THe word Intention is a Metaphor from the Archer, who aiming at a mark, uses
his greatest skill and endeavor to hit. The Scripture speaks of the
Benjamites, as famous in this way; Now every thing that man does as a rational
agent is to have some end, some mark and aim, and what that is, the Scripture
does direct unto, Gods glory is the aim, What ever ye do, do all to the glory
of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. So then we see, what is to be the object of our
intention, what we are to aim at in all that we do; Whence also we must be
directed and guided therein ( viz) by the Word of God. This being concluded on,
we see that the will in every sin it commits, does fail and err in its
intention, therefore is all sin called (...), an aberration from the scope:
Every action that is not done for God, is like an arrow shot besides the mark,
that shooting is lo^^, it was to no purpose, and it cannot be recovered again.
All rational agents intend an end, and if that be not obtained, there is a
miscarriage; So that as in natural things, when there is some error, a monster
is brought forth: Thus it is in voluntary and moral things; Every sin is a
monster, and thou oughtst to be more astonished and trembling under every
sin, then a woman would be in seeing a monster come from her; So that in
every sin the will is corrupted in its intention; But yet more particularly
let us consider, how the intention of the will is deprived, and that in these
ways:

First, When the chief end is not intended, but secondary ends, intermedious
ends; Yea when those things which should be but means are intended as ends,
when we make a wilderness a Canaan, a Tabernacle, the Temple, the Inn, a
Dwellingplace. A secondary end which a man is to intend is the salvation of his
own soul, the principal and most noble is the glory of God. It is true, God
has so inseparably conjoined his glory, and man's salvation together, that one
cannot be divided from the other: Therefore it is too rigid of some, who press
this as a duty upon Christians, to be willing to be damned for Gods glory; That
we are to will our destruction, so that God may be glorified thereby, for we
are to seek for immortality and glory; It would be a sin to will our
damnation, only this is a subordinate end, Gods glory is the principal: Neither
is a Christian anxiously to perplex himself with this Question, Whether they
love Gods glory, or their own salvation best? Some timorated consciences, and
tender spirits have been apt to judge themselves hypocrites in this thing,
thinking they serve God only for Heavens sake, for their own ends and safety,
not for Gods glory, which yet is a greater good, and more to be preferred then
the salvation of the whole world; better all men be damned, then God not be
glorified. But it is not good for a Christian to put such Questions to his
soul; Neither was that a wise wish of one, who desired there were neither
Heaven or Hell, that so he might know whether he served God purely for himself
or no. Though these things are to be granted, yet on the other we must also
yield, That the glory of God is the ultimate end, and our salvation in
subordination thereunto; Not that they are to be divided or opposed, for
Subordinata non pugnant, only one is less principal, and the other more
principal; But how corrupt is the wills intention herein? How many will Heaven
as a place of Salvation, but not as a place of Gods glory; they desire
Salvation as it freeth from Hell torments, but not as it is a perfect
sanctification of the whole man for the enjoyment of God? Here thy intention is
sinful and incomplete, when thou intendest Heaven and happiness, thou art to
desire all of it, not some parts of it.

Again, Our intenton is much more corrupted in making the means to be the end;
we make a perfect period and stop at a Comma, or a Colon; and truly this is the
general and universal corruption of every man's natural intention; he shoots
his arrow too short, he intends no further, then an happy pleasant and merry
life in this world; one intends honors, another intends wealth, another
intends pleasures: There is no natural man can intend any higher good then some
creature or other; That as the bruit beasts have a kind of improper intention,
as they have of reason, whereby they are carried out to those things only that
are obvious to sense: Thus it is with man in his natural estate, destitute of
regeneration; a worm can as soon fly like a Lark toward Heaven, as this man
intend any thing that is spiritually good: for the natural man has neither a
mind or an heart for such holy things, and so is like an Archer that has
neither eyes or hands, and thereby can never reach the mark.

Secondly, The intention of the will is corrupted in its error and mistake
about its object, it shoots at a wrong mark* It Is really and indeed evil
which he intends, though it be apparently good, it is in truth poison, though
it be gilded; It is true, the rule is, Nemo intendens malum operatur; No man
intends evil as evil, but it is propounded under the notion of good, and that
even in those who sin against the light, and dictates of their own
conscience: But yet the Scripture speaks constantly of wicked men, as those
that love evil, and will evil, and hate good, because it is evil, which their
wills are carried out unto, though it has the outward bait and color of what
is good. Herein then we have cause with bitterness of heart to bewail our
sinful intentions, thou do but cosen and delude thy own self, Though thou
have many glosses, many colors and pretenses to deceive thy self with, yet
that which in deed and truth does alure and bewitch thy soul is evil in the
appearance, (as it were) of some real good: a strumpet, in Matrones clothes.

Thirdly, The intention of the will is herein also greatly defiled, that when
it does any holy and spiritual duties, the true motive and proper reason of
their intention is not regarded, but false and carnal ones. Finis operis, and
Finis operantis are not the same, as they ought to be. This is the wickedness
of man, so great that no heads, though fountains of waters, can weep enough
because of it: The Pharisees they were very constant and busy in prayers, in
giving of alms, but what was their intention all the while? It was to be seen
of man; and therefore in the just judgment of God, they had that reward. This
intention of the will, is thought by some to be the eye our Savior speaks
of, If that be dark, the whole body is dark, Matthew. 6. 22. Jebus did many
things in a glorious manner, as if none were so zealous as he, but like the
Kite, though he soared high yet still his eye was to see what prey lay on the
ground, that he might devour it; it was a kingdom not Gods glory he intended.
Thus Judas intended a bag, and riches, in all that seeming love and service he
professed to Christ: Oh take heed of the intention of thy will in every holy
duty! This makes, or marreth all.

To what has been said may be further added,

First, That we foolishly labor to justify our bad and sinful actions by our
good intentions, as if they were able to turn evil unto good, and black into
white: Is not this a continual plea among natural people, that though what
they do be unlawful, yet they mean no hurt in it, they have good hearts and
good intentions? Hence it is, that when they have done evil in the eyes of God,
then they study to defend themselves by some intended good or other: Thus
Judas, when he muttered about the ointment, powered on our Savior, yet he
pretends to good intentions, That the ointment might have been sold and given
to the poor. Saul, when he had rebelliously spared the best of the Cattle, yet
he carries it, as if his intention had been to keep them for a Sacrifice to
the Lord: Yea, the Pharisees in all their malicious and devilish designs
against Christ, would be thought, that their high and pure intentions for the
glory of God, did carry them forward in all they did. By such instances we see
how prone every man is to put a good intention upon a bad action, and thereby
think to wash himself clean from all guilt; but it is against the principles of
Divinity, that a good intention should justify that which is a bad action: It
is true, a bad intention will corrupt a good action; so vain glory, or to do
any religious duty to be seen of men; This is a worm which will devour the
best rose; This is a dead Fly in a box of ointment: But it does not hold true
on the contrary, That a good intention will change the nature of an evil
action; The reason whereof is that known Rule, Malum est e quolibet defectu,
bonum non est, nisi ex integris causis: Even as in a Picture, one defect is
enough to make it uncomely, but the beauty of it is not, unless every thing be
concurrent; So in music, any one jarre is enough to spoil the harmony; but to
make sweet music, there must be the consent of all: Do not therefore fly to
thy good heart, to thy good meanings, thou intendest no hurt, for if thy action
cannot be warranted by the Word, if it have not a good and lawful
superscription upon it, this will never endure the fiery trial: The Apostle
makes all such conclusions full of horror and blasphemy (as it were) that
argue, Let us do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8. Austin said, It was
not lawful to lie, though it were to save a world. Consider then the
sinfulness of thy will, and be more affected with it, then hitherto thou have
been: When thou art overtaken with any sin, Do thou not excuse thy self
with a good intention? Do thou not plead some good or other though aimest at
in all such unlawful ways? But though man cannot judge thee, yet the
All-seeing eye of God does pierce into all thy intentions, and he knows thee
better then thou know thy self.

Secondly, The intention of the will is greatly corrupted in this particular
also, That it will add to the worship of God, and accumulate precepts and
means of grace (as they think) in his service, and all this while think a good
intention will bear them out. If you ask, Why the Church of God has not
always been contented with the simplicity of the Gospel, why she has not
wholly kept her self to divine Institutions? You will find this corrupt
intention of the will to be the cause thereof. A good intention brought in most
of the superstituous and uninstituted Ceremonies that ever have been in the
several ages of the Church, Mat. 15* 9. In vain do ye worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men; The Pharisees thought by their commands and
Doctrines to teach men the fear and the worship of God: This corrupt intention
has eaten out the very life and power of godliness; men taking upon them a
more excellent stay (as they think) then the Scripture has revealed, to teach
reverence and devotion; From whence are those frequent commands to the people
of Israel, That they must not go after the imagination of their own hearts;
That they must not do what is good in their own eyes; That they must not add
to, or take from the word of God; By these straight and close injuctions, we
see that no intention whatsoever (though never so seemingly pious and
reverential) will warrant a man to appoint any worship of God from his own
head. Vzzah had a good intention, when he endeavored to stay the Ark from
falling; but God was so displeased thereat, that he struck him dead
immediately; now the reason was, because Gods order was not kept about the Ark;
Vzzah's intention did not preserve him from Gods displeasure, so neither will
their devout intention justify such who do superadde to Gods worship. Some
observe that expression of Eve's, Genesis 3. 3. where she says, That God had
said, they should not eat of it, nor touch it, left they die; We do not read
that God forbad them to touch, yet (it is thought) this was added by Eve for
caution sake, as if she were so careful to keep Gods command about eating,
that she adds, they must not so much as touch it; From whence Ambrose
gathers, Nihil vel boni causa addendum est precepto: But oh how busy and
active have many at all times been in the Church to bring in new worship, new
institutions, of which there is no footstep in Gods Word, as if they were more
careful of Gods honor and glory, then he himself is! But though with men this
sin be accounted small, saying, They cannot worship God too much, they cannot
be excessive in serving of him, yet this is an high sin in the Scripture
account; It being one of Gods royalties, to prescribe what shall be his
Worship: Shall a servant take upon him to make Rules in his Masters house? Let
men that dote upon superstition, and are inamoured with customs of devotion,
that have no command from Scripture; Lay this very seriously to heart: Oh how
terrible will it be, when thy Devotion and Religion will appear abomination!
God asking thee, Who has required this thing at thy hands? The Ape is
therefore the more deformed, because so like a man, and yet is not a man: Thus
all that worship, which has the greatest appearance of humility, zeal and
mortification, which yet has not its original from God, is the more loathsome
to such as are of a spiritual taste and judgment in heavenly things, serving of
God, not in the way they choose, but in the manner he has commanded. And thus
much for the act of Intention.

. 6.
The Pollution of the Will in its Acts of Election or Choosing.
WE shall in the next place, consider those that relate to the means which lead
to the end; and I shall first begin with Election or Choosing, because in that
is contained either life or death; For as the Election of God, or his mere
choosing of some to eternal life, is the fountain of all the good, which such
persons partake of, all their springs are in it; So the election or choice of
man is the womb, wherein all happiness or misery is conceived: If a man have
right intentions and true ends, yet if he choose false, sinful and ungodly
means, he can never come to that end; It is as if a man should intend his home,
or dewlling place, which is in the North, and he choose that road or way, which
leads into the South. It is acknowledged by all, That in every man there is
an innate appetite to the chiefest good; but as naturally all men do err about
the knowledge of it, what it is, so also about the means, how to attain it. But
let us open this viper, and see what a poisonous brood is in it. As

First, Herein is the sinfulness of the wills choice manifested, That it
electeth and imbraceth such things as are pleasing to flesh and blood, that are
suitable to sense, although there be never so many snares and temptations,
thereby to endanger the soul. As it was with Lot, Genesis 13. 10, 11. when he
beheld all the plain of jordan to be well watered, and that it was like the
garden of God, he chose all that country, and departed from Abraham; But in
what sad dangers did this unwise choice of his cast him into? And thus it is
with every man naturally, he chooses such conditions, such ways, as are full
of pleasure, profit and advantages, in the mean while not considering how
quickly this honey is turned into choler, that rugged and difficult ways had
been better then such sweet and pleasant ways: Whereas then Moral Philosophy
makes a threefold good, Vtile, Jucundum and Honestum, Profitable, Pleasant
and Honest, or Virtuous, and the later is properly and fully the object of the
will, that is so depraved, that it chooses only what is advantageous or
pleasant. Experience does abundantly confirm this, for what man naturally till
regenerated does choose any thing, but as it is connatural to, and commensurated
with that depraved appetite within: David being enlivened with a supernatural
life, see what a choice he declares that he had made, Psalm. 119. 30, 173. In
both those verses he professes, He had chosen the Commandments of God: Hence
the Wiseman, who knew what was fittest to be chosen, says. Prove. 16. 16. That
wisdom and understanding (which is nothing but grace) is to be chosen rather
then gold or silver: If then the will were truly sanctified, it would not choose
a thing, because it is delightsome and profitable, but because it is holy and
commanded by God, Isa. 7. 15. it is made the description of a child, That he
knows not to refuse the evil, and choose the good: Thus the child (and a fool)
he will choose his bauble before gold or silver; such folly and simplicity is
upon us; The will is so perverted that it will choose any thing rather then that
which is indeed and solidly good.

Secondly, The election of the will is grossly depraved, In that it chooses
uncertain things before certain; not only pleasant and profitable things before
holy and honest, but uncertain and fading things, before that which is eternal
and will continue ever; And wherein can the wills sinfulness be proclaimed more
then in this? Is it not a rule commended by all wise men, Tene certum and
demitte incertum, Hold that which is certain, and let go that which is
uncertain? All men have such a will in worldly things, they would choose a
certain estate, rather then what is mere arbitrary, and may be lost the next
day; but if we bring these men unto spiritual objects, and temporal objects,
lay one in the one side, and the other on the other side, yet they will choose
the temporals, and let go the spirituals; Though the temporals are transitory
and fleeing away, whereas spiritual things would be eternal, they would
continue thine for ever: Oh foolish and unwise men who make such a choice! And
yet this is the state of every unregenerate man, What does he say? Give me the
good things of this world, though I lose Heaven and eternal Glory; Let me have
a day pleasure, a moments profit, though I have an eternity of loss and
torments: Consider then with thy self, what a foolish choice thy will does make
all the day long; Thou chusest that which will leave thee, which is here to
day, and like the grass to morrow is thrown into the Oven, and in the mean
while there is that good which will abide, though Heaven and Earth should fall,
and this thou art willing to pass by: Was not Dives called a fool upon this
account? This night thy soul shall be taken away, and then whose shall all
these things be? The sinfulness of thy will herein, will never be enough
lamented, till with Dives thy eyes be opened in Hell, and then thou behold what
a choice thou have made. Christ gives Mary this commendation, That she had
chosen the better part (Luke 10. 42.) and that should never be taken from her.
Oh that this also could be said of thee truly, thou have chosen the good part!
Though the wicked and ungodly of the world think it is the worse part, and they
would never take it, yet it is the good part, and that because it will never be
taken from thee: Thy grace, thy good works will never leave thee, but they
will go to the grave with thee, to Heaven with thee.

Thirdly, This sinfulness of thy Will in choosing, is seen, when thou had
rather sin then become afflicted; and yet this is naturally adhering to every
one, he will rather choose to wound conscience, to go against light rather than
be brought into trouble: Does not every man naturally judge this the best, and
so choose it? Hence he never mattereth what God requires, what may damn his
soul hereafter, only he is resolved he will not put himself upon any hardship
for Christ, but will launch no further in this deep then he can safely retire
back again: Every man would naturally get an Ark to save himself in, when any
public water do overflow; so they escape danger, they regard not Gods glory,
or the Churches good; Job's friends did fasten this upon him, but falsely, Job
36. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity, for this have thou chosen rather then
affliction; They thought Job desired to sin, and would choose that rather then
to be afflicted by God, though Job being sanctified was free from this charge;
yet it is too true of every man by nature: Oh what power of grace is necessary
to make a man choose to do his duty, rather then have all the advantages of the
world! It was Anselm's expression, That if sin were on one side, and hell
flames on the other, he would choose rather to go through them rather then
sin: Even Aristotle could say, A virtuous man would die rather then do any
dishonest thing: But the Scripture gives an admirable commendation of Moses,
worthy all our imitation, Heb. 11. 25. Choosing rather to suffer for Christ,
then the pleasures of Egypt; Moses that might have had all the pleasure and
honors of Egypt, yet because he could not have them without sin, he rather
chooses the poor and despised estate that his brethren were in. So that Moses
does in this case something like Hiram, 1 King. 9. 13. to whom Solomon gave
many Cities, but Hiram did not like them, and called that place Cabul, that is,
displeasing or dirty: Thus Moses called Pharaoh's Court, and all his honors
Cabul in respect of Christ's favor and his love. Did not all the holy Martyrs
likewise do the same things? Were not many of them offered life, liberty, yea
great places of honor, if they would renounce Christ, if they would forsake
his way? But they did not stand deliberating and doubting, what they should do,
they immediately choose to be imprisoned, burnt at the stake, rather then not
confess Christ and his way; but the will naturally cannot make such a choice.

. 7.
The Wills loss of that Aptitude and readiness it should have to follow the
deliberation and advise of the Understanding.
THe sinfulness of the Will in its noble and famous operation of Election or
choosing has been in a great measure considered, I shall add two particulars
more, and what is further to be taken notice of in this point, will seasonably
come in, when we are to treat of the Will in its freedom, or rather servitude.

The first of these two to be mentioned is, The loss of that aptitude and
readiness it should have to follow the deliberation and prudent advise of the
understanding. For this is the privitive Institution and nature of the soul in
its operations; The understanding when the end is pitched upon does consult and
deliberate in a prudential way about the means which may conduce to that end,
and when prudence does direct about those things which are to be done, then the
will is to embrace and elect that medium rather then any other, which reason
does thus wisely suggest; Thus it ought to be, now the will being wholly
corrupt does not choose according to the dictates of prudence, but the
suggestions of sense, and the carnal affections within us; So that naturally a
man chooses an object, not because reason or prudence says, This is good, this
is according to Gods will, but because sense or affection says, this is
pleasant and delightful. This sad perverting of the order of the will in its
operations, if rightly considered, would throw us upon the ground, and make us
with great amazement and astonishment cry out of our selves; For what can be
more absurd and grievous then the will, which is so essentially subordinated in
its choosing to the guidance of the understanding, should now be so debased,
that like Samson without eyes, it is made to grind in evey mill, that any
carnal affection shall command; we may see the good method and rule the will
should walk by in its choice, by that which Moses said, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. 19. See,
I have set before thee this day life and death, good and evil. I call heaven
and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and
eath, cursing and blessing; therefore choose life. Observe what should direct
us in choosing, viz. That which the servants of God deliver from the Word, and
so that which the mind of a man enlightened from thence does declare to us, and
for defect herein it is that we choose evil and death, for how often does the
Minister of the Gospel yea thy own conscience it may be within thee, obtest and
adjure thy will, as herein the Text Moses did the people of Israel. I call
heaven and earth to witness, says conscience, that I have showed thee the good
thou were to do, I have terrified and threatened thee with hell, and that
vengeance of God which will follow thee upon the commission of such sins:
Therefore look to thy election, see again and again what it is that thou
choosest. But though all this be done, yet the will will choose what affections
say, what sense suggesteth, dealing herein like Rehoboam, who would not hearken
to the advice and direction of the ancient grave and wise counselors, (thou
plus valet umbrasenis, quam gladius juvenus, as the expression is in the civil
law) but he gave his ear to the young men that flattered him, and were brought
up with him, which proved to his desiruction. Thus the will in its choice it
makes, listneth not to what the mind does with deliberation and prudence
direct to, but what the inferior appetite does move unto, that it follows:
And this is the foundation of all those sad and unsuccesfull choices we make in
the world, this lays work for that bitter repentance and confusion of soul
which many fall into afterward; Oh that I had never choosen this way! Oh that I
had never used such means! Oh me never wise! Oh foolish, and wretched man that
I am? Especially this bitter bewailing and howling about what we have chosen,
will be discovered in hell, what will those eternal yellings and everlasting
roarings of soul be, but to cry out, Oh that I had never chosen to commit such
sins! Oh that I had never chosen such companions to acquaint with! Thus the
foolish and sinful choice thou make in this life, will be the oil as it
were poured into those flames of fire in hell, to make them burn seven times
hotter.

Secondly, The other particular wherein this corrupt frame of the will in
election is seen is, That in the means it does choose, it never considers
how just, and lawful, and warrantable, the means are, but how useful; and
therefore, though God be offended, though his Law be broken, yet he will choose
to do such things, whereas we must know that God has not only required the
goodness of an end, but also the lawfulness, and goodness of the means, and
the sanctified will, dares not use an unlawful medium to bring about the most
desired good that is; but the carnal heart, takes up that rule of the
Atheistical Politian, Quod utile est, illud justum est, That which is
profitable, that is just and righteous: That famous act of the Athenians, being
provoked to it by Aristides the Just, may shame many Christians, when
Themistocles had a stratagem in his head against their enemies, telling the
people, he had a matter of great weight in his mind, but it was not fit to be
communicated to the people, The people required him to impart it to Aristides,
who being acquainted with it, declares it to the people, That Themistocle's
counsel was utile, but injustum, profitable but unjust; by which means the
people would not pursue it. Here was some restraint upon men by the very
principles of a natural conscience, but if the will be left to it self, and God
neither sanctifying or restrayning it; it looks only to the goodness and
profitableness in means never to the lawfulness of them. Some have disputed,
Whether it be not lawful to persuade to use a less evil that a greater may be
avoided? They instance in Lot offering his daughters to the Sodomites to be
abused by them, rather then commit a more horrid impiety, by abusing themselves
with mankind (as they thought those strangers to be) but the Scripture rule is
evident and undeniable, We must not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.
8. Neither does a less evil cease to be an evil, though compared with a
greater; and therefore as in a Syllogism, if one of the premises be false,
there cannot be inferred a true conclusion, e falso nil nisi falsum, so also, e
malo nil nisi malum, from an evil means there can never come, but that which
is evil, though indeed God may by his omnipotent Power work good out of evil;
know then that it comes from the pollution of thy will, that thou dare make
choice of means, not because just or righteous, but because profitable for that
end thou desire.

. 8.
The Pollution of the Will in its Acts of Consent.
WE proceed to another act of the Will, as it is exercised about the means
which is called Consent; for though in order of nature, this does precced
election, yet because I intend not to say much about it at this time, because
more will be spoken to it, when I shall treat of the immediate effects of
original sin; I therefore bring it in, in this place. And for to discover the
sinfulness hereof, we must know, That the will has a twofold operation or
motion in this respect, for there are motus primo primi, the immediate and
first stirrings of the will antecedently to any deliberation or consent; The
natural man being wholly carnal cannot feel these, no more then a blind man can
discern the motes in the air, when the Sunne-beames do enlighten it; but the
godly man, as appears Romans 7. he finds such motions and insurrections of
sin within him, and that against his will. Now although it be true, when
there are such motions of the will, but resisted and gainsayed, they are not
such sins as shall be imputed unto us; and thus far Bernards, expression is
to be received, Non necet sensus rei deest consensus, yet they are in
themselves truly and properly sins. The Papists and Protestants are at great
difference in this point. The Romanists denying all such indeliberate motions
antecedent to our consent to be properly sins, but the Reformed do positively
conclude they are, and that because the Apostle, Romans 7. calls them often
sins, and sins that are against the law, and which ought to be mortified.
It is true, we further add, when the sanctified soul does withstand them, cry
out to God for aid against them; as the maid in danger to be defloured, if she
called out for her help, the Law of God did then free her; so God also will
through Christ forgive such sinful motions of thy soul, which appear in thy
heart, whether thou will, or no; yet for all this, these stirrings of the will
being inordinate and against the Law of God, which requires not only pure
streams, but a pure fountain also, therefore they are truly culpable, and so
damnable. Let then a man observe, whether Egypt was once fuller of flies then
thy heart is of inordinate motions; for as the pulse in the body is always
beating, so the will is always in action, it is always moving to some object
or other, and being naturally corrupted, it does always tend, either to an
object unlawful, or if lawful, in an unlawful and immoderate way.

But in the second place, Besides these indeliberate motions, there are those
which are deliberate, to which the will does give free and full consent; and
these are greater sins then the former, because the more voluntary; and
certainly the will of a man is as full of sinful consents, as the Sea is of
water: Whenever any lust, any sin comes to tempt thee, How easily and
quickly is thy consent obtained? Indeed outwardly to commit the sin that is
many times hardly accomplished, there may want the opportunity, fear or shame
may restrain men, but to consent to sin, yea that which is most abominable,
may be a thousand times over committed by the will in a little space. Now that
the wills consent to a sin is a sin, if it be kept within only, and not
expressed in the outward act, is difficulty believed; even as they think their
thoughts, so also the desires of their will are free in this particular; Yea it
seems to be the constant Doctrine of the Pharisees, That if a man did
externally obey the Law of God, though in his heart he did will the contrary,
yet the Law did not condemn him: Hence it is that Matthew. 5. our Savior does
expound the Law so exactly and spiritually, and that it seemed a great Paradox
to the received Traditions at that time, for our Lord, does there show, That if
a man does lust after a woman in his heart it is adultery and so of all other
gross sins: If then thou do will in thy heart, desire and consent in thy
heart to any sin, though thou can not, or dare not commit it; Here God
looks upon thee, as such a sinner; for as in holy things God accepts the
will for the deed, so in evil things, the will to do it, the consent to do it,
is as if thou had done it, Tantum fecimus, quantum volumus, even Seneca could
say. What thunder and lightning is in this truth, if rightly understood; Go
and search thy will, make strict examination about it, and thou will find
sparks, do not fly faster from the forge then sinful consentings do issue
from thee all the day long. No sooner does any voluptuous, ambitious or
profitable object appear in thy soul, but thy will has secretly consented to
it, and embraced, even before thou can tell what thou have done: Now this
sinful temper of the will is the more pernicious and dangerous, because these
consentings inwardly to sin, are so sudden and imperceivable, that thousands
of them came from the soul almost in a twinkling of an eye, and the heart
feels them not: Do not then think to justify thy self, because thou can
with the Pharisee thank God, that thou art no adulterer, no drunkard, no
Publican, for if thou have at any time a secret consent to these things, if thy
heart embrace them, though thou dare not externally commit them; The holy and
spiritual Law of God will find out these sins in thee, and condemn thee for
them.

In the next place, Consider also that there is a twofold consent to a sin,
Express and Formal, or Interpretative and Virtual; an express consent is,
when the will does actually yield it self up to any lust that does tempt it:
Thus Cain expressly consented to the murder of Abel; Judas to the betraying of
Christ. But a virtual consent is, when we yield to that from which such a sin
will either necessarily, or probably follow, although we do not expressly think
of the sin: Thus a man that is voluntarily drunk, if in his drunken fits he
kill any, or commit any other gross impiety, he may be said interpretatively
to will all that wickedness, though for the present he knows not what he
does. Thus the best Casuists do determine, and the reason is, because such a
man does voluntarily expose himself to the cause of all such evils, and he who
wills the cause of a sin, may be justly said to will the sin that is the
effect; Know then thy consent to sin may extend further then ever thou
thoughtest of; Such sins may lie at thy door ready to arraign thee, because
though thou did not expressly will them, yet by consequence thou did.
Therefore Matthew. 25. 44. when those workers of iniquity plead, They never saw
Christ hungry or in prison, and did not minister to him; Our Savior replieth,
That because they did not such things to his Disciples, they did them not to
him.

Lastly, This consent of the will is not only to the evil that we do in our
own persons commit, but also to that which others are guilty of. And here now
might be a large field, wherein the sinfulness of our corrupt will may be
discovered; and this consent of the will to other men's sins, may be (as
Divines show) many ways, but I must not enlarge therein: It is enough for the
present, to know the will is so corrupt, that as if it were too little to
consent to its own sin, it is frequently yielding to the sins of others,
whereby the sins of other men are made ours, and so at the day of Judgment
shall stand arraigned, both for our own and other men's sins also.

The last act of the will is, That which they call usus, the application of the
other parts of the soul and body to bring about the evil desired. In this also
the will, because of the universal dominion it has, does demonstrate the vast
extent of its sinful kingdom. This sinful will commands the body in a
despicable manner to be instrumental to sin; It bids the eye look upon wanton
objects, and it does it; it commands the tongue to speak obscenely, wantonly,
to lie, or curse, or swear, and it does it; all thy bodily sinfulness is
committed, because the will commands it to be done: And although the
affections are not under such an absolute command by the will, but rather they
sometimes subjugate and keep that under them, yet at other times, the will
causes them to arise, men love and hate, because they will. Mel^cthon is said
to write thus to Calvin, Judicas prout amas, aut odio habes, amas vero aut odio
habes, prout vis; The will of a man is that which sometimes stirs up all the
passions of the soul; Hence is that usual expression, I will have my will
whatsoever it cost me. Yea the understanding, though it be a light, yet the
will many times puts it under a bushel; yea it will command the mind to
divert its thoughts; Hence men will not understand, will not be convinced,
because the will applies to other objects. But of this more in its time.

SECT. IV.
The Defilement of the Will in its Affections and Properties, or the sinful
Adjuncts inseparably cleaving unto it.
ROMANS 9. 16. So then it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy.
HItherto we have been declaring the native pollution of the noble faculty of
the Will in the several operations thereof; but we have not (as yet) manifested
the least of all that filthiness which adhereth to it; You have seen but a drop
in respect of the Ocean: We proceed therefore to a further discovery of the
original contagion thereof, and that in its Affections and Properties: The
sinful Adjuncts inseparably cleaving to it, proclaim it to be a defiled
subject.

. 1.
This Scripture opened, vindicated and improved against the Doctrine of
Free Will.
THis truth cannot be superstructed better, then upon this foundation in the
Text, which is a noble ingredient into that famous portion of Scripture,
wherein the Doctrine of those sublime mysteries about Election and Reprobation
are professedly handled, and those Objections which the presumption of humane
reason is ready to produce, are fully answered. So that whereas in other places
that Doctrine is only occasionally or incidentially handled, here the Apostle
does industriously treat of the nature of it. Thus it has of old been
interpreted, and of late by the Orthodox. Only Arminius following Suecanus in
part, and the Remonstrants after Arminius they have excogitated a new Analysis
of this Chapter, full of absurdity and impertinencies; for they would not have
the Apostle at all to treat of Election and Reprobation of persons, they turn
themselves and the Scripture into all shapes and forms to evade that, but they
interpret it of a twofold Purpose or Decree of God, The one whereof they say
is, That whosoever does believe shall obtain Justification, Adoption and
Salvation: The other, That whosoever seek for righteousness by the works of
the Law shall be rejected from all these. This (they say) is the scope of the
Apostle: But who sees not what forcing and wresting this is of Scripture? So
that we may wonder, how such an interpretation could come into their mind; for
the Apostle does not speak of Conditions, but of Persons, his scope is not to
show, that they are believers who are received, and workers who are rejected.
The Apostle had abundantly confirmed this in the fourth Chapter, but he intends
to show the Dominion and Sovereignty of God in the eternal disposing of men's
persons, and that upon the occasion of Gods rejecting the Jews, and calling in
the Gentiles. Therefore he says, To whom he will, he shows mercy, and whom
he will he hardens: whom he will] He puts the discrimination upon Gods will,
not upon any internal qualification in the subject. Also he instanceth in Esau
and Jacob before they had done good or evil, whereas if Jacob were considered
as a believer, then God did look upon him as having good in him. Further, he
brings in Pharaoh for an example, how that God did reject him, and whether
the word (...), verse. 17. be rendered, I have raised thee up, or I have kept
thee alive in those judgments, and not destroyed thee, as the Remonstrants and
others vehemently contend; yea some Orthodox do yield, it will all come to the
sense, that he was an object on whom God would demonstrate his power and
justice, or kept by God for a while, as some Anatomists do a dead body before
they bury it, to gather profitable observations for the good of others: not
that God infused any evil in Pharaoh's heart (though the Scripture uses three
words concerning Pharaoh, the one is to confirm or corroborate his heart, and
that is ascribed to God seven times. The other is to harden, and that is once
(though we render the word to corroborate, to harden.) The last is, To
aggravate or make heavy, which is once likewise ascribed to God, (which is also
rendered by our Interpreters to harden,) not (I say) that this expression
denotes, God did put any sinful frame into Pharaoh's heart; nor yet on the
other side, is it to be understood of a mere bare permission of God, as if he
did no more then suffer him by his patience to be hardened, but God as a just
Judge did for Pharaoh's sin antecedent justly deny him any molifying grace,
leaving him to his lusts, which in such occasions as he had, did break out into
a more violent flame; So that the whole blame lay upon Pharaoh himself, not on
God; Hence it is, that he is so often said, To harden his own heart. Now this
example of Pharaoh could not make at all to Paul's purpose, if his intent was
to prove, that God would reject all such who seek for righteousness by the
works of the Law, for Pharaoh was an Heathen, he was ignorant of Gods Law, and
could not seek for Justification by the works thereof. Besides, if the Apostle
did not intend to show Gods purpose absolutely and inconditionately (in a well
explained sense) about persons, but only his Decree about their qualifications,
what occasion was there for Paul to make such an Objection, Is there
unrighteousness with God? And then first to objurgate the Objector, Who art
thou, O man, that disputest against God? And then returns a full answer to
the Objection, from the less to the greater, from the Potter, who has power
over the same clay to make a vessel of honor or dishonor. These Objections
and Answers could have no place in the Remonstrantical Analysis and
Interpretation; For who would argue it injustice in God to reject such who did
not believe in Christ, but sought for Justification by the Law? If the Apostle
did prove only two such Decrees about the ways to salvation and damnation,
here was no such mystery transcending humane expectation. This is certain, the
Remonstrants commend their way of common Election, making the determinate event
to be by man himself, in a most plausible and colorable manner, as being most
agreeable to humane reason and equity. There is no man would dispute against
God in this, whereas the other exposition strongly pursued by Austin, and for
the dreadfulness of it to flesh and blood, which is ready to call God to an
account for his administrations was greatly disliked by many and a scandal to
them; Even as at this day, it still meets with the same unkind entertainment
from Lutherans, Socinians and Arminians, who make an Universal Conditional
Election, whereby (they say) God would have all to be saved, even the
Calvinists themselves, as they are pleased to instance by derision. Well if
this part of Scripture will not convince, I know not what light will, and they
must needs be prepossessed, who can let their judgments assent to such a
remote and forced explication; Not to add that the Decree which they make
about Gods rejection of such who seek for Justification by works is false; for
did not many Jews following the righteousness of the Law, at last believe in
Christ; Was not Paul once zealous for the works of the Law? Yet afterward an
affectionate admirer of the righteousness by faith. But we leave these bold
Interpreters who do assume more to themselves in turning the sense of these
words this way and that way, then do allow God in the disposing of mankind, as
if the Text were like the Potters clay, that they might make a sense of honor
and a sense of dishonor.

Come we therefore more particularly to the words in hand, and as appears by
the illation [So then] they are an inference from Paul's preceding Discourse;
As for those, though men of great Antiquity, who suppose these words spoken not
by Paul himself, as in his own person, but in the person of some opponent, it
is so weak that it is not worth the resuting; For the Apostle in the beginning
of the Chapter, uses great asseveration and atteslation, even with a solemn
oath concerning his great affection to the Jews and their salvation, to whom
also he attributes great Church privileges and spiritual prerogatives, and
this he does, because he was to deliver most dreadful matter, which would be
exceeding displeasing to that Nation, and which might seem to come from hatred
to them: But this Preface is to mollify them: And whereas it might be
objected, If a greater part of the Jews, who were once Gods people, and to whom
the promises did belong, were rejected, how could Gods word be true? The
Apostle dishtinguisheth of the Israelites, and shows, that the promise in
regard of the spiritual efficacy did belong only to Abraham's seed after the
promise, or who were the children of Abraham in a supernatural way, imita^ing
him and walking in his slept; The other were Abraham's sons after the flesh,
not but that they were children of the promise also in respect of the Covenant
externally administered, they were circumcised as well as the other, and called
Act. 3. The children of the promise, and if this were not so, the Apostle
should in the same breath almost have contradicted himself, for he said of the
Nation in the general, That to them did belong the Covenants and the Promises:
Hence that whole Nation is sometimes called his son, yea his siest born, and
son of delights; But though Abraham's children thus after the flesh, and in
some sense of the promise also, yet not in that sense, as the Apostle means
here, so as to be the blessed seed, and elected by God in Christ: Hence Paul
shows, That the promises in respect of the efficacy and gracious benefits
flewing from them did belong only to the elect; And this he proves, first
from Ishmael and Isaac; And whereas it might be said, Ishmael for his actual
impiety deriding of, and persecuting Isaac was rejected, and also that he was
born of Hagar a bondwoman; then he further exemplifieth in Esau and Jacob,
born both of the same father, and of the same mother, and at the same time, and
yet before they had done good or evil; The one even the younger was loved of
God, and the Elder to whom the birthright did belong was hated. Whether these
instances be propounded as types only (so that for all this both Ishmael and
Esau might be elected, as some have charitably thought of Elau, that he
repented of his cruel intentions to his brother, changing his mind to him, and
so (as they think) dying a converted man, or whether they be propounded as
Examples also as well as Types (viz.) as those persons whom God had excluded
from grace, and therefore the Scripture gives this Character of Esau that he
was a profane man,) is not much material. This is enough, that the Discourse of
Paul is carried on with great strength: And whereas it might be objected, That
God was unrighteous in making such a difference between those that were equal,
the Apostle answers from a Text of Scripture, Exodus 33. 19. where Moses
desiring to see the glory of God, God grants his request, giving this reason, I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and merciful to whom I will be
merciful: Thus even Moses has that great glory put upon him, even to speak to
God face to face, and that not for any worth or dignity in himself, but the
mere gracious will of God; Therefore there is no unrighteousness in this act,
whereby God receives one and leaves another, because this Assumption is an
act of grace and savor, and in things of favor and liberality, there is no
injustice: If I meet two poor men equally indigent, and I relieve one passing
by the other, there is no injustice in not relieving of him. Now from this
expression of God to Moses, the Apostle makes this inference in my Text,
removing all causes and merits of the grace of God from man, and attributing it
wholly to God.

In the negation we have a distribution, It is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs. [It is not.] Here is much dispute, what is meant by that? But
the Context makes it evident, that election is not, nor the blessed effects of
Election, Conversion, Justification and Salvation. Some also add, The act of
volition, It is not of him that wills to will; for God works in us to will:
So that all is to be given to God; for Voluntas bons, is one of Gods good gifts
to us, Nelentem pravenit ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne finstra velit: A
good will cannot precede Gods gifts, seeing that it self is one of Gods gifts.

Not of him that willeth] Here we see plainly the will of man so importent, yea
so polluted by sin, that it cannot put it self forth to any good.

Again, It is not of him that runs.] The Remonstrants limit this too much
(as if it were) an allusion to Esau, who neither by running (when he wearied
himself in hunting for venision;) nor by willing (when with tears he so
earnestly desired the blessing) could obtain it; for the Scripture does usually
compare Christianity to a race, and our conversation to a running. So that it
is neither our inward willing, or outward performing of duties, (though with
much industry,) that make us obtain this grace from God: Not that we are to sit
still and to be idle, but we are to wait on the means only, it is Gods grace
not our wills which do make us holy and happy. Therefore you have the positive
cause of all, But it is of God that shows mercy,] It is then the mere mercy
and compassion of God, which makes a diffrence between men lying in the same
sin and misery; he speaks not of justifying mercy, adopting mercy, but of
electing mercy, converting and calling mercy. This discriminating power and
grace of God does evidently appear every where, there being two in a family,
one taken, the other left; Two hearing a Sermon, one humbled and converted, the
other remaining blind and obdurate; If to this it be replied, that the meaning
is, It is not of the will alone, nor of him that runs alone, but of Gods
mercy also, then (as Austin of old did solidly observe) it might as truly be
said, That it is not of God that shows mercy, but of him that wills and
runs; And this is very absurd, Pia aures non ferunt, Godly ears (says
Aquinas on this place) would not endure it; and New Christianus dicere
andebit, (said Austin.) The weightiness of the matter has made me thus long in
opening the Text: We come to the Observation, viz.

That the will of man is so greatly defiled by sin, that we cannot obtain any
spiritual mercy by it. It Is the grace of God, the compassion of God that makes
thee abhor thy sins, and close with that which is holy, thy will is
naturally an enemy and an adversary to it; Should God let thee alone, till thou
come to meet him, thy condition would be hopeless; The will of a man naturally
stands at a defiance against the things of God; else why is it, that under such
means of grace that many enjoy, why is it that when there are so many
invitations and expostulations that the understanding and conscience is
convinced, that cannot tell what to say, yet the will of a man is obstinate and
refractory?

. 2.
The Will is so fallen from its primitive honor, that it is not worthy to be
called Will but Lust.
LEt us take notice of the great depravation of the will. And

First, It is seen in this, That it is so fallen from its primitive honor,
That it is no more worthy to be called voluntas but cupiditas, not will, but
lust. For the will signifies a rational appetite following the dictates of
reason, but our will does not, cannot do so, and therefore as she said, Call me
no more Naomi, but Marah; So it is here, Call it no more a will, but a lust;
and thus the Scripture does by (...) mean lust, Ephesians. 2. 3. Fulfilling the
desires, or lusts of the flesh; (The wills, as it is in the original, 1 Pet. 4.
3.) To work the will of the Gentiles, is explained by walking in lusts; and
verse. 2. the lusts of men, which is nothing but their wills is opposed to the
will of God; Thus those that will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9. that will to be rich, is
a sin against that command, Thou shall not lust. Oh then think seriously of
this, my will is become a lust, my virgin an whore, I cannot will any thing,
but it is a lusting after it rather then a willing of it! It is not willing of
riches, but lusting after them; not willing of honors, but lusting after them;
we call it a lust not a will, because it does excessively (and beyond
Scripture-bounds) will a thing neither does it will with subordination and
reference to Gods glory. Thus a man's will is his lust.

. 3.
The Will is wholly perverted about the Ultimate End.
ALthough the will of man be subject to more defilements, then the body of a
man is exposed to diseases, yet I shall briefly select some of the more
remarkable instances. And

First, Herein is the natural sinfulness of the will manifested, In that it is
wholly perverted about the ultimate end, which is the proper and adequate
object of it; God is the supreme and ultimate end of the will: Therefore were
our souls endowed with this noble faculty, that the will might firmly and
immovably adhere to him; That as the elements have their proper principles of
motion, whereby they never rest, till they come to their center, or ultimate
term in which they wholly acquiesce; Thus also if we respect the primitive
institution, the will was given us for such a principle which should carry us
out constantly to the enjoying of God. But oh the sad perversion and inordinacy
that is now come upon this chief power of the soul, for now a man's self is put
into Gods room; So that whereas God was the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
end of a man's will; Now a man's self is made his god, he wills himself, he
loves himself, all things are done in reference to himself, as the utmost end:
So that this self-seeking, this self-loving is the root of all other
iniquities; when the Apostle was to reckon up a Catalogue of manifold notorious
impieties, 2 Timothy 3. 2. he reckons up men, lovers of themselves, as the bitter
root of all wormwood springing from it; you cannot reckon up any sin, whether
spiritual or carnal, that does not flow from this, because a man does
inordinately will, and love himself; That as Aristotle reports of one
Antipheron, which through the weakness of his eyes, the very air was in stead
of a Looking-glass, making a constant reflection, so that he saw himself,
beheld himself all the day long; Thus it is with the will, all the motions and
actings of it are only to self-glory, self-pleasure, self-profit, etc. whereas
at first the will was created so subordinate to God, that it did will the
glory, and honor, and blessedness of God infinitely above its own self; If
they could say to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, how much more could
Adam in the state of integrity say unto God, that his Name, his Glory and
Majesty were to be esteemed and set up far above the good of all men and
Angels. Austin observes truly, That those two Cities, Jerusalem and Babel, of
God and the Devil, had these two contrary foundations, Babel had Amor sui
usque, and Contemptum Dei, The love of a man's self, even to the contempt of God
and Jerusalem, The love of God, even to the contempt of a man's self: Oh then
look upon this as the Goliah-sinne, as the Beelzebub-evil in thy will, that it
cannot, it does not any thing, but excessively will and love it self to the
contempt of, and rebellion against God! The Command of God is, To love him with
all our heart, soul, and might, and to love our neighbor also, but there is no
injunction to love our selves; Indeed that is supposed as a duty, when a man's
self is made the rule and measure of love to our neighbor: Some think the
reason why there is no express command to love our selves, is, because that is
required in loving of God, because he only loves himself that loves God, and
in loving of God we love our selves; whereas when we love our selves for our
selves sake, not subordinately to God, we do indeed hate our selves, procuring
our self damnation. Let us then bewail this fall of the will by original sin
from God into its self, whereby we will our own glory rather then Gods; our own
interest then the great Gods, who yet gives us all we have; This is to break
the order which the wise and holy will of God has immutably ordained, viz. the
submission and subjection of the creature to the Creator.

. 4.
The Privacy and Propriety of the Will.
SEcondly, Another extensive and powerful defilement of the will is a
consequent from the former, viz. The Privacy and Propriety of it; For whereas
by the primitive Institution our will is to be commensurated and regulated by
the will of God; now it naturally abhors and refuses any such agreement, as
if our will were to take place of Gods will, as if the prayer were that our
will (not Gods will) might be done; In this is an Abyss of all evil, that our
will naturally inclines to be independent on Gods will; we would have that a
measure and rule even to Gods will, that God should not will, but what we would
have: Oh horrible blasphemy and confusion! for the humane will of the Lord
Christ was not a rule and measure of things to be done, being the will of a
creature, therefore he prays, Not my will, but thy will be done, Luke 26. 39.
If then Christ's humane will was to be regulated by that superior and increated
will, how much more is the will of a sinful and corrupt man; This then is that
which makes the whole soul like a Blackmoor; This is the essence (as it were)
of all sin; A man's own will, not Gods will is regarded, but a man's own proper
will is wholly followed, we would give Laws to God, and not God to us;
Whenever thy heart is carried out to lusts, to any wickedness, What is this
but to exalt thy will, and to depress the will of God? Has God said, Be not
proud? thou will be proud: Has God said, Swear not? thou will swear: Thus all
sin is nothing but a man's own will lifted up against the will of God: No
wonder then if one said, Cesset voluntas propria and non ardebit g^henna; Let
there be no longer our own will, and there will be no longer any hell; It Is
this proper private will of ours that was the cause of hell: Adam and Eve they
preferred their will before Gods will, and that brought in death and demnation:
Therefore regeneration is the writing of Gods Law in our hearts, whereby we
come to say, as Christ, I come to do thy will O God, and Paul immediately upon
his conversion says, Lord what will thou have me do, he gives up his will as
a blanck on which God may write his will, O Lord there shall not be any longer
my will to persecute, my will to oppose thy Church, I will break this will of
mine, renounce this will of mine: Thus as a vessel melted in the fire may be
put into any form or fashion the artificer pleases, so was it with Paul's
will: This proper private will of thine, likewise makes all the trouble and
misery thou meetest with; it is thy own will that makes thee to walk so
heavily and discontentedly, for were thy will resigned up into Gods, were thou
able to say in all things, the will of the Lord be done, I have no will, but
what God would have me to exercise; this would keep thee in a quiet calm frame
all the day long, whereas now all the dispute and contention is, whether thy
will or Gods will must give place to each other. Oh vain and wretched man! how
long shall this self-will of thine be thy ruin; Is it not reason that the will
of the creature should give place to the will of the Creator, as the stars do
not appear, when the Sun begins to arise.

. 5.
The Pride and Haughtiness of the Will.
THirdly, The great and notable pollution of the Will, Is the pride and
haughtiness of it, not only refusing subjection to the Will of God, and to be
under that, (as has been showed) but in some remarkable particulars.

The first whereof is, an affectation of equality with God himself. Thus the
will of a poor weak wretch, that cannot turn a white hair into black, whose
breath is in his nostrils, that has the same originals for his body as a worm
has, yet the aspireth after a Deity, and would be like God himself. As

1. in attempting to make gods, and then to worship them. What pride and vanity
is in man to take upon him to make what he intends to worship; so that what man
pleases shall be a god, and what pleases him not shall be none, Deus non erit
Deus nisi homini placuerit. Thus whereas God at first made man after his image
now man makes God after his image; Besides the horrible blindness that is upon
the mind in this thing, there is also pride and arrogance of the will; what is
this but to assume superiority over their own gods, which yet they worship, and
adore? But

2. This pride of the will is more conspicuously manifested, In affecting to be
like the true God, not to endure him to be a superior above us: While our first
parents had not any internal pollution at all upon them, yet this sin did
presently insinuate them, whereby they aspired after a Deity: therefore the
Devil tempted them with this suitable bait, Ye shall be like Gods knowing good
and evil: That sin of Adam has still a more peculiar impression upon
mankind: Whence came that abominable and blasphemous custom into the world of
deifying men, (which they called Daimons,) but from that inbred pride of the
will, desiring to be like God* Ezekiel. 28. 2. Thus it was with that Prince of
Tyrus, he lifted up himself and said, I am a god, I sit in the seat of God,
thou have ser thine heart as the heart of God; What detestable and loath some
arroganacy is here? Oh the patience of God, that does not immediately consume
such a wretch, as he did Herod who sinned not so highly, for he did not
proclaim he was God only the people by way of flattering cried out the voice of
God, and not of man, which because he did not disclaim but secretly owned,
therefore was such a remarkable punishment inflicted upon him. We see from
these instances what pride lurketh in man's will, there is the cockatrice egg
which may quickly prove to be a flying Serpent: This pride is thought also to
be the sin of the Devil, whereby he was not contented with the station God
had put him, but was ambitious of a divine nature, as if he with Christ might
think it no robbery to be equal with God. This unspeakable arrogance did show
it self notoriously in some great Potentates of the world, Caius Caesar
especially, (for which cause Grotius though absurdly makes him to be the
Antichrist) that did exalt himself above all that is called God. This madness
of pride was as visible in Alexander, who though sometimes through the
consciousness of humane imbecility (as when he was wounded and saw blood fall
from him) would refuse such a thought, yet at other times he did industriously
affect to be related among the number of the Gods, and to have divine worship
performed to him, and as the son of Jupiter, Hammon, would be pictured with
horns, and Jupiters Priest meeting of him instead of that form, (...), did
purposely mistake, saying, (...), Hail thou son of Jupiter; yea, he sends
into Greece, that by a public Edict, he might be acknowledged for a god,
which the Lacedaemonians in scoff did without scruple admit, saying, Qundoquidem
Alexander vult esse Deus, Deus esto; Seeing Alexander will be god, let him be
one: But the Athenians being more scrupulous, or at least of greater hatred
against him, punished Demades the Orator for advising them to receive him as
god; for he had said, Look (Oye Athenians) Ne dum coelum custodies terram
amittatis, while ye keep heaven ye loose the earth: This carnal counsel, is
admired as infallible policy almost by all the Potentates of the world; Thus
you see what pride is latent in the will of a man, and how far it may rise by
temptations; though the experience of humane imbecillities may quickly rebuke
such mad insolences, yet some excuse or other they use to put it off, as when
it thundered, one asked Alexander, wheather he could do so; he put it of, and
said, he would not terrify his friends: if you say this corruption of the will
is not in every man by nature, I grant it for the degree, but it is habitually
and radically there. Let any man be put in such temptations, as Herod and
Alexander were, and left alone to this inbred pride and original pollution, it
would break out into as great a flame: Original sin needs time to conceive,
and bring forth its loathsome monsters.

3. This pride of the will is seen, In the presumption and boldness of it, to
inquire into the consels of his Majesty, and to call God himself to account for
his administrations. Romans 9. 20, who art thou (O man) that disputest against
God? [O man,] that is spoken to humble and debase him; Will thou call God to an
account? Shall God be thought unjust, because thou can not comprehend his
depths? Certainly God has more power over us then the Potter over his clay,
for the Potter does not make the materials of that, he only tempreth it, whereas
God gives us our very beings; and therefore it is intolerable impudency for us
to ask God, why he made us so? yet how proud and presumptousis man, to dispute
about Gods precedings, whereas the great Governors of the world will not allow
any Subject to say, why do thou so to them? The Psalmist complains of this
pride in some men, Psalm. 12. 4. Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Thus
Pharaoh said to Moses, who is the Lord that I should obey him? This pride in
the will, whereby men will audaciously intrude into things they know not, has
made these heretics in judgments, the Pelagians and Socinians, Their will
does not captivate their understanding to Gods Ipse dixit, for us the
Schoolmen observe truly, in every act of faith, there is required pia
affectio, and inclinatio voluntatis, and when that is refractory and
unsubmitting, it causes many damnable heresies in the judgment; for it is the
pertinacy of the will, that does greatly promote the making of an heretic.

Lastly, This pride of the will is seen, In raging and rebellious risings up
against God in his proceedings against us. In this the pride of the will does
sadly discover it self, what rage, what fretting and discontent do we find in
our hearts, when Gods will is to chastise or afflict us? If we could bind the
arms of the Omnipotent to prevent his blows, how ready is presumptuous man to
do it? It is therefore a great work of regeneration to mollity and soften the
will, to make it sacile and ductile, so as to be in what form God would have
us to be. When David had such holy power over his will, 2 Samuel 15. 26, that in
his miserable flight from Absalom, he could say, If ye have no delight in me,
behold here I am, let him do to me as seems good to him; he could abound and
want, be rich and poor, a king and no king all in a day, this argued the great
work of sanctification upon his will. This iron was now in the fire, and so
could be molleated as God would have it; Thus in the fore mentioned instance of
Paul, when he cried out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Here was a tender
humble resignative of the whole will to God, without any conditions or
provisoes; But oh the pride and unruliness of the will, if left to its natural
pollution! When God shall any ways bring his judgments upon us, how
impatiently do we rise against God, even as if we would be revenged of his
Majesty? As it is said of the Thracians, when it thundereth and lightneth, they
shoot against heaven, as if they would bring God to order. Xerxes scourged the
sea, and sent a Bill of defiance against the hill of Athos. Augustus being
beaten with a tempest at sea, defied their god Neptune, and caused his image to
be taken down from the place where the rest of their gods were. Yea Charron
speaks of a Christian King, who having received a blow from God, swore be
would be revenged, and gave a commandment, that for ten years no man should
pray to him, or speak of him; I tremble to mention these dreadful instances,
but they are useful to demonstrate, what pride and unsubdued contumacy is in
the will of man, even against God himself, when he crosses us of our wills:
Yea do not the godly themselves though grace has much mollified their will,
and made it in a great measure obsequious to God, yet do they not mourn, and
pray, and groan under the pride of their will? do they not complain, oh they
cannot bring their will to Gods will! They cannot be content and patient under
Gods dispensations, they fret, they mutter, they repine. Is not all this
because the will is proud, the will does not submit? Heavenly skill and art to
order thy will, would make thee find rest in every estate.

. 6.
The Contumacy and Refractoriness of the Will.
ANother instance of the native pollution of the will is, The contumacy and
refrractioness of the will, it is obstinate and inpenetrable; The Scripture
uses the word heart for the mind, will and conscience not attending to
philosophical distinctions, so that the stony heart, the uncircumcised heart,
is the same with a stubborn and disobedient will. Thus the Scripture puts
the whole cause of a man's not conversion, of his not repenting upon the
resractory will in a man especially, Levit. 26. 14. If ye will not hearken to
me, and will not do these Commandments, verse 18. If ye will not for all this
hearken to me, verse. 23. If ye will not be reformed, but will walk contrary to
me; Observe how all is put upon the will, so that if their will had been
pliable and ready, then the whole work of Conversion and Reformation had been
accomplished; So Matthew. 21. 29. The disobedient son returns this answer to
his father, I will not. This contumacy therefore of the will may be called the
bad tree, that is the cause of all thy bad fruit; A regenerated will, a
sanctified will, would make thee prepared for every good work. It is for want
of this that all preaching is in vain, all Gods mercies, and all judgments are
in vain; Why should not the hammer of Gods word break it? Why should not the
fire of it melt it? but because the stubbornness of the will is so great, that
it will not receive any impression, it is called therefore a stony heart, not an
iron heart, for iron by the fire may be mollified and put into any shape, but a
stone will never melt, it will sooner break into many pieces, and fly in the
face: Thus the will of a man has naturally that horrible hardness and
refractoriness, that in stead of loving and embracing the holy things of God,
it does rather rage and hate with all abomination such things.

. 7.
The Enmity and Contrariety of the Will to Gods Will.
IN the second place, That imbred sinful propriety of the will, which
accompanies it, as heat does fire, is, The enmity and contrariety of the will
to Gods will; There is not only a privative incapacity, but a positive
contrariety, even as between fire and water; Gods will is an holy will, thine
is unholy; Gods will is pure, thine is impure; Gods will is carried out to will
his own glory, honor and greatness, thine is carried out to will the dishonor
and reproach of God: Thus as Gods will is infinitely good, and the cause of all
good, so in some sense, thy will is infinitely evil, and the cause of all that
evil thou art plunged into; Therefore when the Apostle says, That the carnal
mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. (...) comprehends the actings of the
will and the affections, as well as of the mind; It is enmity in the very
abstract, so that it is neither subject to God, nor can be: Oh that God would
set this truth more powerfully upon our hearts, for what tongue can express the
misery of this, that thy will should naturally have such irreconcilable
opposition and implacable enmity to the Law of God, that it should be
diametrially opposite to Gods will, which at first was made so amicable and
compliant with Gods will, that there was the Idem velle, and Idem nolle.
Besides, many other considerations there are two especially that may break and
exceedingly humble our souls herein: For

1. Gods will and his law, which is his will objectively taken, are absolutely
in themselves very good, and therefore the proper object of thy will; So that if
thy will be carried out to any thing in the world, it should be carried out to
Gods Law above any thing: This is to be willed above any created good what
soever, How is it that thou can will pleasures, profits and such created good
things, and art not more ravished and drawn out in thy desires after the
chiefest good, but to be in a state of opposition to this chiefest good, to
contradict and withstand it, this is the heinous aggravation? Could there be a
Summum malum, it would be in the will, because of its direct opposition to the
Summum bonum? Herein man's will, and the Devils will, do both agree, that they
are with hatred and contrariety carried out against Gods will: If therefore
thou were to live a thousand and thousands of years upon the earth, and thou
had no other work to do, but to consider and meditate about the sinfulness
and wretchedness of the will in this particular, thou would even then take up
but drops in respect of the Ocean, and little crumbs in respect of the sand upon
the seashore. But

Secondly, This contrariety of thy will is not only against that which
absolutely in it self is the chiefest good, but relatively it would be so to
thee, and therefore thy contrariety to it is the more unjustifiable. What to be
carried out with unspeakable hatred, to that which would be thy blessedness and
happiness, who can bewail this enough? To have a delight and a connaturality
with those things that will be thy eternal damnation, with much readiness and
joy to will them, and then to be horrible averse and contrapugnant to those
things, which if willed and embraced would make thee happy to all eternity: Oh
miserable and wretched man, thy condition is far more lamentable then that of
the beasts, for they have a natural instinct to preserve themselves, and to
desire such things as are wholesome to them, but thou art naturally inclining to
will and embrace all those things which will be thy eternal woe and misery!
What is the cause that thy will cannot embrace the Law of God? Why art thou so
contrary to it? Alas there is no just reason can be given, but original sin
is like an occult quality in thy will, making an Antipathy in it against the
same; so that thou do not love what is holy, neither art thou able to say,
Why? only thou do not love it; yea, there is the greatest reason in the
world, and all the word of God requires it likewise, that thy will should be
subordinate and commensurated unto it, but there is no other cause of this evil
will, then the evil of it; It is evil, and therefore cannot abide that which is
good.

. 8.
The Rebellion of the Will against the light of the mind, and (...) slavery of
it to the sensitive part in a man.
THirdly, The original pollution of the will is seen in the rebellion of it
against the light of the mind, and the slavery of it to the sensitive part in a
man, to the carnal and sinful affections therein: Both which do sadly proclaim
how the will is by nature out of all holy order, and fallen from its primitive
integrity; For in the former respect therefore did God give us reason, that by
the light and guidance thereof, the will should proceed to its operations; So
that for the will to move it self before it has direction from the mind, is
like the servant that would set upon business before his master commands him,
like an unnatured dog, that runs before his master do set him on: To will a
thing first, and afterward to exercise the mind about it, is to set the earth
where Heaven should be: But oh the unspeakable desolation that is brought upon
the soul in this very particular! The will staieth for no guidance, expects
no direction, but wills because it will, what is suitable and agreeable to
the corrupt nature thereof, that it imbraceth be it never so destructive and
damning; God made the mind at first, that it could say like the Centurion, I
bid the will go and it goes; the affections move, and they move; but now the
inferior soldier bids the Centurion go and he goes; This then is the great
condemnation of the will, that though light come in upon it, yet it loves not
the light, but rebelleth against it; and this sinfulness of the will is more
palpably discovered under the means of grace, and the light of the Gospel, then
under the light of nature merely, for such are said comparatively to sit in
darkness, and to have no light; The more then the light of the Gospel does
appear, the more any beams of truth do gloriously shine into thy breast, and
thou for all this gain-sayest them, live against them, the more is thy will
in a sin. This then does greatly aggravate the polluted nature of the will,
that it can contradict the powerful arguments of the soul, when it was made
subordinate to knowledge, then to become tyrannical and usurping over it, this
argues the will has a peculiar infection in it, insomuch that if it had never
so much light, yet that would be evil, because it will be evil. I know there
are many learned men, that say, The will cannot but follow the practical
dictate of the understanding; There is (say they) a natural connection between
them, so that if the will at any time offend, it is because the light and
conviction of the mind is faint and inefficacious: But this opinion does
greatly retract from the nature of grace, and the nature of our original sin,
from grace, as if that did sanctify the understanding and affections only, and
from original sin, as if that were not seated in the will, but in the other
parts only, whereas the will of a man may be called the throne of wickedness,
because from it properly all sins have their rise and being; Do we not see
this plainly in the Devils, who are (...), greatly knowing and understanding,
yet no Devil is able to will what is good, but wills to sin always, and
cannot resrain it; How comes this about? They do not want knowledge, they are
not capable of sins of ignorance, and yet with what irreconcilable enmity is
the Devil set against that which is good, insomuch that he cannot all the day
long, but will those things that are offensive to God. Although they know this
is to their eternal torment; By which you see how depraved and poisoned without
Christ the will is, though the understanding meet it like an Angel to stop this
Balaam in wicked and unjust ways: Never then plead ignorance, or plead
passions, for it is the defect and wickedness of the will that makes thee so
vile; But as the will in the upper region (as it were) is so much polluted, so
in the lower region also; for if we consider it as bordering upon the
affections, there we shall find as horrible a sin daily committed, as when
Gods Law sorbids a woman to fall down before a beast; for when the will, which
is in it self a rational appetite, shall make it self like one of the vile
affections and passions; what is this but a spiritual and unclean lust with a
beast; Lay then this more to heart than thou do; Think how horrid a sight it
would be, if thy body should become like a beasts, and thou go on the ground as
that does, what would then become of that Os sublime? And is not this as bad,
when thy will is made a vassal to every inordinate affection? Thou willest what
thy passions call for, yet thus it is with every one till grace does elevate
the will, and set it in its proper throne.

. 9.
The Mutability and Inconstancy of the Will.
FOurthly, The mutability and inconstancy of the will about what is holy, is a
great part of the original desolation upon it. It is true, Adam's will was
mutable at the first Creation, though he had full power and perfection to
stand, yet because his will was changeable, therefore he fell from his holy
estate, and no wonder that Adam's will was mutable, for the will of the Angels
so greatly transcending man in glory, was also vertible and changeable, so that
to have the will confirmed in what is good, that it cannot fall into the
contrary condition, is a blessed and gracious privilege vouchsafed by God
alone; Therefore there are no men, though never so much sanctified, but their
wills would make them fall off from God, did not God outwardly support him. This
natural mutability is in the will, because it is the will of a creature, only
the will of God is immutable and unchangeable, and this is only a negative
imperfection, it is not a sin, but the inconstancy and changeableness that I
now mention is a sinful and corrupt one. This mutability of the will and
instability, discovers it self in these particulars,

1. In some great fears or judgments of God upon a man, then though he has no
more but nature, yet his will does sometimes seem to yield, and to melt before
God. Thus Pharaob's will, Ahab's will, did abate of their contumacy while the
heavy rod of God was upon them, but how quickly did they lick up their vomit
again? When the iron was taken out of the fire, it grew as cold as ever; And is
not this inconstant will the ruin of many? Oh that thou had such a will
always, as thou had in such straits, in such extremities, then how happy
would thou be!

2. This inconstancy of thy will appears to thy undoing, When in some
Ordinance the Word preached, the Sacrament administered or reproof applied to
thee, then thou beginnest to yield, then thou say, I will do it, I will be
so no more, I will become new, but these April showrs hold for a season, the
winter will come when all will be frost and snow. Mat. 21. 29. One of those
sons, who said to his father, I go, sir, seeming to be very willing; (whereas
on the other side, I will not,) did quickly falsify his Word; So that he who
refused at first, proved better then he that seemed so forward, and thus truly
it falls out sometimes, that the later end is far better of some, who for a
long while say, they will not, that are stubborn and rebellious, but God
afterward makes them to will, then of such who give many fair promises, now
they will, and then they will, in such sickness they will, in such a powerful
motion they will, but afterward they will not.

3. The sinful inconstancy of the will about holy things, is, When after a
ready and willing profession of Christ, in times of temptation and great
extremities then they fall off, and their fall is great. This is because the
will was not resolved and fixed, that whatsoever should fall out, yet they
would not treacherously depart from God, Act. 11. 23. Barnabas exhorted the
Disciples, That with purpose of heart they should cleave to God, otherwise if
the will be not steadfast and resolved, every temptation is able to drive it
back.

Lastly, The lazy, sluggish and half-desires of the will about good things,
manifest the inconstancy of it. Jam. 1. A double-minded man, (and so a
double-willed man) is inconstant in all his ways; when the will is divided
between the creature and the Creator; or when like the sluggard, he desires
meat, but will not put forth his hand out of his bosom, he wills and wills,
but never does effectually set himself upon working: This man is like a reed
that is tossed up and down with every wind. Many more sinful affections might
be named, for they are like the motes in the air, or the sand upon the sea
shore; But let this suffice, because more will then be discovered, when we
speak of the slavery of it to evil, having no freedom to will what is good.
Only let this Truth be like a coal of fire fallen upon thy heart, let it kindle
a divine flame in thy breast, consider this corrupt will is the root of all
evil; If thy will were changed, if thy will were turned to God, this would
bring the whole man with it: Oh pray to God, to master thy will, to conquer thy
will? Say, O Lord, though it be too hard for me, yet it is not for thee;
Remember hell will be the breaking of thy corrupt will; Thou that would not
do Gods will here, shall not have thy will in any thing when in hell.

SECT. V.
Of the Natural Servitude and Bondage of the Will, with a brief Discussion of
the Point of Free Will.
. 1.
JOH. 8. 35. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.
HItherto we have been discovering the vast and extensive pollution of the
will, in its Originals and Naturals, both in the several operations and
affections of it; The next thing in order is, To treat of the will in regard of
its state, as in freedom of servitude, about which so many voluminous
Controversies have been agitated: And indeed a sound judgment in the point of
Free will is of admirable consequence to advance Christ, and the grace of the
Gospel; For whosoever do obscure the glory thereof, they lay their foundation
here; They praise nature to the dispraise of grace, and exalt God as a Creator,
to the prejudice of Christ as a Redeemer.

Although it is not my purpose to go with this Point as many miles as the
Controversy would compel me, yet because the Doctrine of Free Will is so
plausible to flesh and blood, that in all Ages of the Church it has had its
professed Patrons; And because the cause of Christ and the Gospel is herein
interessed, and further, because it is of a great practical concernment to know
what a slavery and bondage is upon the will of man to sin; it will be necessary
and profitable (in some measure) to enlarge upon it; for there is scarce one in
a thousand, but is pussed up with his own power and strength, so that he
feels not the want of grace.

. 2.
This last mentioned Scripture opened.
THis Text I have pitched upon will be a good and a sure foundation for the
superstruction of our future Discourse; For Austin in his hot disputes with the
Pelagians about the freedom of the will to what is good, does often fly to
this Text, as a sure Sanctuary: And Calvin (gravely upon this Discourse of our
Savior) says, Eunt nunc Papistae (we may add Arminians and Socinians) and
liberum arbitrium factuose extollunt, etc. Let them presumptuously exalt free
will, but we being conscious of our own bondage, do glory in Christ only our
Redeemer: Though Maldonate is pleased to censure this expression of Calvin, us
Sententia digna verberibus, vel igne.

Let us therefore take notice of the Coherence, and we will go no higher then
to the 30th verse, where we have specified a blessed and fruitful event upon
Christ's Discourse, concerning his Person and Office, For as he spoke those
words, many believed on him; not by their own natural ability and power, but
the Father did draw them by his omnipotent and efficacious grace: Christ while
he spoke to the ear did also reach to the heart; he did not only preach, but
could enable the hearer also to believe, herein exceeding all Pastors and
Teachers that ever were in the Church of God; Christ plants and waters, and
gives the increase likewise all of himself; Yea Christ seems here to sow his
seed upon the high way, and among thorns and stones, yet some seed comes up
and prospers well.

Upon this we have the love and care of Christ mentioned to these new Converts,
he immediately waters these plants, and swadleth these new born Infants that
they may not miscarry; This is seen in the counsel suggested to them, where you
have, The Duty supposed, and the admirable Privilege issuing from it* The Duty
supposed, If ye continue in my Word; It is not enough to begin, unless there be
perseverance. It is not enough to receive Christ and his Word, unless we abide
therein and have our ears (as it were) boared, never to depart from such a
Master; The neglect of this makes all that dreadful Apostasy, and those sad
scandals to Religion, which in all Ages do terribly break forth, Except ye
abide in Christ, as well as be in him, we shall fall short in the wilderness,
and not be able to enter into Canaan.

It is also observable, that Christ says, If ye abide in my Word; it must be
the true Doctrine of Christ; it must be what he has delivered, which denotes
two things:

1. That heresy and error can no ways make to our Christian-Discipleship,
they cannot set us at liberty from any lust or sin; and therefore no wonder
if you see men of corrupt judgments at last fall into sinful and corrupt
practices; For the word of God is only the instrument and instituted means of
sanctification, Sanctify them by thy word, Joh. 17.

2. Hereby we see the necessity of the Ministry of it; by the preaching of Gods
word they are first brought to believe, and after that are continually to
depend on it; The Ministry is both for the begetting of grace, and the increase
of it; Those that despise and neglect the Word preached, do greatly demonstrate
they never got any good by it.

The consequent Privilege upon this continuance in the Word, is to be Christ's
Disciples indeed; From whence we have a distinction of a Disciple in appearance
and show, or profession only, and a Disciple indeed. There were many that
became Christ's Disciples in profession only, they followed him for a season,
but afterward forsook him, which caused our Savior so much in his Parables
and Sermons to press them upon a pure. through and deep work of grace upon their
souls: The title without reality will be no advantage. Musculus observes, That
Christ uses the Present tense, Then are ye my Disciples indeed; From whence he
gathers, That Continuance or Perseverance in grace does not make the truth of
grace, but the truth of grace makes the perseverance, they do continue, and
therefore are Disciples indeed, but they are Disciples indeed, therefore they
continue in Christ's Word. But Beza makes (...), as in other places; and if so,
then it must be thus understood, That our Perseverance in grace does not make
grace to be true, but does demonstrate and evidence the Truth; such will appear
to be stars indeed fixed in the firmament, when others like blazing Comets
will quickly vanish away: But this is not all the Privilege, there is a
twofold mentioned in the next verse,

First, Ye shall know the truth; when they did at first believe the Word, they
did know the Truth in some measure, but now their knowledge should be more
evident, clear, and increasing; And indeed the godly they do so grow in
knowledge about heavenly things, that they account their former knowledge even
nothing at all.

The second Privilege is, The truth shall make them free; Every man (till
regenerated) is in bondage and captivity, to blindness in his mind, to lust in
hiswill; And there is nothing can set us at liberty from this dungeon and
prison, but the grace of God by the Word preached.

But no sooner is this Privilege spoken of, then it stirs up the Cavils and
Objections of some that heard it, They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and
were never in bondage to any man, How then do thou say, Ye shall be made
free? Some think, That those who are said to believe did argue thus; But this
seems very harsh; Therefore no doubt some others that were in the multitude,
that did not believe, they were offended at this speech of our Saviors, and
therefore dispute against it, arrogating to themselves both a Native freedom,
We are Abraham's seed; and also an actual one, We were never in bondage to any
man. This expression exercises Interpreters very much, for whether by [We]
they mean their Ancestors or Themselves, living at that time; It is plain, at
first they were in bondage in Egypt, afterward in Babylon, and at that
present in bondage to the Roman Empire, How then could they affirm such a
notorious lie, that they were never in bondage to any man? Some say, They mean
of such vassals and slaves, as sometimes in war are taken and sold to others:
Now (though the Israelites were often conquered, and brought under the power of
others, yet) they were never sold slaves, and so not in bondage in that sense.
Others say, They do not speak of a Civil, or Public, and State-Liberty, but
(as it were) a religious and holy freedom; For, though they were in civil
bondage, yet they glorified in Abraham's seed, and the religious freedom
thereby in respect of Gods favor. So Hensius (in his Aristarchus Sacer. upon
this place,) They (says he) who spoke this, did attend to the Law and
Covenant, for such who obeyed the Law, they called free. Hence they had a
paradoxal Proverb, None unless he exercise himself in the study of the Law, is
to be accounted a free man; And, Qui observat legem esse Regem, even as the
Stoics say of their wise man. Sixtus Senesis makes these words to be spoken
by some of the Galileans, who would never own any foreign power, but did
choose rather to die, then to make such an acknowledgement. That which many
pitch upon is, That the Jews speak this to Christ from their pride and
arrogance, not willing to take any notice of their external subjection, but so
that they may oppose Christ, care not what they say, though never so contrary
to Truth. Although Calvin well adds, They might have a pretense for what they
said, as if the Roman power did by force reign over them, and therefore that
they were ( de jure) free.

But our Savior speaking of one kind of freedom and slavery, and they of
another, he does in the next verse more particularly open his meaning, and
withal lays a foundation to prove, That though they boasted and gloried in
their freedom, yet they were indeed servants and slaves; This he proves by
that universal Proposition, Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin;
You must lay an Emphasis in that (...), it is not to be understood of every
actual committing of sin, but of the wilful, habitual and constant
committing of it: And thus though great men may boast in their Sovereignty they
have over many others; though they may glory in multitude of servants, yet if
they be overcome by any one vice, they be the vilest slaves and vassals of all,
Quot vitia, tot Domini, so many vices, so many Lords: Now original sin that
is a Lord and Master to every one, that reigns over all mankind; some actual
sins enslave one man, and some another; but original sin does every man;
yea though the godly are (in some measure) freed from the dominion of it, yet
it keeps up a tyrannical dominion over the most holy, as appears Romans 7. by
that complaint of Paul, He could not do the good he would, because he was sold
under sin.

This foundation then being laid, our Savior showing the difference between a
servant and a son, does in my Text suppose,

1. A necessity of every one till sanctified to be made free.

2. The Manner how. And

3. That this is freedom indeed.

The Necessity supposed is, If the Son make them free; Though he speaks
this to those Jews who were in a twofold bondage to sin, original and
actual; natural and voluntary, yet this is to be applied to every man that is
not in the state of regeneration, He has no liberty or freedom of will to do
what is good, but is a vassal to all sin; sin is the lusts thereof do
prevail-over him, so that he has neither will or power to come out of this
bondage.

2. There is the Manner how, or the Person by whom we obtain true liberty, If
the Son make you free. In some Cities the elder brother had power to adopt
sons, and so to make free, however Christ is therefore called the Redeemer,
because he does obtain spiritual freedom for his people, and that not only in
respect of the guilt of sin freeing from that; which grace of Christ the
Pelagians did acknowledge (and would constantly interpret my Text in this sense
only) but also the power of sin by inherent Sanctification and Renovation of
the whole man; and of this freedom the Text does here principally speak, not so
much the freedom from the guilt of sin; by justifying grace, as from the
power of sin by sanctifying grace.

3. You have the Commendation of this spiritual liberty, it is called freedom
indeed, implying, that though they had never so much civil freedom, never so
much dominion and power, yet if servants to sin, they were in the vilest
bondage that could be: Civil freedom is thought to be so great a good, that it
can never be prized enough; Therefore the Rabbis have a saying, That if the
Sea were ink, and the world parchment, it would never serve enough to contain
the praises of liberty. The Scripture informs us, how great an honor it was
accounted to be free of Rome, but if all this while men are captivated either
to personal sins, or to sins of the nature, they remain in worse bondage,
then ever any Gally-slaves were in; The people of Israel in their iron furnace
and house of bondage did cry and groan for a Redeemer; but this is the
unspeakable evil of this soul-bondage, that we delight in it, that we rejoice
in it; all our endeavor and care is, that we may not be set at liberty, and
have these chains taken off us. From this explication observe,

That no man has any liberty or freedom of will to what is good, till Christ
by his grace has made him free. We do not by freedom of will obtain grace, but
by grace we obtain freedom of will: So that by the Scripture we have not any
true ground for a liberum, arbitrium, but a liberatum in spiritual things;
There is no such thing as a free will, but a freed will in a passive sense, and
tunc est liberum, when it is liberatum, as Austin; Then it is actively free,
when it is first passively made free, Romans 6. 16. Being made free from sin;
He does not say, you have made your selves free, but ye are made frre by the
grace of Christ. And again, verse. 22. Ye are now made free from sin; and Romans
8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
Law of sin and death: By which expressions is implied, 1. That all men till
sanctified are in an absolute vassalage and thraldom to sin. And, 2. That it
is only the grace of Christ that does deliver from this bondage. It is Christ
not our own will that makes us free.

3
Of the several Kinds of Freedom which the Scripture speaks of.
TO enter into the depths of this Doctrine, Consider, What kinds of freedom
the Scripture speaks of, and which is applicable to our purpose. The Schools
have vast disputes about liberty and free will, What it is, whether a
compounded faculty or a simple one; and whether a faculty, or habit, or act;
especially they digladiate about the definition of free will, what it is; but
if any thing shall be thought necessary to be said in this point, it may be
pertinently brought in, when we shall answer such Objections as the Patrons of
nature do use to bring in the behalf of Free Will: only it is good to know,
that in the Scripture we find a civil liberty and a spiritual liberty spoken
of, a civil liberty; Thus bond and free are often opposed, Ephesians. 6. 8. Col. 3.
11. 1 Cor. 7. 22. But this is not to the Text, nor to our purpose; Therefore
the Scripture speaks much of a spiritual freedom, and that is,

First, In the translating of us out from the dominion of sin and Satan, into
a gracious state of holiness; and this is called by Divines, Libertas gratia,
or (as Austin) libertas a peccato. The freedom of grace of which those Texts
speak that we mentioned before.

Secondly, There is the Evangelical and Christian liberty, whereby we are freed
from many things of the law, not only the curse of the moral law and the spirit
of bondage, which did accompany the legal administration thereof, but also from
the obligation unto, and exercise of the ceremanial; This Evangelical liberty
is often commended in the Scripture, as the glorious privilege of the
Christian Church, which the legal Church wanted; of this legal servitude, and
Evangelical freedom the Apostle, Gal. 4, does largely, and most divinely
treat, This Christian liberty also from Jewish rites, The Apostle, Gal. 5. 1.
^^horteth us to stand fast in, as being purchased for us by the death of
Christ, as a glorious priveledge; only the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 16, gives
good advice, That we turn not our liberty into licentiousness; It is true, the
Apostle does once use the word [free] abusively and improperly, Romans 6. 20,
where the servants of sin are said to be free from righteousness, or to
righteousness, now this is improperly called a freedom; for as the service of
God is the truest freedom, so freedom from holiness is the greatest slavery.
Although Austin does from this Text make a division of liberty into two kinds,
which he makes perpetual use of, Libertas a peccate, and Libertas a justitia;
The godly man has the former liberty, the sinner has the latter, but this
latter is improperly called liberty.

Lastly, There is a spiritual freedom mentioned by the Scripture, as the
utlimte and complete perfection of all, when the soul shall be freed not only
from the dominion of sin, but the presence of it, all the relics and
remainders of it, and the body shall be freed from death, pain, and all
corroptibility, Romans 8. 2. This is called, the glorious liberty of the sons of
God; and for this every godly man is to groan and mourn, even as the woman in
travel to be delivered; This is called by Divines libertas gloriae, and
libertas a miseria. But we are to speak of the liberty of grace; and herein we
are not to admire the Freewill of man, but the free grace of God: man has no
free will to do that which is spiritual and holy; Free Will is an Idol which
the corrupt heart of man is apt to advance; he is unwilling to be brought out
of himself, to be beholding to the grace of Christ only; therefore Austin
observed well, That this truth is to be found out by prayer and supplication,
sooner then by disputation; Did men commune with their own hearts; did they
observe the Abyss and depth of all evil that is in their corrupt will, how
entangled and in slaved to the creature, they would quickly fall from
disputation to humiliation, and turn arguments into prayers.

. 4.
The Names which the Scripture expresses that by, which we call Free Will.
THe next thing in our method that will be explicating of the Doctrine, is to
take notice of, What names the Scripture uses to express this thing by, that
we call Free Will; for free will is not a Scripture name, but Ecclesialsical,
yet the sense of it is in the Scripture; for (...), is often used in the
Scripture, to will, and that in such things wherein freedom is necessarily
supposed, Luke 22. 9. Where will thou, that we prepare a place? Joh. 9. 27.
Wherefore would ye hear it again, will ye also be his Disciple? Act 7. 28, will thou kill me also, etc. and in many other places, hence (...) is used for the
free will of a man, 1 Cor. 7. 37, and indeed it is disputed, whether to do a
thing voluntary, and libere, voluntarily and freely be not all one, and so
libertas, and voluntas, only voluntas denotes the power and liberty, the
qualification of it in its working. Jansenius is most consident, that in
Austin's constant dispute with the Pelagians, liberum arbitrium, is no more
then voluntas, and that to do a thing freely, is no more then to do it
voluntarily; this he maintains against the Jesuits, and withal wonders at a
late Writer of their own (whom he names not) which writes, that the word
servum arbitrium, was not heard in the Church of God for fifteen hundred
years, It is Bellarmine that says so, but our Divines had detected this
falsehood long before Jansenius. Howsoever Austin may use the word, yet the
Scripture expresses that which we call the will by, (...) and (...). A second
word to express liberty is (...), liberty, yet this is not so much applied to
the liberty of the will, as to the liberty of a man, as here in the Text, the
son shall make you free, your persons not your wills; but because there is an
universal bondage in all the powers of the soul to sin, blindness in the
mind, contumacy in the will; (for Quid est libertas sine gratia, nisi
contumacia.) What is liberty in the will without grace, but contumacy against
God, and a wilful delight in evil ways, Inordinacy in the affections:
therefore the person is said to be made free, not but that the will is
principally included in this, only the will is not all that is made free, 2 Cor
3. 17, where the spirit of the Lord is, thereby is liberty; It Is from the
Spirit of God we obtain liberty from sin, and also from servile slavish
fears. The Jesuits would have this liberty nothing to the purpose in the
controversy de libero arbirio, for (say they) this is a spiritual mistical
liberty, libertas a peccate, and they are treating of libertas naturae, which
they make to consist in an indifferency to good or evil, but by their favor
this is a proper liberty, and it is this that the Pelagians did most controvert
about, and still the proper dispute between the orthodox and their adversaries
is in this particular, Whether there be any liberty or freedom in a man's will
without grace to shake off the deminion of sin, so that they keep most
properly to the state of the question, who are diligent in the opening of the
nature of this liberty. Another word which the Scripture uses to express this
free will by, is (...), 1 Pet. 5. 2, Phil. 1. 4, and this is very proper and
full, when we do a thing not by constraint, or by a natural necessity, then we
do it freely, therein we show our liberty, so that liberty does oppose coaction
and natural necessity; It is impossible the will should in its immediate
elicite acts be compelled, for then it should be voluntas and noluntas, at the
same time; then velle would be nolle, which is an high contradiction: Therefore
liberty does necessarly oppose constraint, but (...), does also oppose a
natural necessity (I say) a natural necessity (for there are other necessities
that liberty does consist with, yea and the more necessary the more free, as in
time is to be showed.) Thus though the stone has an inclination to descend
downwards, yet because the stones motion is from a natural necessary principle,
therefore it is not free: Beasts likewise though, they exceed the inanimate
creatures, yet they do not agere (...), voluntarily. They do act spontaneously,
but not voluntary, because a natural principle of sense does determine them.
(...) indeed, Heb. 10. 26, is translated wilfully, If we sin wilfully after
we have known the truth; but there it signifies an high degree of the
obstinacy of the will, and a confirmation in evil against great light and
knowledge; but commonly it signifies doing a thing, so as not to be
constrained to it. Platonical Philosophers call free will (...), too proud a
word to be given to a creature; and therefore the ancient Greek Fathers being
many of them Platonists, did greatly obscure the glory of grace by receiving
Platonical words, of which this is one: Indeed they gave to God (...), but yet
(...), is too much for a creature, which has a necessity of subordination to
God, and dependency on him. The Stoics they express free will by (...), that
which is in our own power. The Aristotelians express it by (...), which is the
Scripture expression likewise; Though the Scripture and Aristotelians differ as
much as light and darkness about the nature of liberty, As the Ancients by
following Platonical Philosophy: so the Neotericks (especially the Jesuits by
following Aristotle,) have greatly prejudiced the Doctrine of free grace,
setting up free will in the room thereof. There is one expression more, and the
Scripture has it but once, which is the most emphatical in describing of this
liberty, and that is 1 Cor. 7. 37. Having power over a man's own will, (...),
for liberty lies in some kinds of some dominion to have our own will; hence in
liberty we may conceive something Negative and something Positive; Negative,
and that is not to be compelled, not to be constrained, not to be inslaved:
Positive, and that is to have some power and dominion over the actions of our
will, as the Apostle instanceth in him, who had decreed to keep his virgin from
marriage, This man is said to have power over his own will. By these Scripture
words we may come to understand in a great measure, what liberty and freedom
of will is.

. 5.
Some Observations concerning the Promoters of the Doctrine of Free Will, how
Unpleasing the contrary Doctrine is to flesh and blood, with some advice about
it.
SEcondly take notice, That it is the great purpose and design of some to go
contrary to the plain intent of the Scripture; For many in all ages of the
Church have (with all their learning and parts) endeavored to set up this Idol
of Free Will, whereas the great drift of the Scripture is to advance and set up
the free grace and free gift of God: The Apostles they write to debase man and
to exalt the grace of God; Erroneous persons, they dispute, and write, to exalt
the will of man, and to take off from the grace of God; What a loud trumpet is
Paul in his Epistles to sound forth the praises of free grace, not only free
grace in justification, but free grace also in sanctification? It Is the grace
of God that does not only pardon the guilt of sin, but conquer the power of
it: Consider then whether it be better, to set up Dagon or the Ark, the
free will of man, or the free gift and grace of God. Truly it is a very
uncomfortable task, to be disputing against that grace, which yet we must
wholly rely upon, when we come to die. It is one thing what men write while
they are in health, what cobweb-distinctions they please themselves with in
their voluminous writings, and another thing when they are in the agonies of
death, and are to appear at the tribunal of a righteous God. It was that (which
that famous Champion for the grace of God) Bradwardine comforted himself with,
when he undertook the cause of God against Pelagians, That he could pray for
the grace of God, to help him in his undertakings, to be present with him, and
to direct him, whereas his adversaries could not do so. And indeed how can an
Arminian, or a Pelagian with any of those Naturists, cordially pray for the
grace of God to assist them, while they write against grace, and patronize
free will? Let them sacrifice to their own nets, to their own parts and
abilities; It Is from their will that grace is efficacious. This arrogance is
like that of the Heathens, whose saying was, Ignavis opus est auxilio Dei, It
is only the sluggish that need the help of God: Yea Tully argues the case,
That we are not beholding to God for our virtue; therefore (says he) our
ancestors have praised the gods for their success and outward advantages, but
never for their virtues; Happily it is awe and reverence that men bear to the
Christian Religion, that keeps them from such blasphemous expressions; yet
even in Christian Writers (pleading for the power of nature) instances might be
given of proud and swelling expressions.

Thirdly, It is good to observe, That even in all those whose end avour has
been to advance the free will of a man to what is truly good, there has
appeared some guiltiness (as it were) in them, therefore they have often
changed, (if not their minds yet their words) thus they have removed from the
mountains to the valleys: The Pelagians did incrustate their opinions often,
and the Papists speak sometimes so plausibly, that you would think Bellarmine
and Calvin did embrace each other. Pelagius did at last come to use the word
grace, yea did anathematize such as should not hold the grace of God requisite
to every good act; by which crafty guiles he did deceive the Eastern Bishops,
and still in the serpents-skin do the Jesuits and Arminians appear; They think
it the greatest calumny that can be cast upon them, to say, they are against
the grace of God; hence they use the word of grace often, as well as of
free will, but all this arises from guilt; they do use the word grace ad
frangendam invidiam, to decline, envy, to insinuate more into the hearts of
credulous hearers: so that men sacrilegiously advance the will of man' make man
to have the greatest praise in converting himself, in saving himself; and
whereas Paul said, Not I, but the grace of God with me; They will on the
contrary affirm, Not the grace of God, but I; yet for all this they would be
thought to advance the grace of Christ, but that is a true rule of Austins,
Gratia non est gratia ullo modo nisi sit gratuita omni modo; Grace is not grace
any way, unless it be free and gra^uitous every way; Therefore the inconstancy,
the changes and shifts all such are put to, who plead for this liberty of the
will, argue they are not in the Truth, but like thieves do hate the light, and
change their garments often, that they may not be discovered; They are afraid
of the Scripture, and would more gladly have the controversy ended by
Aristotle, then by Paul; so that this Pelagian error has had Cain's curse (as
it were) upon it, a trembling, lest every place of Scripture it, does meet
with) should kill it.

Fourthly, To maintain the slavery of the will to sin, and to deny any
liberty to that which is holy and godly, is a truth so unpleasing to flesh and
blood, does so reproach (as it is thought) mankind, that it has always in the
Church of God, (by some heretical persons or others) been spoken against; It
has been judged very scandalous and offensive, as that which did lay the axe
to the root of all Religion and holiness; But yet experience has taught us,
that none have expressed so much holiness in their lives, as those who have had
this truth of Christ's grace incorporated into them; and on the other side, the
Pelagian Doctrine has left upon men's spirits, like leaven, a cornu and
tumorem, a sowreness and bitterness, as also a tumor and vaunting confidence in
themselves; So that if the denying of free will and exalting the grace of God
be so profane an opinion in its genius and inclination (as some calumniate,)
it is a miracle, that from such a poisoned fountain such sweet streams should
flow, and from such thorns so pleasant grapes should grow. But the reason of
this offense to flesh and blood, is the self-love and self-fullness that is in
every man by nature; spiritual pride and self-confidence do reign in all men by
nature; hence it is that though they be naked, yet they are not ashamed of it,
which in Adam (while innocent) did come from his integrity, but in corrupt man
from his senslesness and stupidity. No wonder then if this Doctrine of grace be
not justified cordially, and as it ought to be, but by the sons of grace, who
have felt the power and efficacy of it upon their hearts, who have
experimentally found the grace of God freeing their will from all that bondage
it was in to sin and Sataen.

Fifthly, From this it is, that a gracious heart is required to study this
point, as well as a learned head. Experience of regeneration, of being made a
new creature, of the conflict between the flesh and the spirit, will
excellently direct in this controversy. I wonder not to see a man, though come
out of Egypt laden with Egyptian gold, to make a molten-calf for a god and to
worship it: men of great learning, and it may be of great external civility (as
they say of Pelagius) if not humbled by the grace of God, and throughlyu
emptied of themselves, how can they stoop and yield all up to Christ? It was
therefore Austin's wish, That the Pelagians would turn their disputations into
prayers, for it is the heart as well as the head that is useful in this point.
Though all Divinity be practical, and practice is the end of knowledge, yea in
Scripture language, Tantum scimus quantum operamur, we are said to know no more
then we do; yet some truths have a more immediate influence into practice then
others, whereas some opinions do stand in the Court (as it were) others enter
into the holiest of holiest: Now this truth about the grace of God, and
free will is practice (practice) as I may say, what some do of the ultimate
dictate of the understanding; This truth lies in the vitals of Religion, and
therefore the experience of all the godly is justly brought after Scripture
arguments to confirm this great truth; Therefore humble your selves more,
commune with your own hearts, be much in prayer and self-emptiness, and you
will quickly find the light of this truth shining into your hearts; Come and
taste, Come and see, what you hear with your ears; pray that God would grant
you an experimental knowledge of grace, and then you will quickly confess not
unto your own free will, but to the free grace of God, all praise, and glory
does belong.

Sixthly, This truth therefore being so contrary to flesh and blood, It is by
the grace of God that we come to acknowledge the grace of God. Error in mind is
part of our bondage, as well as lust in our heart; It is therefore by the grace
of God that we are delivered from both these thraldoms; we have a freed mind
from ignorance, and a freed will from concupiscence; It is the Spirit of God
that leads us into all truth, called therefore the Spirit of truth, John 14.
17. It is by the grace of God that thou fallest not in this error of advancing
free will; It Is by the grace of God that thou art no Pelagian or Arminian; It
is this that makes thee to differ from them; Thy judgment, thy heart would be
self-confident herein, did not the Spirit of God teach thee.

Lastly, Consider that the grace of God is necessary to guide us in this point,
Because this Question has always seemed very difficult. Austin acknowledged
it so; Hence he says, That when grace is defended, we are thought to destroy
free will, and when a free will is acknowledged (though in some sense only) we
are thought to deny free grace. Indeed the Truth is not so difficult ( viz.)
that we have no spiritual liberty to what is good, or that grace only makes
the will free; but how to reconcile this with the natural liberty of the will,
that it shall not be as a stock or stone, that has seemed to some even
insoluble, and therefore they advise to captivate our understandings in this
point, as we do in the Doctrine of the Trinity; however whether soluble or
insoluble, the difficulty argues the necessity of Gods assistance, while we
preach, and you hear about it.

. 6.
The first Demonstration of the slavery of the Will is from the Necessity of
sinning that every man is plunged into.
SEveral particulars being premised as introductory to our intended matter, our
next work is to show, Wherein this servitude and slavery of the will does
consist; Not that you are to conceive of the will, as some prisoner who is
chained up in a dungeon, that has power to walk and run, only those external
impediments do hinder him, which is Bellarmine's similitude about the inability
of a natural man to supernatural good: So the will has some inward power and
ability to do that which is holy, only there are lusts, which are vincentes
and vincientes, as Austin expresses, conquering and binding this will, that it
cannot actually perform what internally it has a power to do, here is no such
thing, for we must conceive of this habitual depravation and defilement of the
will in its state and condition more inward and deeply rooted in it.

First therefore, That the will of man is destitute of any freedom to what is
good, appears, In the Necessity of sinning that every man is plunged into,
that he cannot but sin in all that he does; That as the Angels and Saints in
Heaven have Beata Necessitas, a blessed necessity of loving of God, and
delighting in him, so that no temptation in the world can draw them off: Thus
every man by nature is in an unhappy and wretched necessity of sinning, Dura
Necessitas, as Austin called it. Insomuch that though the Scripture does
represent the things of Heaven in a most glorious manner to affect us, yet we
cannot be taken off from our sin to love that; Hence it is that every man
till regenerated is compared to an evil tree, and Tit. 1. they are said to be
unclean, and every thing made unclean to them; The person being not accepted,
neither can any duties be: This is our sad and miserable condition by nature,
But whose heart is thoroughly affected with it? Thy eating, thy drinking, thy
buying and selling, yea thy praying and all other duties, as they come from a
man not sanctified by grace are sins in the eyes of God. Think then to what
an infinite aggravation they will arise, and whether thou may not truly
complain, they are more then the sands upon the Seashore; so that as the Toad
and Serpent do necessarily vent what is poison, and can never do that which is
sweet and wholesome: Thus no man in his natural estate can ever do any thing but
be sinning, and so damning of himself all the day long; Only when we say it is
thus naturally necessary to a man to sin in all things he does, you must
know, that we do not herein make him absolutely like a bruit beast, which is
not capable either of vice or virtue; for this necessity is voluntarily brought
by man upon himself, he did wilfully strip himself of all power and ability to
do that which is good, and so having shut out the light from himself, he does
necessarily remain in the dark, having chaced away the Spirit and presence of
God from his soul, which is the life thereof, he becomes spiritually dead, and
so in a necessity of sinning: But it is not thus with Serpents and Toads; for
whether they were at first created solely, with such a poisonous nature, or
whether upon Adam's fall it was inflicted upon those creatures as a curse, it
is plain, that these creatures could not with any will or consent bring
themselves into this estate, but man did voluntarily at first, having no seed
of evil, or inward propensity to sin transgress the Commandment, whereupon
his soul became more shamefully naked then his body. This necessity therefore
whereby he is determined only to sin, arises from his own free and
voluntary impiety; As a man that has wilfully put out his own eyes must blame
himself for ever if he cannot see: If then this bondage be upon thee, that in
all things thou sinnest, whatsoever thou undertakest, evil is presently over
ruling of thee, blame not God, or any providence of his, no nor the Devil
neither, for though he does tempt, yet he does not necessitate to sin, but
thy own self, for from thy own bowels this destruction does arise.

. 7.
That a Necessary Determination may arise several ways, some whereof are very
consistent with Liberty, yea the more necessary the more free.
IT is good to observe, and it may clear many difficulties in this point, That
a necessary determination may arise several ways, some whereof are very
consistent with liberty, yea the more necessary the more free. Thus God himself
does necessarily will that which is good, and yet freely also: And if you ask,
Whence does it arise that God is thus determined to what is good? I answer, It
is from the infinite and absolute perfection of his holiness, whereby he is
not, nor cannot be a God that wills iniquity. Arminius indeed makes it
little less than blasphemy to say, God is libere bonus, but that is, because
he cannot part with his Helena, or Dalilah (viz.) That liberty consists in an
indifferency to good and evil, and in this sense to say, God does so freely
will good, that he can as freely will evil, would be blasphemy; but to will
evil is no part at all of freedom, it is a defect in a mutable creature, as is
to be showed. Such a determination to good only was in Christ also from his
perfection, and is likewise in the Angels confirmed, and Saints glorified; here
is no power to sin, yet have they liberty in an eminent degree, though
determined to good only: On the contrary, the Devils and damned men they are
necessarily determined to that which is evil, they cannot but hate God, they
are not able to have one good thought, or one good desire to all eternity, yet
all this is done freely by them; Now as the determination to good did arise
from perfection, from the strong principles of holiness within, so in these
their necessary determination to evil does arise from that power of iniquity
and sin they are delivered up unto: In this necessity of sinning are all
natural men (till regenerated) absolutely plunged into, and that from the
dominion which sin has over them; Only herein they differ from the Devils
and damned men, they are in their termino, in their journeys end, and so are
not in a capacity of being ever freed from this necessity and thraldom to
sin: There will never be a converted Devil, or a converted man in hell, their
state is unchangeable, and they can never be recovered, but with wicked men in
this life, God has dealt in many plentiful ways of mercy, so that though for
the present determined only to evil all the day long, though for the present
under the chains and bonds of sin, Yet the grace of God may deliver them out
of this prison, and set them at liberty, but till this be, they are as the
Devils carried out necessarily in all hatred unto God, and this determination
to one is from imperfection.

Lastly, There is a determination to one from principles of Nature without
reason and judgment, and where such is there cannot be any liberty, for reason
and judgment is the root of liberty, though it be formally in the will.

By this then you see, That this necessity of sinning does not take away the
natural freedom that is in the will, so that a man and a beast should be both
alike. Luther (De Servo Arbit.) indeed wished that the word Necessity might be
laid aside; Neither does Bradwardine like that expression, Necessitas
immutabilitatis, as applied to man, but in the sense all that are Orthodox do
agree.

. 8.
The second Argument of the Servitude of the Will is its being carried out unto
sin voluntarily, and with delight.
SEcondly, This necessity of sinning does not at all take off from the
voluntarinesse and delight therein, but every natural man is carried out so
voluntarily and readily unto every sin suggesting it self, as if there were
no necessity at all. Hence man by nature is said To swallow down iniquity like
water, Job 15. 16 Even as the feavorish or Hydropical man is never satiated
with water; Therefore the necessity of sinning is never to be opposed to his
willingness and freedom; for though a man has no freedom to good, yet he has
to evil, Eoque magis libera, quo magis Ancilla, the more he is subject to
sin, the more enslaved to it by his delight therein, the freer he is to act
it; We must not then imagine such a necessity of sinning in a man, as if that
did compel and force a man against his inclination and desire: You must not
think that it is thus with a man, as if he could say, O Lord, my will is set
against sin, I utterly abhor and detect it, but I am necessitated to do it;
for the will being corrupted, does with all propensity and delight rejoice in
the accomplishing of that which is evil.

. 9.
3. The Bondage of the Will is evident by its utter impotency to any thing that
is Spiritual; And wherein that inability consists.
THirdly, This bondage of the will to sin is evidently manifested in its
utter impotency and inability to any thing that is spiritual. It Is like Samson,
that has lost its strength, God made man right, whereby he had an ability to
do any thing that was holy, there could not be an instance in any duty, though
in the highest degree, which Adam had not a power to do, and now he is so
greatly polluted, that there is not the greatest sin possibly to be committed
by the vilest of men, but every man has the seed and root thereof within him,
for this reason man by nature is not only compared to the blind and deaf, but
also to such who are wholly dead in sin: So that as the dead man has no
power to raise himself, so neither has a man who is spiritually dead in his
sins.

That this Truth may greatly humble us, Let us consider, wherein this absolute
impotency to what is holy, is in every man, for this is a great part of the
demonstration of our spiritual bondage to sin and Satan. And

First, Such is the thraldom of the will, That a man by nature cannot resist
the least temptation to sin, much less the greatest, without the special
grace of God helping at that time. We matter not those Pelagian Doctors who
hold a man by his own power may resist less temptations, yea more grievous
ones, though not continually; for when our Savior teaches us to pray, That we
may not be lead into temptation, does not that imply, whatsoever is a
temptation, whether it be small or great, if the Lord leave us thereunto, we
presently are overcome by it. Certainly, if Adam while retaining his integrity
in a temptation, and that about so small a matter comparatively, for want of
actual corroborating grace, was overtaken by it: Is it any wonder that we who
have no inward spiritual principle of holiness within us, but are filled with
all evil and corruption, that we are reeds shaken with every wind? The rotten
Apple must fall at every blast: Know then that it is either sanctifying or
restraining grace, that keeps thee from every snare of sin thou meetest with;
Thou would every hour fall into the mire did not that uphold: These Dalilahs
would make thee sleep in their laps, and then as Jael to Sicera, so would they
do to thee. Herein is our bondage discovered.

Secondly, Our thraldom is manifested, In that we are not able of our selves
to have one good thought, in reference to our eternal salvation; But if any
serious apprehension, if any godly meditation be in thy soul, it is the grace
of God that does breath it into thee; The wilderness of thy heart cannot bring
forth such roses: Thus the Apostle, We are not able of our selves (2 Cor. 3.
5.) to think any thing as of our selves; Though the Apostle speaks it
occasionally in his ministerial employment, yet (it holds generally true of
every one, of thy self) then thy heart is like a noisome dunghill, nothing but
unsavory thoughts do arise from it; but if at any time any good motion, any
sad and serious thought stirs within thee, know this comes from without, it
is put into thee, as the cup of gold in Benjamin's sack; and therefore this
must greatly debase us.

Thirdly, We are not able of our selves to have the least desire or longing
after grace, and a state of holiness. Not only Pelagianism, but
Semi-pelagianism is a dangerous rock to be avoided: The later made our desires
to begin, and then Gods grace to succeed and accomplish; But there is not so
much as the least groan, the least desire can arise in thy heart: Oh that God
would change me! Oh that I were in the state of those that do truly fear God!
And the reason is, because the Scripture describes us by nature to be dead in
sin, and compares the work of grace to a spiritual resurrection: Oh how
great is thy bondage which does so far oppress thee, that thou can not so
much as long for any freedom! Oh hopeless and wretched man, if left to himself!

Fourthly, From this follows the next demonstration of our vassalage and
spiritual impotency, That we cannot pray to God, that he would deliver us out
of this misery. No natural man can pray, it is the grace of God that does
enable thereunto, he may utter the words of prayer, he may repeat the
expressions, but (alas) he does not, he cannot pray, as God requires, and so
as he will accept of it. The Apostle is clear for this, Romans 8. 26. The Spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we ought; Is not
this unspeakable misery, who needs to pray more then thou, and yet thou can
not pray? Thou art sinning, thou art dying, thou are damning, and yet can not
pray: Is not thy heart like an adamant, if this break thee not?

Fifthly, Such is our impotency and bondage, That we are not able to affect our
selves with the fear and terror of the Law, thereby to be convinced and
humbled in our selves. If we cannot do the preparatories for grace, much less
grace it self; if we cannot do the less, How shall we do the greater? Now one
great preparatory work is, To have a divine and powerful fear in our souls, by
reason of the Law, whereby we are afraid of hell, of the day of Judgment, and
cannot have any rest in our spirits, because of this. Now this is wrought by
the Spirit of God in a preparatory way, Romans 8. 15. It is called The Spirit of
bondage: And Joh. 14. The Spirit does convince the world of sin; So that in
and through the preaching of the Law, and discovery of sin, the Spirit of God
does awaken and terrify the conscience of a man, makes him afraid, that he
cannot eat, or drink, or take the delight he used to do. It is true, the
slavish sinfulness of this fear the Spirit of God does not work, but the heart
being like a mudded pool, when it is moved, such slavish fears will arise
likewise; But how far is every natural man from this, he is secure and jolly,
blessing and applauding himself, crying peace, peace, all is at quiet within
him, because the strong man does keep the house? It is the voice of the Lord
only that can make these mountains to quake and melt.

Sixthly, Such is our weakness, That we cannot barden or soften our hearts in
the least manner, but they remain obdurate and like brass and iron. Thy heart
is like a stone within thee, and thou art no ways able to mollify it;
Therefore God makes it his work, and he graciously promises, I will take away
the heart of stone (Ezekiel. 11. 19.) and give an heart of flesh; As if God had
said, I know this work is above you, you are not able to do it: And certainly,
if the godly themselves (because of the remainders of original corruption do
complain of the hardness of their hearts,) cannot mollify or soften them, as
they desire; Is it any wonder if the wicked man be not able to remove the stone
from him.

Seventhly, A man cannot by the power of nature believe, no not so much as with
an historical faith, till grace prepare the heart therein. Now faith is the
first foundation-stone, Heb. 11. He that comes to God must believe he is, and
so he must believe the truth about Christ; But we see by the Pharisees, who
heard Christ preach, saw the wonderful miracles he did, yet in stead of
believing in him did deride and oppose him; so that all the acts of faith,
whether dogmatical or saving, we are enabled unto only by the grace of God,
Matthew. 13. 11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
Heaven, but not to them: Thus Act. 18. 27. the Disciples are said to believe
through grace, faith then is the gift of God, not the work of man's free will.)
And if he cannot do this, it is plain, he cannot move one foot of himself
toward Heaven.

Lastly, Such is our impotency, That when grace is offered and tendered to us,
the will of it self has no power to consent to it, or make improvement of it.
It can, and often does resist and refuse grace, but of it self it cannot embrace
it. It is true, Papists and Arminians plead hard for this power of the will,
but this is to give more to man's will then to Gods grace, this is to make man
to differ himself from others.

It might be thought, that the will indeed cannot choose Christ, or receive him
as a Lord, because there is no revelation or manifestation of a Christ; They
are a people happily who sit in darkness, and have no light; and therefore
though they may have an inward power to see, yet for want of light to actuate
the medium they cannot; so that the defect arises not from the power within,
but the manifestation of the object without: And this indeed is gratly to be
considered, whether an Infidel or Pagan (for example) does not believe, because
there is no proposition of the object in the Ministry, otherwise if he enjoyed
that, then he had power over his own to assent to it. Now even the Pelagians
themselves, and their followers, yea even all that give not grace its full due,
yet thus far they do acknowledge there must be a doctrinal revelation by the
Spirit of God, of the truths to be acknowledged; and when this light is set (as
it were) upon the Candlestick, then a man of his own self is able to see; but
such is the corruption of man, that not only grace must bring in the light, but
it must also give the eye to see; So that the work of Gods grace is both
objective and subjective, objective in revealing the object, and subjective in
preparing and fitting the subject; It being the Lord who does give the seeing
eye, and the hearing ear, Prove. 20. 12. Yea the Arminians go further,
acknowledging that grace does irresistibly work upon the understanding of a
man, for it being a passive faculty it cannot withstand its illumination, but
the will that retains its indifferency, when grace has done all it will do:
This therefore is granted, That without the grace of God enlightening and
revealing, we are not able to believe the mysteries of Christ Kingdom; but
though all this be granted, yet we say, That without further grace (even grace
regenerating and sanctifying the will.) we are not able to cleave to that which
is good: You must not then conceive, as if God only offered grace in the
Ministry, and then the will of man by its own self does love and delight in it;
No, the heart of stone is first to be removed, we are to be new born, and made
new creatures, before we can put forth any spiritual life at all; Not that a
man is converted without his will, or that he does not believe or repent, but
the grace of God, only God changes the will, he quickneth it, and enliveneth
it so, that whereas it was like Sarah's dead womb before, now it was made
fruitful. The grace of God does not compel the will, but change it; As if
water which naturally descends be turned into air, then it does as naturally
ascend; Indeed this is a physical change, but the moral change by grace in the
will, is as notable to its operations. To consent therefore to grace is the
work of grace; It is grace that makes us to will and receive grace: Hence we
see by experience of those many who enjoy the means of grace, how few do
effectually and powerfully improve them: Whence is this difference? Is it
because one does use his free will better then another? Surely this would
attribute far more to free will, then to Gods grace; for it is the will of man
that makes grace effectual, not grace that makes the will of man pliable: By
this Peter should be no more beholding to the grace of God then Judas; nor
David then Saul, seeing ( ex part Dei) all had grace alike, only one used
this grace of God by his own power better then another, and thus we shall have
something that we did not receive, and we shall make our selves to differ from
other; How derogatory and injurious is this to the grace of God?

. 10.
That man naturally loves his Thraldom to Sin, and contradicts the Means of
Deliverance from it; is a great Aggravation of the Bondage and Servitude of the
Will.
SEcondly, The miserable bondage of the will to sin, is the more to be
aggravated, In that it loves this thraldom, delights to be in this drudgery,
even as the Swine does in its mire; yea it does vehemently oppose and
contradict all the means of deliverance from it. Austin complained, Velle meum
inimicus captivum tenebat: Our will is kept captive; So that if the grace of
God come to set us free, we love our bondage better then liberty; we had rather
be in our prison with chains upon us, then abide in Gods palace: So that this
vassalage of the will to sin, is not like a bodily one, which is troublesome
and very grievous to those that are detained therein, as we see it was to the
Israelites groaning under the yoke, but naturally we delight in this slavery,
and look upon that freedom which grace would procure for us, as the greatest
misery, and this makes us unspeakably miserable, according to that known Rule,
Quid miserius misero, non miserante seipsum, What is more miserable then that
wretched man, who does not, who cannot pity himself? You must not therefore
conceive of the will of man thus captivated to sin, as if it were against its
inclination, as if of it self it did endeavor to cast off this yoke, as it is
with some people, who being overpowered, are forced to submit, but yet they
wait for, and long for an opportunity to set themselves at liberty: No, but the
will does delight and rejoice in this servitude: A man does willingly give his
ears to be boared by his lusts, resolving never to go from this Master, unless
grace change him, and make him a new creature all over.

. 11.
The Bondage of the Will is seen in its Concupiscential Affection to some
Creature or other, never being able to lift its self up to God.
THis want of freedom to any thing that is good, is seen, In the
concupiscential affection to some creature or other, never being able to lift
it self up to God: And certainly, if you ask, Wherein does the bondage of the
will to sin consist? We may in the general say, in its creature affection, so
that the will, which while entire and sound did love God as the chiefest good,
and all creatures in reference, and with subordination to him, is now so
debased that it creeps upon the ground, and is not able at all to love any
thing but it self and the creature; So that now every one takes up that
request Psalm. 4, Who will show us any good? Any temporal good, they desire the
Devils offer; So that if he would show them the glory of the world, and bestow
it on them, they would presently fall down and worship: Oh the unhappy and
miserable change that sin has now made upon the will! being in absolute
subjection to every thing that he was made lord over; God put all things under
his feet, and now all things have put man under their feet: It Is the love of
the world, and the things of the world, that is the Iron chain about the will,
as that about Nebuchadnezzar's stump of the Tree; so that it can never lift it
self up to what is Heaven: This makes the will like that woman, who was bowed
down with her infirmity, and could not look up, till Christ healed her, and
made her straight: This makes the necessity of a spiritual resurrection, that
so we may set our affections upon things above. This love of the world, and the
things thereof, is the Sum of all those particular ways, whereby we are thus
wretchedly enslaved; Therefore grace when it comes does loosen these bonds,
and make us free, by working in us a contrary love, and a contrary sweetness
and delight; So that now all the world, with the dainties thereof, are but as
so many husks in comparison of that manna he now feeds upon; And as he that
steadfastly beholds the Sun for a while, his eyes are so dazeled, that he
cannot for a season behold any thing else: Thus when grace has so sanctified
and affected the will, that it finds no greater sweetness and delight then in
holy things, this presently makes him throw away all those bonds that were
upon him.

. 12.
Herein is the Bondage of the Will seen, That when it does endeavor to
overcome any sin, it is by falling into another.
FOurthly, Herein is the bondage of the will seen also, That when it does
endeavor to overcome any sin, it is by falling into another. So that the
Argument usually brought to prove, that the will has some freedom to what is
good does indeed more confirm the servitude of it to sin; For it is often
objected, That if the will be thus in absolute bondage to sin, How comes it
about that even Heathens have by their own strength reformed their lives, and
have abounded in justice, fortitude and chastity even to admiration? Is not
that instance of Polemon famous, who though a drunkard, yet coming to hear
Xenocrates his Lecture about temperance, was so immediately persuaded thereby,
that he presently forsook that beastly sin? In this Argument Julian the
Pelagian did often triumph; But Austin's answer was good, and justifiable by
Scripture, That when they left one sin, they fell into another, they did cure
one lust by another lust, a carnal one by a spiritual one; for when they did
abstain from such sins, it was not in reference to God, and from faith in
Christ, but it was either from vain glory, or to be sure a sinful confidence,
and resting upon themselves; and therefore even the Stoics, who pretended the
highest, viz. That we were to do virtuous actions for virtues sake, yet they
came too short of the right mark; for virtue is not to be loved ultimately for
virtues sake, but that thereby we might draw nearer to God, and be made happy
in enjoying of him; Therefore the Stoics opinion did teach a man nothing but
self-confidence and self fullness, which sins are forbidden by the Word of
God, as well as Epicurean and gross sins: Oh then the unspeakable bondage of
the will to sin! That as the bird in a net, the more she striveth to get out,
the more she intangleth her self: Thus it is with the natural man, the more he
striveth of himself to come out of this mire, the faster he sticks in: Thou
then who art a natural man, though such a sin and such a sin be left, yet
see if when the Devil was cast out, a worse did not come in the room thereof;
See if it be not with thee, as in that representation to the Prophet, Thou have
broken a wooden yoke, and an iron one is made in stead thereof; Thou have
cured a carnal sin by a spiritual one; For you must know, That not only
grace does expel sin, but sometimes one lust may expel another, as the
Pharisees spiritual pride, and self-righteousness did make them abhor the
Publicans sins; so that even then the natural man cannot but sin, while he
is casting off sin. Therefore though unregenerate persons may do that which
is materially good, and for the substance of the act, yet they can never do
that which is formally so; or as Austin expressed it of old, we must
distinguish between the Officium, the Duty it self, and Finis, the end of the
Duty: Now the end of all till regenerated, can never be right or pure, it never
ascends high enough even to God himself, because they want faith; So that
though Aristides was just, yet he was not the Scriptures just man, that lives
by faith; None of the renowned Heathens were chaste by faith, charitable by
faith, temperate by faith, and therefore their glorious actions were only
splendid, glistering sins, they had a pompous appearance, but were indeed
real vices, which were so far from profiting them as to eternal happiness,
that they were an hinderance to them, for hereby they trusted in themselves;
The Epicurean he said, It is good for me frui carne, To enjoy the body; The
Stoic he said, It was good for me frui mente; But David he said, It was good
for him to draw nigh to God.

. 13.
The more Means of Grace to free us, the more our Slavery appears.
FIfthly, Herein is our miserable bondage to sin manifested, That the more we
have the means of grace to set us at liberty, the more does our slavery
discover it self: So that whatsoever good and holy thing we meet with, it
draws out our corruption the more. This the Apostle complains of, as part
of that captivity he groaned under, Rom 7. That the Law which was for good,
wrought in him all manner of evil: Thus the Gospel, yea Christ preached, is the
occasion of more wickedness and impiety in unregenerate men, then otherwise
they would be guilty of; And if this be so, though our heads were fountains of
water, yet we could not weep enough for the guilt and wretchedness we are in by
this means, for our remedies make our diseases greater, light increases our
darkness, life causes death; Insomuch that did not God work by his own power
mightily in the use of these means, they might be no longer the means of grace,
but of anger and judgment, and the preaching of the Gospel, because of the sad
effects which it has through the wilful indisposition of many who hear it,
might be as much trouble to us, as the presence of the Ark was to the
Philistims: Therefore the clearer light, the more powerful means of salvation
a people do enjoy, the more is the impiety and wickedness of such (whom grace
does not convert) daily increased; insomuch that the Gospel shining upon such
men, is like the Sun shining upon a noisome dunghill, which makes it the
more loathsome; How then can there be free will in a man to good, when if left
to himself all helps are an hindrance to him, and all remedies are more
destructive? Hence the Scripture calls it, making of the heart fat, Isa. 6.
an allusion to beasts, which are prepared to destruction by their best pastures.

. 14.
The Necessity of a Redeemer demonstrates our thraldom to sin.
LAstly, That the will is inthralled irrecoverably unto sin, appears, In
the necessity of Grace, and of Christ as a Redeemer, if we were not in bondage,
what need we have a Redeemer? Let not then the common expression in the
Schools be liberum arbitrium, but liberatum, which is a phrase we seldom meet
within them; It is good to know the full latitude of that glorious title of our
Savior, ( viz.) a Redeemer; he is so called, not only, because he redeemeth us
from the curse of the law, and the guilt of sin, but also because we were
under the power and dominion of sin and Satan, daily fulfilling the works of
the flesh, so that his death was not only to obtain remission of sins, but to
make us a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 1. 14. And hence also he
is said, to offer himself a sacrifice, that he might present to God, a Church
without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5. 27, which will be completely perfected in
heaven. To set up free will then, is to pull down our Redeemer, as much as we
give to that, we deny to Christ, we make him but a half-Saviour, and an
half-Redeemer, while we maintain, that we set our selves at liberty from the
power of Satan: Oh then let the name of a Redeemer for ever make thee blush and
ashamed to speak of a free will.

. 15.
An Examination of the Descriptions and Definitions of Freedom or Liberty of
Will which many give it; Showing, that none of them are any ways competent to
the Will unsanctified.
WE proceed therefore to make a further discovery of the bondage of the will to
sin, and that it has no liberty, no power or ability to do any thing that is
truly godly; If we take notice of all those ways, wherein learned men do place
liberty or freedom of will, we shall find evidently, that none of these
descriptions, or definitions are any ways competent to the will, while it is
unsanctified; For,

First, if that opinion be received, (which Bellarmine and others follow) That
liberty is radically in the understanding, though formally in the will, (that
is) the reason of the wills liberty is from the understanding, which does
propound several objects, and thereupon the will is indeterminate, whereas in
beasts their appetite is plainly limited, because they want reason; as it is
arbitrium, so (they say) it is in intellectu, as liberum so in voluntate. Now
(I say) let this be received (for I do not dispute the truth of it) then we
must say, The will has no liberty to what is good, because it fails in the
root; The stream cannot run, when the spring is dried up; for if we take the
understanding in respect of spiritual, and heavenly things, so it is altogether
darkened and blinded; Therefore there is the grace of illumination required
that it may know and believe the things of God, without which men love and
delight in darkness rather then light: The things of God are said to be
foolishness to a natural man; so that all the while a man has no more then
nature in him, he is like those birds that can see in the night, but are blind
in the day; They have quick and sharp apprehensions in worldly and earthly
matters, but are altogether stupid and senseless in regard of heavenly; How then
can the will be free, when the mind is altogether dark; for God in conversion,
when he will set the will and affections at liberty from sin, begins first in
the understanding, light in the mind is first created, there are holy thoughts
and spiritual convictions wrought in the soul, and by this light the other
parts of the soul they come to be sanctified; now then if there be not so much
as this antecedaneous work upon the mind, the will is as yet very far from
the Kingdom of heaven? Wonder not then if ye see unregenerate men walking and
stumbling in the dark; that you see them so captivated unto every lust; you may
as soon remove a mountain out of its place, as take them off from their
iniquities; For how can it be otherwise while the will has no guide to lead it,
none to inform it concerning the evil and danger of those ways it is going
in? If there be no light in the mind, there is no liberty in the will; so that
hereby both horse and rider are (as it were) thrown into the sea.

Secondly, If to be that liberty does consist in an active indifferency to good
or evil, then the will is not free, because the former part of this description
(upon Scripture-grounds) can no ways be accommodated to the will. This
description is generally received and applauded by Arminians and Jesuits as
the best, (though Gibieus says it is the worst) making the very formal nature
of liberty to consist herein, that when all requisites to an action are
supposed, yet the will can do, or not do; and this they extend even to
spiritual objects, to that great work of conversion, affirming, when grace does
assist and help all it can; (so that Ex part Dei, all things are ready that do
concur to our conversion;) yet the will, because it is free, retains an
active indifferency, either to accept of this grace offered, or to reject it.
This description we do no ways acknowledge, as that which depriveth God,
Christ, and the glorified Saints from liberty; and besides, liberty being
perfection, and so in the most perfect manner in the most perfect subjects,
this does debase it making a defect part of this perfection: It is wholly
absurd to make a power to sin part of liberty: Indeed this was a concomitant
of Adam's liberty, but not because liberty, but because his will was mutable
and changeable, so that if he had been corroborated and confirmed in grace, he
had not put forth any such experience of his liberty: well though we cannot
assent to it, yet let it be supposed to be true; The Scripture is very clear
and pregnant, That a man has no such indifferent power in him to good or evil;
Indeed to evil, that he is carried out unto with all delight, he can of himself
kill himself, but he cannot of himself give life to himself: But as for the
other part, to be able to love what is good, to believe and to turn himself
unto God, this is above his power, for the order of nature and of grace differ
as much, as the order of sense and reason; so that as the sensitive faculty
cannot put forth acts of reason, (the eye cannot discourse and reason,) so
neither can the rational faculties put forth the acts of grace, which come from
a divine nature, and that which is borne from above; All these places which
describe man in a spiritual sense to be blind in mind, deaf in ears, and
hardened in understanding, yea which say, he is dead in sin; and therefore the
work of conversion is compared to regeneration, and to a resurrection; all
these do plainly declare, that the will has no activity at all as to the first
beginnings of grace. It is true indeed, there are commands to repent, to be
converted, yea we are bid to choose life and death, but there are none of these
duties commanded, which in other places are not made the gracious gifts of God;
so that to repent, to be converted, they are promised by God as the workings of
his grace, whereby they are both duties and gifts; Although the Arminian
thinks that impossible: They are duties because we are the people who do
believe and do repent, and are commanded thereunto; They are also gifts because
it is the grace of God alone that does enable thereunto; when therefore you
read of such commands, you must not think, that they imply our power and
ability, for then grace would be wholly excluded, seeing these Texts speak
absolutely, as if a good work were wholly done by our own power; whereas the
Arminian and Papist will not wholly exclude grace, and so these Texts would
prove more then they contend for; But such commands are still imposed upon us
by God, to show what does belong to him; what he may justly expect from us; for
seeing he created man with full power and ability to keep these commands, if
man wilfully cast himself into an utter impotency, God has not thereby lost
the right of commanding, though we have the power of obeying.

Besides by these Commands, as we are to know our duty, so thereby also we are
provoked to be deeply humbled under our great inability, seeing our selves
treasuring up wrath every day, and preparing more torments for our selves,
unless the grace of God does deliver us; Yea by these commands God does work
grace, they are practical and operative means, whereby he does communicate life
unto us.

And lastly, Therefore God does use Commands, Because this way is suitable to
man, who is a rational Agent; For although the work of grace is more than
merely swasive, it is efficacious and really changing the heart, so that the
Spirit of God does far more in converting of a sinner, then the Devil does in
tempting to sin; yet God deals suitably to the nature of a man; We are not
like stocks and stones, to whom it is ridiculous to preach, there being not in
them a passive capacity of receiving the work of grace; Hence it is that the
Word is preached, Miracles are wrought, powerful Arguments are used to draw
off the heart; So that grace does work Ethicophysically (as some express it,)
Commands then and Threatenings are used, because grace is wrought in us after a
rational manner, in an attempered manner to our constitution; The understanding
being first wrought upon, that so the will and affections may more readily give
up themselves.

Thirdly, If liberty be the same with voluntariness and no more, (as many
learned men do contend, making voluntas and liberum arbitrium all one, as that
which is opposed to coaction and natural necessity; yea if we add Aurtelus his
opinion to this, that libertas was nothing but complacentia, liberty is the
complacency and delight of the will in its object) then in this sense, (if
rightly understood,) a man has no freedom to what is holy. It is true indeed,
the learned to show, that grace in converting does not destroy the liberty of
the will, ( viz. the natural liberty) no more then the will it self; Grace does
not compel the will, or put an inherent natural necessity upon it; for if there
could be coaction, the velle would be nolle, which is a contradiction; and if a
natural necessity could be imposed upon it, it would not be appetitus
rationalis, a rational appetite; so that though grace in converting of man does
insuperably, and invincibly change the will, making it of unwilling willing, so
that there is a necessity (not natural,) but of immutability and
unchangeableness; The will does most certainly give it self up to the grace of
God mollifying and fashioning of it for that purpose: This Iron (as it were) is
put into the fire, and then it is made pliable to receive any form or
impression, yet the essential liberty is not destroyed; For the Question about
Free Will is not An sit? but Quid possit? And herein lies the difficult knot
in this whole point about grace and the will of man, How to assert the
irresistible (as many call it, but others reject that expression, though the
sense of those who use it, is very sound and significant enough) work of grace,
insuperably determining the will to that which is good, and yet to be free from
coaction or such a necessity as is destructive to liberty? The Quomodo. How
these two are to be reconciled, is that which in all ages has exercised the
most learned and judicious; insomuch that some have advised to rest in it by
faith, as in a mystery above our understanding, even as we do in many other
Doctrines to be believed by us; But I am not to ascend this mountain at this
time; This is enough for our purpose, to show, That if liberty be said to
consist in willing a thing freely from coaction and necessity, even in this
respect, we have not thus far liberty to good, because it is God that works
in us to will. Indeed when we do will, we are not compelled by the Grace of
God, only we cannot will till the Grace of God enable us thereto; It is not of
him that wills, but of God that shows mercy; Neither are, we born of the
will of man, but of God; It is grace then only that makes us to will the good
things tendered to us, though the will in eliciting of this is not compelled,
but does it freely, yea grace gives this freedom to it, so that grace does
not destroy, but give liberty; And therefore Austin of old urged, That they
denied Liberum arbitrium, who would not have it Liberatum; They cannot hold
free will in a true sense, that do not hold free and efficacious grace, which
gives the will all the strength it has to what is good: Thus liberty, if it
be the same with willingness, we have it not of our selves, till the grace of
God bestow it upon us.

Fourthly, If liberty consist in having dominion and power over our actions,
then also the will cannot be said to be free, as to do holy things; For
although the will, when it does will, is the subordinate cause under God of its
own action, and as a cause, so also may be said to have dominion over it, yet
because the actual willing of what is good, does not arise or exist by the
strength of the will, but by the grace of God, therefore it is that (in respect
of good things) the will cannot be said to have the dominion over them. This
Definition of liberty ( viz.) [to have a dominion over our own actions,] is by
Jansenius asserted to be the true and proper meaning of Augustine, that his
judgment is, then the will is said to be free, when it has dominion and power
over what it does; and if so, no wonder then the will be so often said to be
captivated and enslaved, that it has no freedom to what is holy; For what
power can the will have over holy actions, when it is corrupted and defiled,
that no holy thought, or holy motion is under the power of it. It was Ambrose
his complaint of old, That Cor nostrum non est in nostra potestate; Our heart
is not in our power, but sinful and evil workings of soul rise up in us,
which we are no ways able to extinguish.

Fifthly, If liberty be (as Anselme of old defined it, to which some Neotericks
do adhere, viz) Facultas servandi rectitudinem, propter rectitudinem ipsam,
That it is a power to observe that which is right, for righteousness sake,
then this does evidently proclaim, That man has no Free Will, for to observe
that which is holy and righteous for holiness sake, which must needs argue a
man regenerated and borne again; And indeed liberty in this sense is nothing
but the Image of God repaired in a man, and so is no more then to be like God
himself; And now that every man by nature has lost this Image of God, is so
plain, that the experience of every man concerning his distance from God may
fully confirm it. If to this be added Aquinas his Description, That it is, Vis
electiva mediorum servato ordine ad finem. A power to choose means with a due
order and respect to the end (yet still freedom in the will to what is good
cannot be found) For as (says he) The understanding which is an apprehensive
faculty, has its simple and bare apprehension of a thing (viz. of the first
principles) And then it has another act, which is to Reason and Discourse, and
that is properly of Conclusions to be deduced from those principles; So what
principles are in respect of conclusions to the Understanding, the same the end
is, in respect of the means to the will; And therefore as the understanding
does necessarily err, when it does not discourse suitably to the first
principles; So the will, which is the appetitive part of a man, must
necessarily sin, when it does not choose means with a due order to the end:
Now God being the chief end of all our actions, how impossible is it for the
will corrupted as it is, to will riches, health, learning, or any creature in
reference to God as the end.

Lastly, If liberty consist (as Gibieuf would have it) in an amplitude of
spirit and independency upon the creature, so that it is above every created
object with an eminent magnanimity of spirit adhering to God alone, and resting
in him as the chiefest good, then it is plain also, That by nature the will of
man is utterly impotent to this thing, for the love of the creature is so
predominant that we live and do all things in reference to that; So that
whereas grace makes us to do all things of God, and through God, and to God;
Now the creature does so reign in our hearts, that we move only in all the
workings of our soul to it. Aristotle observes, That some are slaves by
nature, and such have no reason of their own to guide them, that do Sentire
rationem magis quam habere, Feel Reason rather then make use of it: And if we
speak in a spiritual sense, we are all thus borne slaves and vassals, not being
able to put forth the actings of true and right reason, but do follow the lusts
of our own soul, and are taken captive by the Devil at his will.

Thus we have at large discovered the bonds and chains of sin our wills are
fastened in; Oh that in the reading of this, God would breathe into the souls
of such wretched sinners, strong desires and ardent groans to be redeemed from
this thraldom! Shall the ungodly say, ( Psalm. 2.) concerning Christ, Let us
break his bonds, when yet they are bonds of love, which are for our eternal
happiness? And wilt not thou rather cry out, concerning these bonds, and these
yokes, which are for thy eternal damnation, Let us break them and rend them
asunder? Does not the senslesnesse and stupidity of men, while they hear these
things too sadly evidence the state of thraldom we are in to sin?

CHAP. V.
Of the Pollution of the Affections.
SECT. I.
This Text opened.
COL. 3. 2. Set your Affections upon things above, not on things on the earth.
THe exceeding great pollution of the Will by original sin being largely
discovered, both in the acts of it, as also in its state. We now proceed to the
Affections which are seated in the sensitive appetite of a man; For as sense is
a kind of imperfect understanding, so the affections are a kind of an imperfect
will, and the defilement of these is so palpably and experimentally discerned,
that Heathens have complained of God the Author of Nature, for implanting such
things in us, which are for the most part the cause of all our ruin and
calamity.

Now it is not my intent to declare the depravation of every affection in a
man, for that would make the work to swell too big, but I shall speak in the
general of them, instancing in particulars, as occasion offers.

The Scripture does not speak of the several parts of the soul, according to
that Philosophical division, as is generally received; and therefore that which
Philosophers call (...) affections, or passions, as distinguished from the
understanding and will, that is most commonly called the heart and the soul;
Thus love, fear, hope and anger are attributed to the heart of a man. It is
true, the word (...), is used in the New Testament three times, where the word
Affection is not barely intended, but an horrible depravation of it, even to
unnatural uncleanness, as Romans 1. 26. God gave them up to vile affections, and
how unnatural they were is immediately subjoyned, Col. 3. 5. The Apostle there
reckoning up several sins to be mortified, fornication, uncleanness, adds
(...), which some understand the same kind of uncleanness the Apostle
mentions to the Romans, So doing, or that mutum percatum, a sin that they
say Socrates was guilty of, though so admired for his wisdom and morality;
Hence those that have given themselves up to this dreadful pollution are
called Pathici from (...), we render it inordinate affection in the general;
and therefore some do understand (...) here for those sins which arise from
the irascible appetite, and so take the word, though generally spoken in an ill
sense; Even as the Stoics held all passions and affections to be sin; and
the affections which are placed in the concupiscible appetite the Apostle
means (say they) by the next expression (...), evil concupiscence, If this be
so (as Grotius expounds it) then we have here the Apostle speaking of
affections according to philosophical notions, but I will not determine this to
be the meaning.

The last place is, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. where the Apostle showing, God has called
us to holiness, he adds (...), not in the lust, or affection of
concupiscence; Here it seems to be taken strictly for those lustful
affections, which flow from the sinful concupiscence in a man; But if the
Scripture does use the word differently to Philosophers, to be sure the thing
it self is acknowledged, as appears by my Text, where we have a Command
directing of us about the Object we are to place them upon, and that is set
down, First, Affirmatively, and then Negatively. The Directive Duty is in that
expression, (...), Set not your affections, we render it in the margin, or
mind; so that the Greek word does signify the acts of the mind, but not them
only, it comprehends also the affectionate part of a man; It includes the
mind and affections also, because commonly the intense actings of the mind
excite and stir up proportionably the intense actions of the affections:
Therefore it is sometimes translated savouring, Matthew. 16. 23. So Romans 8. the
(...), does not only comprehend the mind, but chiefly the affectionate
workings of the flesh against the Spirit of God.

We shall treat of it, as relating to the affections, therefore we have the
Object prescribed them, they are to be upon things above, heavenly things This
implies naturally they are placed other where then they should be, upon
earthly and sading objects. The Serpents seed (and so we are all by nature)
cannot but lick up the dust of the earth, and live upon that; So that there is
(for more emphasis) added the Negative also, Not on things on the earth; By
these some mean those humane and superstitious Ordinances that the Apostle
mentioned before, for these were not of the Fathers heavenly planting; and
indeed it is true, the more a man is made spiritual, and has had the
experience of that wonderful resurrection of his soul from the state of sin,
in which it was dead, the more does he nauseate and reject all superstition and
humane ways of devotion, rejoicing in the purity and simplicity of Christ's
Institutions, as those alone by which he can obtain any spiritual proficiency.
But the Context seems to extend this Object further to all sinful objects,
yea and to lawful objects, that we are not in an immoderate and inordinate
manner to let our hearts run out upon them.

So then we have in the Text a most divine Injunction imposed on us, To set our
affections upon things above, always to put in practice that Exhortation,
Sursum corda, but such is the horrible corruption of these affections by
nature, that they can no more ascend up to them, then a worm can fly upwards
like a Lark; Therefore the Apostle supposes, that ere this be done, there must
be the foundation laid of a spiritual Resurrection, If ye be risen with Christ,
seek those things that be above; Our spiritual Regeneration and Resurrection is
both a cause of our heavenly affections, and also it is a motive and
obligation, it being contrary to the nature of such things that ascend upwards,
that they should descend downwards: How can fire fall like a stone to the
center? From the Text then we may observe.

That such is the corruption of the affections of man by nature, that till the
grace of regeneration come, they are placed only on earthly objects, and cannot
move toward heavenly.

SECT. II.
Of the Nature of the Affections.
BEfore we come to anatomize their evil and sinfulness, let us take notice a
little of The Nature of these Affections, And

First, You must know that in man (besides his understanding and will, which
are either the same with the rational soul, or powers seated in it) there is
also a sensitive appetite placed in the body, from whence arise those motions
of the soul, which we call affections and passions, such as anger, love, joy,
fear and sorrow, etc. It is true indeed, many learned men place affections in
the will also, they say, The will has these affections of joy and sorrow, and
so Angels also have, only (they say) these are spiritual and incorporeal, and
this must necessarily be acknowledged; But then in men (besides those
affections in the will) there are also material ones seated in the sensitive
appetite; for man being compounded of soul and body, hereupon it is, that as in
his rational part, he does agree with Angels, so in his sensitive part with the
bruits; Therefore in man there are three principles of actions that are
internal, his Understanding, Will and Affections, these later are implanted in
us only to be servants and helps, but through our corruption they are become
tryants and usurpers over the more noble powers of the soul; so that man is not
now as reason, much less as grace, but as affections do predominate. The
Scripture (you heard) calls these affections by the name of the heart, though
sometime that comprehends the mind and will also. The common Greek word is
(...), which is rendered passions, and they are so called, because of the
effect of them, for when put forth, they make a corporeal transmutation and
change in a man: Some make this difference between (...) (a word that
Quintilian says, there is no proper Latin expression for, Vide Voss de
institut. Orat.) and (...), they make passions to be, when in a mild and
moderate motion of the soul without any violence or excess, and (...), when
they are turbulent and troublesome, but (...) does rather signify the manners
of men, then their affections. These passions have several names, sometimes
they are called perturbations, but that is most properly, when they have cast
off the dominion of reason; Sometimes the motions and commotions of the soul;
sometimes passions, which expression is disliked by some; That which seems to
be most proper and full, is to call them affections, because the soul of a man
is affected in the exercise of them; So that by these we mean no more, then
that whereby a man about good or evil is carried out with some affection and
commotion of his soul, only you must know, that when we call them passions, it
is not to be understood formally, but causally; In their nature they are not
passions, but motions and actings of the soul, only they cause a passion and
suffering by some alteration in the body.

Secondly, These affections in the soul are of a various nature, yet by
Philosophers they are reduced into two heads, according to the subject they are
seated (viz.) The appetite concupiscible, and the appetite irascible; not that
this is a twofold distinct appetite, only the same appetite is distinguished
according to its diversity of objects; The appetite concupiscible, does contain
those affections that relate to good or evil absolutely considered; For if it
be good that is propounded, then there is first the affection of love, if this
good be not enjoyed, then there is the affection of desire; if it be obtained
and enjoyed, then it is the affection of joy; if it be evil that is presented,
then there is the affection of hatred, whereby we distaste it, and hereupon we
fly from it; This is called Fuga, or abomination; but if we cannot escape it,
then there is the affection of sorrow; Thus there are six affections in the
concupiscible part; The object of the irasible appetite is good, as difficult
or evil, as hardly to be avoided; good, if it be possible to be obtained, then
there follows the affection of hope, if it be not possible, then of despair,
and as for the evil, that is difficulty overcome, if we can master it, then
there arises the affection of boldness or confidence, if we cannot, then of
fear; if the evil press us hard, that we cannot obtain what we would have,
then arises the affection of anger; Thus there are five affections in the
irascible appetite, so that in all there are eleven passions, although from
these come many other affections of the soul, that we may call mixed ones, as
Error, Zeal, Pity, etc. in which many and several affections are ingredient:
If then there be so great a number of these in man, and they all corrupted, yea
predominating over a man, what sea is more troubled and tossed up and down with
storms and tempests, then the heart of a man? What a miserable wretched
creature is man, who has every one of these passions tyrannizing over him, if
God leave thee to an inordinate love of any thing? What unspeakable bondage
does it put thee into, if to excessive anger? What torments and vexations does
it work, making thy soul like an hell for the present, if to excessive fear and
sorrow? Will not these be like rottenness in thy bones immediately? In how
many particulars may thy condemnation arise? Thy love may damn thee, thy fear
may damn thee, thy anger may damn thee, or any other affection, which yet do
continually work in thy soul.

SECT. III.
How the Affections are treated of severally by the Philosopher, the Physician,
the Orator, and the Divine.
THirdly, These affections may be treated of in several respects, but what is
most advantageous to the soul, is to handle them, as a Divine, enlightened and
directed by the Word of God.

1. The Natural Philosopher he is to treat of them, while he writes De anima,
of the soul; and certainly the nature of them is as necessary to be known as
any other part of men: Hence it is said, Aristotle did write a book of these
nature affections, (but it is lost,) The Philosopher he discourses of them,
but as to their natural being, not at all regarding the holy mortifying of
them; and therefore a man may be an excellent Philosopher, but yet a slave to
his corrupt affections.

2. The Physician he also treats of the affections; Galen wrote a Book
concerning the curing of them, but he also considers them only as they make
for, or against the health of the body, they attend not to the souls hurt, how
much the salvation of that is indamaged thereby, only they treat of them as
they are hurtful in the body; Erasistratus discovered the inordinate love of a
great man by his pulse; Amnon did pine and consume away by his inordinate
affection to Tamar; Therefore the Physician he considers them no further then
how they may be cured, that the health of the body may be preserved; And indeed
this is also a good Argument in Divinity, to urge, that you must take heed of
the sins of the passions, for they torment the body, indispose the body, they
kill they body, Worldly sorrow works death, so does worldly anger and worldly
fear; But of this hereafter.

3. The Rhetorician and Orator he also writes of the affections, as Aristotle
in his Rhetoricks; Now the Orator he discourses of them no further, than as
they may be stirred up or composed by Rhetorical speeches, how to put his
Auditors into love, anger, fear and grief, as he pleases; for it is a special
part in Oratory to bow the affections; This was represented in Orphens harp,
which is said to make beasts follow him, yea very trees and stones, that is,
Oratory does civilize and persuade the most rude and savage. Now although those
who write of the method of preaching, do much commend this gift in a Minister
of the Gospel to be able to stir up, and quicken the affectionate part, yet
the grace of God is required to go along herein; For it is easy for a Tully or
Demosthenes to stir up the affections of their Auditors, when they declaimed
about such civil and temporal matters, that they saw themselves deeply
concerned in; The very principles of nature did instigate them to this; but we
preach of supernatural things, and the matters we press are distasteful and
contrary to flesh and blood, therefore no wonder if men hear without affection,
and go away without any raised affection at all.

4. There is the Moral Philosopher, and he looks upon it as his most proper
work to handle the affections; for what has moral virtue to do, but to
moderate the affections, that we do not over-love, or over-fear; This is the
proper work of the Moral Philosopher, but neither is this handling of them high
enough for a Divine; The curing and ordering of them, which Moralists do
prescribe, is but to drive out one sin with another, so that their virtues
were but vices, if you regard the principles and ends of their actions;
Therefore

In the last place, The Divine or Minister of God, he is to preach of them, and
he only can do it satisfactorily having Gods Word to direct him, for by that we
find they are out of all order, by that we find they are to be mortified, by
that we find only the Spirit of Christ, not the power of nature is able to
subdue them; The true knowledge therefore about the pollution of them, will
greatly conduce to our humiliation and sanctification.

SECT. IV.
The Natural Pollution of the Affections is manifest in the Dominion and
Tyranny they have over the Understanding and Will.
. 1.
SOmething being already premised about the nature of the Affections, we shall
in the next place consider the horrible and general depravation of them, and
that originally.

First, The great pollution of them is evidently and palpably manifested in the
dominion and tyranny they have over the understanding and will, which are the
superior magistrates (as it were) in the soul. Thus the Sun and Stars in
the souls orbs are obscured and obnubilated by the misty vapors and fogs which
arise from this dunghill: A man does now for the most part reason, believe and
will according to his affections and passions; Aristotle observed this, That
Prout quisque affectus est it a judicat, As every man is affected, so he
judges; They are sinful affections which make the erroneous and heretical
judgments that are, they are sinful affections, which make the rash, corrupt
and uncharitable judgments that are: Thus the vanity may be observed in the
soul, which Solomon took notice of to be sometimes in the world, Princes go on
foot, and servants ride on horsback; God did at first implant affections in us
for great usefulness and serviceableness, that thereby we might be more
inflamed and quickened up in the service of God; They were appointed to be
hand-maidens to the rational powers of the soul, but now they are become Hagars
to this Sarab, yea they are become like Antichrist, for they lift themselves up
above all that is called God in the soul. The understanding and conscience is
made to us, as God appointed Moses to Pharaoh, it is ordained as a god to us;
but these passions will be exalted above it, and so man is led, not by reason,
not by conscience, but by affections; This is the very reason, why either in
matters of faith toward God, or in matters of transactions with men, our
judgments are seldom partly and sincerely carried out to the truth, but some
affection or other does turn the balance in all things; Therefore as Abraham
was to go out of his own Country, and so to worship God in a right manner:
Thus if we would ever have a sound faith, a right judgment, we must come out
of all affections that may prepossess us; What a woeful aggravation of our
sinful misery is this, that our affections should come thus boldly and set
themselves in the throne of the soul, that they should bid us judge, and we
judge, that they should bid us believe, and we believe? So that we most justly
in a spiritual sense complain, as the Jews in a temporal one, Servants have
ruled over us; Is not this a more troublesome judgment then that of the
Egyptians, when Frogs came croaking into their very chambers, or when vermin
and lice assaulted them every where? But who it there by nature, that though he
be tossed up and down by these storms and tempests and ready to sink into hell,
yet does not lie fast asleep, not thinking he is ready to perish?

. 2.
2. In regard of the first Motions and Risings of them.
SEcondly, The sinfulness of these passions is seen, In regard of the first
motions and risings of them; whereas God made them at first to serve the more
noble parts of the soul, and to stir at their command; Now upon every
temptation presented, they fly about us as so many Hornets, and we cannot keep
them down; Adam being made in integrity, as he had a command over all the
beasts of the field, and birds of the air, so also much more over his
affections and passions, which were the brutish part in him; He was, as the
Poets seign of their Aeolus who had all the winds in a bladder, and so could
make them blow when he pleased and no longer: Thus Adam could love, desire, as
he pleased; These did not move in him, till he commanded: But now woe and again,
woe to us who are brought into such vassalage, that we are indeed Servi
servorum, slaves to slaves; Now our love rises whether we will or no; now our
fear, our anger breaks into the soul, and it cannot resist it: Now that which
Aristotle said of anger, is true of the other passions, that they are like an
unnurtured dog, which runs and fastens upon an object before his master
sets him on; or like an overhasty servant that runs upon his errand,
before he does understand it: This then is greatly to be bewailed, that our
affections rise first in us, they move before our understanding moves; These
swarms fly out before the King-Bee leads them the way; That expression
concerning Christ, where it is said, He was troubled, is noted to be in the
active sense, in the original (...), John 11. 33. He troubled or moved himself;
for it was not with the holy humane nature of Christ, as it is with ours, he
being without sin, had the Sovereign power over every affection that was in
him, he loved and grieved, as he pleased, they were under the free exercise of
his will, but we are sold under these affections, they bind us and lead us
whether we would not: Oh what an unspeakable glorious privilege are we
deprived of; What an admirable honor is it to have a command and power over
our own selves, our own affections? Does not Solomon say, Prove. 16* 32. He that
rules his spirit, is better then he that wins a City; He is more then the
mighty ones of the world that can master his affections? How many that have
conquered others in the world, have yet themselves been conquered by their
inordinate affections? The very Heathens did give testimony to this, that it
was Melius imperat re sibi, quam aliis, to have command over himself, then over
all the world. Luther that great Reformer, who removed the Mass, Indulgences,
and many other soul abominations out of the Church, yet could not sometimes
remove sinful passions, especially anger from his own breast, which made
Melancthon of a more moderate spirit, speak in an Ex temporary verse to him,
when he was once in a great passion, Vince Animos irasque tuas qui caetera
vincis. This Pope in Luther's belly (as he would call it) was more difficultly
ovecome then the Pope of Rome.

. 3.
3. In respect of their Progress and Degrees.
THirdly, As these affections are not in subjection to the noble power of the
soul in respect of their rise, so neither in respect of their Progress or
Degrees; but they grow hotter and more vehement, sometimes even like
Nebuchadnezzar's furnace, and we cannot repress them, so that in all things
wherein they put forth themselves, there is an excess, we over-love, we
over-fear, we are over-angry; Indeed the having of affections is not a sin,
no nor the workings of them, but the immoderate excess of them. It was a great
Dispute between the Stoics and the Peripateticks about these passions; The
Stoics said, They were to be wholly eradicated, they were not to be moderated,
but to be extirpated, therefore they pressed their wise and good men to an
(...), to be without affection, which yet the Apostle reckons amongst the
notorious sins; And we know Christ himself wept; These held all affections to
be sins; The Peripateticks held the excess only to be a sin, when they did
go beyond the bounds of Reason; but some learned men think there was but a mere
Logomachy between those two great Sects, that they did agree in the same thing,
only quarrelled about words; Howsoever all agree in this, That when the
affections do overflow the banks, when they swell higher than they ought to do,
then sin lies at the door: But who can command these winds and waves to be
still? Do not these passions like armed men prevail over us, that as it is with
paralitical bodies, the members do continually shake and trepidate, because of
some corporeal infirmity that they cannot keep them in uniform and equal
motions? Thus it is with us in regard of these commotions of the soul, as they
begin not at the command, so neither do they stop at the guidance of reason,
but from a natural, they turn into a preternatural and feavourish heat
immediately.

. 4.
Those Affections are not subject to the more noble guiding parts of the Soul,
in respect of the Continuance or Duration of them.
FOurthly, These affections are not subject to the more noble guiding parts of
the soul, in respect of the continuance or duration of them. We are commanded
not to let the Sun go down upon our wrath, and this holds true also in any
other affection when immoderate, we are not to let it continue burning, lest at
last it consume; The Church indeed does often complain of the continuance of
Gods anger, Will the Lord be angry for ever? and will he show mercy no more?
But Gods anger, though never so continuing, though lasting to eternity it self,
yet it is just and holy, but we have a time prefixed to our affections,
hitherto, and thus far they must go and no further. Thus you see how
unspeakable our thraldom is by reason of pollution in our affections, that we
can neither command them in the rise, degree or duration of them; we have power
over the members of our body, we bid them move, and they move; we command them
to cease from motion, and they cease; but now when we speak to these affections
to lie still and be quiet, it is as ridiculous, as when Xerxes threatened the
Sea to come no higher, or commanded Mount Athos to remove.

SECT. V.
They are wholly displaced from their right Objects.
THirdly, The great sinfulness of the affections is seen, In that they are
wholly displaced from their right Objects. The objects for which they were
made, and on which they were to settle, is God himself, and all other things in
reference to him; our love God only challenges in that command, Thou shall
love the Lord with all thy heart and soul, etc. Our hatred that is properly to
be against sin, because it dishonours God; our sorrow it is principally to be
because of our offenses to him; so that there is not any affection we have, but
it does either primarily or secondarily relate to God, but who can bewail the
great desolation that is now fallen upon us; Every affection is now taken off
its proper center; In stead of loving of God, we love the world, we love our
pleasures rather then God; Instead of hating of sin we hate God, and cannot
abide his pure and holy Law and Nature: Thus we fear not whom we ought to fear,
viz. God, That can destroy both soul and body in hell; and what we ought not to
fear, there we are afraid, as the frowns and displeasure of men, when we are to
do our duties; Our sorrow likewise is not that also corrupted, How melting and
grieved are we in any temporal loss, in any worldly evil, but then for the loss
of God and his favor by our iniquities, there our bowels never move within us.
Thus our affections, out of all order to their proper objects, ought to be
groaned under, more than if all our bones were out of joint, for that is only a
bodily evil, hindering a natural motion, this is a spiritual one, depriving us
of our enjoyment of God. This particular pollution it is, that the Text does
immediately drive at, when it commands us, To set our affections above, it
plainly shows, where they are naturally, viz. upon things of the earth; and
therefore as it was Christ's divine power that made the woman bowed down with
her infirmity for so many years to be strait; Thus it must also be the mighty
and gracious power of God to raise up these affections that are crawling on the
ground to heavenly things; Possess then thy soul thoroughly with this great
evil, that thou have not one affection within thee that can go to its proper
object, but some thing moves it from Go! to the vain and fading creatures; If
these affections be the pedes animae, the feet of the soul, then with Asa, thou
have a sad disease in thy feet, and if thy whole body else were clean, these
feet would need a daily purifying.

SECT. VI.
The sinfulness of the Affections is discovered in respect of the End and Use
for which God ingraffed them in our Natures.
FOurthly, Their sinfulness is discovered in respect of the object about which,
So also in respect of the end and use for which God first ingraffed them into
our Natures; They were given at first to be like the wheels to the Chariots,
like wings to the bird; To facilitate and make easy our approaches to God, the
soul had these, to be like Elijah's fiery chariot to mount to Heaven, and
therefore we see, where the affections of men are vehement and hot, they
conquer all difficulties, that Adam might in body and soul draw nigh to God,
that God might be glorified in both, therefore had he these bodily affections;
And we see David, though restored to this holy Image but in part, yet he could
say, His soul and his flesh did rejoice in the Lord, his flesh desired God, as
well as his soul, that is, his affections were exceedingly moved after God, as
Psalm. 84. 2. For the soul being the form of the body, whatsoever that does
intensly desire by way of a sympathy or subordination there is a proportionable
effect wrought in the inferior sensitive part. As Aaron's oil poured on his
head, did descend to his skirts; Thus by way of redundancy, what the superior
part of the soul is affected with, the inferior also does receive, and by this
means the work of grace in the superior part is more confirmed and
strengthened, and the heat below does increase the heat above: Thus you see that
these affections had by their primitive nature a great serviceablenesse to
promote the glory of God, to prepare and raise up men to that duty: But now
these affections are the great impediments and clogs to the soul, that if at
any time it would s^ar up to Heaven, if light within does instigate to draw
nigh to God; These affections do immediately contradict and interpose, and the
reason is, because they are engaged to contrary objects, so that when we would
love God; love to the world, that presently stops and hinders it; when we
should delight and rejoice in holy things, worldly and earthly delights they do
immediately like the string to the birds feet, pull down to the ground again;
Hence it is that you many times see men have great light in their minds, great
convictions upon their consciences, they know they live in sinful ways, they
know they do what they ought not to do, yea they will sometimes complain and
grieve bitterly, because they are thus captivated to those lusts which they are
convinced will damn them at last, but what is the snare that holds them so
fast? What are the chains upon them, that bind them thus hand and soot, even
their sinful and inordinate affections, their carnal love, their carnal
delight keeps conscience prisoner, and will not let it do its duty? Oh that
we could humble our selves under this, that what was wine is now become poison,
that what we had to further us to Heaven, does hurry us to hell, that our
affections should carry us to sin that were for God, that they should drive
us to hell, which were to further us to Heaven! Oh think of this, consider it
and bewail it! Many things lose their use, and they only become unprofitable,
they do not hurt by that degeneration, as salt when it has lost its seasoning;
but now these affections are not only unprofitable, they will not help to what
is good, but are pernicious and damnable; we that were of our selves falling
into hell, they thrust us, and move us headlong to it, so that they seem to be
in us, what the Devils were in the herd of Swine; These are the wild horses
that tare thy soul in so many pieces; Thus our gold is become dross.

SECT. VII.
When the Affections are set upon inferior objects that are lawful, yet they
are greatly corrupted in their Motion and Tendency thereunto.
IN the next place, If the inferior objects they are placed upon, be lawful
and allowable, yet they are greatly corrupted in their motion, and tendency
thereunto; For they are carried out excessively and immederately; They do
unlawfully move to lawful things: As man ^ands corrupted by nature, his
affections are defiled two ways in respect of the objects; For sometimes they
are carried out to those things that are absolutely prohibited, that are no
more to be embraced then absolute poison is to be eaten, such are the pleasures
of sin, and the lusts of the flesh; when the affections does entertain these,
they embrace present destruction; here is no moderation or stint allowed in
these, but there is an absolute prohibition to give these any entertainment,
yet poor wretched and corrupt man is hurried to these things, and drinks down
iniquity as a thirsty man water; so that it can never enough be bewailed to see
what a grievous change sin has made in the affections, that they are now
most propense and inclining to those things which are to be most abhorred by
them; even as the corrupt appetite in some persons, delights to feed on trash
and most offensive matter to a found stomach. But

In the second place, there are other objects which the Scripture does allow us
to let our affections run out about, and these are not evil in themselves, no
more then to have affections is a sin: love in it self is not a sin,
neither is love of husband, health, and such comforts, but when we go beyond
our bounds, when these are loved more then God, or the love to them does hinder
and dead the heart to holy things, then does love become sinful and damnable:
Now such is the original depravation of all the affections, That they cannot in
a moderate and well-regulated way, with subordination to God move to any lawful
object, but they do exceedingly transgress, and that many ways. For

1. Whereas they should be carried out to these lawful things only with
reference to God, as the chiefest end, to love them, to desire them, no
otherwise then thereby to be brought nearer to the end; we are apt to make them
the end, to stay there, to make a full stop at a Colon or Comma; Even as the
children of Reuben, who desired to take up their rest in a country on this side
Cannan, because it was a fruitful place, and fit for cattle: Thus we who
should let our affections stir to these things only as a way to heaven, or
means to bring us nearer to God; we center in them, desiring them for their
own sakes; It is a rule, That the desire of the end, is a rule to the desire of
means; we desire drink to satisfy thirst, we desire garments to cloth us,
and we desire no more then is commensurate to such an end; and indeed thus it
ought to be with us in our affections to all things upon the earth, not to be
affected with wealth, health, learning, or any advantage any otherwise, then to
be more enabled to do God service, and thereby to enjoy him; but as the dark
night cannot be dispelled till the Sun does arise, so neither can the
regulating and ordering of the affections (with subordination to God in lawful
things) ever be accomplished till sanctifying grace does interpose.

2. We are apt in the affecting of these things to find more sweetness and
delight in a sensible manner, then when our heart is turned unto God. The
objects of sense do more affect us sensibly, then Christ laid hold on by faith,
and the Apostle John supposes such a proneness in us, when he says, He that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how shall he love God whom he has
not seen? 1 John 4. 20, Hence, it is that the Schools have a distinction,
about the love of God appretiative and intentive; The former is, when in our
judgment we do more highly esteem of God, then all the things of the world,
and therefore are ready to part with all (even life it self) to please him: But
the other, they make to be a sensible passionate moving of the sensitive part,
which is (they say) very variable, according to the complexion and constitution
of the body; and therefore such do advise, That believers should not be
discouraged, if they cannot find such sensible affections of love to God, as
they do to their friends, or such sensible sorrow about sin, as they do about
the loss of a dear friend; and this distinction may be received (in some
sense,) yet there, are learned men that do greatly dislike it, and do
positively affirm, That appretiatively and intentively, both intellectually,
and affectionately, we are to love God and to delight in him: Certainly we find
David acknowledging, That God had put more joy and gladness in his heart, then
they had, whose wine and oil increased, Psalm. 4. And when God does require us,
to love him with all our heart, mind, and strength, there is both the
intellectual, and sensitive part of a man understood. No doubt but Adam in the
state of integrity would have found his very affectionate part carried out to
God, preemiently to all creatures, seeing the affections were implanted only as
Handmaids to wait on those noble parts of the soul; yea David (you heard)
profeffing that his flesh, as well as his soul did long for the living God:
Besides, seeing the soul is the form of a man, thereby becomes such a natural
and essential union between the soul and body, that what the spiritual part
does strongly and ardently close with, the sensitive part by its essential
subordination, does find a proportionable intensitiveness in the affections
threof, even the waters from the hills do overflow the valleys, though therefore
the sensible part of a man be not absolutely subject to his will: (hence those
who have desired sensible sweetness, or melting tears in a bodily manner could
not enjoy them, though they would give a world for them) yet this we may
conclude of, That whenever thy want of sensitive affections does arise from
the want of powerful impressions upon thy spiritual part, and therefore thou
can not find such joy, or sorrow, because the mind and will are not
powerfully quickened by grace, this is always a sin; if thy mind were more
enlightened, thy will more sanctified, thy affections would be more enflamed.

3. (Not to enlarge in this more) The affections are sinful when carried out
even to lawful things, Because thereby is retarded or stopped the current of them
after heavenly things: We see the Apostle; 1 Cor. 7, admirably prescribing a
diet to our affections, Those that marry must be as if they married not; Those
that weep as if they wept not, and so those that rejoice as if they rejoiced
not: Thus whatsoever affections we are allowed to have, they must not in the
least manner distract or dull the motions of our souls to heavenly things, but
such is our corruption, that our affections though to lawful things put quite
out, or (at least) exceedingly hinder our affections to heavenly things.

SECT. VIII.
Our Affections are corrupted, in respect of the Contrariety and Opposition of
them one to another.
AGain, Our affections are greatly corrupted, in respect of the contrariety and
opposition of them one to another: They hinder one another operation; so that
the irascible part was given us to make effectual the concupiscible part, now
this kingdom is divided against it self, our fear does put out our joy; we do
not take that quiet delight which might be in having any temporal good, because
we are so molested with fears lest we should loose it; How often are we
distracted Inter spem and metum, between hope and fear? Thus these affections,
that by their primitive institution were all of one accord, they all mutually
assisted one another, now they are become like contrary winds; hope drives one
way, fear another; love one way, anger another; so that by this means every
man is miserably tormented within himself: There is an heartquake as well as an
earthquake, and as this later is produced by winds got into the bowels of the
earth which cannot find any vent; Thus it is with these passions of man, they
are all pent up (as it were) close in his heart, one is ready violently to
break out one way, another, another way; so that no sea is more tossed up and
down when contrary Euroclydons fall upon it, then the heart of man, while moved
with different passions: It Is the contrariety of thy passions makes all thy
discontents, and all the turmoiles that are in thy soul; thy love that haleth
thee one way, thy anger draggeth another way; Thus thou art like one that is to
be torn in pieces by wild horses, one draws one limb asunder, another teareth
another part asunder; so that thy soul is become like the Levites wife's body,
that was cut into so many pieces. Adam in respect of his affectionate part, was
like the upper region where there is no molestation, or confusion; but now that
part in us is like the middle region, where tempests and storms, thundering and
lightning are daily produced.

SECT. IX.
The Pollution of the Affections in respect of the Conflict between the natural
Conscience and Them.
AGain, The great and notorious pollution of the affections does appear, In
that fight and conflict, which is between the natural conscience and them, so
that no sooner does the reason and affections of men begin to work in them, but
presently there is a civil war begun in a man, his mind that inclines one
way, and his affections they carry another way: The very Heathens acknowledged
this, as Aristotle in his incontinent person, and the Poet in his Medea, Video
meliora, probeque deteriora sequor; yea there are some interpreters, Socinians
and Papists, and Arminians, to whom also Amyraldus in this particular adjoyneth
himself, though disalowing their other opinions, that would have the Apostles
complaint which he makes Rom 7, to be nothing more then the contrariety of the
mind and affections in an unregenerate man, especially when the mind is legally
convinced, and that has some powerful influence upon it, and among other
reasons, he gives this, that it would be very injurious to regenerating grace,
as if that could or did carry a man no further, the Aristotle's incontinent
person was, whereas indeed convinced of better things, but had no power to
follow them: But there is a twofold conflict and combat to be acknowledged;
The first a natural one, between conscience and affections; The other a
spiritual one, and that is not between these several powers in the soul, but
between the regenerate part in every particular, and the unregenerate, so that
there is not only spiritual light against corrupt affections, but affections
sanctified against unsanctified ones, they have love against love, fear against
fear, hope against hope; This opposition in the regenerate man is universal,
whereas this natural conflict is seated only in some particular parts of the
soul: The Apostle Romans 7, does speak of this spiritual fight in himself as
regenerate, as appears, because he says, In the inward man he delighted in
the Law of God, which no unregenerate man can do; and although the Apostles and
some other eminent and godly men, may attain to far higher degrees of grease
then others, yet it may not be thought, that there is any godly man living or
did live that does not more or less find this combat of flesh and spirit in
him: Certainly, if it should be so in any man, we might say that in that man
original sin was quite subdued, the flux of blood was wholly dried up in
them, but that is the prerogative of heaven. But our work is to consider the
sad difference that is now brought upon all men by original corruption, between
the rational and affective part, our very constitution is in discord, there is
no more agreement then between fire and water; Even as in the Roman
Government, there was commonly perpetual opposition between the Senatus, and
the Plebs, The Senate and the common People, they were very difficultly ever
reconciled: Thus in man, his intellectual and sensitive part they are carried
out to contrary objects, one inviting to one way, another to another: Indeed
even the rational part is in the Scripture sense become flesh, that is wholly
corrupt and minds only sinful things, yet this corruption does not put out
those natural dictates and practical maxims which conscience has, against
which the affections of men do naturally so rebel: It is true, that there are
some who have so hardened themselves in evil, by a voluntary obstinateness, and
are made such bruits in their lusts, that they have none of this conflict at
all they are hurried on with all delight to sin, and have not so much as the
least regreet within themselves, but this is acquired partly by the just
judgment of God upon man's wilful impiety, being from him delivered up to such
a senslessnes, otherwise there is in all such a fundamental contrariety between
the superior and inferior part of his soul, that there is no rest within: It is
true, the Papists and so the Socinians they affirm his repugnancy to have been
in Adam in the state of integrity, yea a Remonstrant attributes it
blasphemously to Christ himself, but seeing that God made man right, this
rectitude is to be understood universal, and that could not be without an
admirable harmony and agreement between the spiritual and, sensitive part in a
man: There are some also who place the hurt that we have by original sin in
this affectionate part only, as if the mind and the will they did escape in
Adams fall, and no sin infected them, only the sensitive part becomes all
over poisoned, but the contrary to this has already been demonstrated; yet we
grant that in the affectionate part is the Serpents brood there are the
Cockatrices eggs, that is the womb wherein many sins even all the bodily ones
are conceived, and brought forth.

SECT. X.
The Sinfulness of these Affections is seen in the great Distractions they fill
us with, when we are to set upon any holy Duties.
FUrther, The sinfulness of these affections is seen in the great distractions
they fill us with when we are to set upon any holy Duty. What is the reason we
do not make God the delight of our soul? Why is not our conversation in Heaven?
Why do we not pray without distraction, hear without distraction? Is it not
because these affections hurry the soul otherwise? In Heaven, when we shall
enjoy God face to face, and the affections be fully sanctified, then the heart
will not for one moment to all eternity be taken off from God; but now because
our affections are not spiritualized, neither are we fully conquerours over
them; Hence they press down continually the creature; for where a man's
affections are, there is his heart, there is his treasure; The godly they do
exceedingly groan under this exercise of distractions in holy duties: Oh how it
grieveth them, that their hearts are not united, they cannot hoc agere, they
cannot be with God alone, but some thoughts or importunate suggestions do
molest them like so many croaking frogs, many flies fall upon their Sacrifice;
Now whence is all this? Our unmortified affections are the cause of this, if
they were more spiritual and heavenly, there would be more union and accord in
holy duties.

SECT. XI.
Their Deformity and Contrariety to the Rule and exemplary Pattern.
IN the next place, Herein does their depravation appear. Because they are so
full of deformity and contrariety to their rule and exemplary pattern which is
in God himself, for we are to love as God loves, to be angry as God is angry.
It is disputed by the learned, Whether affections be properly in God? Now it
must be, As affections do denote any passions, or imperfections intermixed with
them, so they cannot be attributed to him, who is the fountain of perfection,
yet because the Scripture does generally attribute these affections unto God,
he is said to love, to grieve, to hope, to be angry: Hence it is that Divines
do in their Theological Tractates, besides the attributes of God, handle also
of those things, which are (as some express it) analogical affections in him;
They treat of his love, his mercy, his anger, which are not so properly
Attributes in God, as analogical affections; As when the Scripture says, God
has eyes and hands, these are expressions to our capacity, and we must
conceive of God by those words according to the supreme excellency that is in
him: Thus it is also in affections; There is an (...), in the former, and an
(...) in the later. It was of old disputed by Lactantius, Whether anger was
truly and properly in God? Some denied it, some affirmed it; But certainly the
difference did arise from the different use of the Word; for take anger, as it
signifies an humane imperfection, so it cannot be said to be in God, but as it
is a Will to revenge an impenitent sinner, so it is in God; Hence these things
are said to be in God per modum effectus, rather than affectus; And some
learned men like this expression better than of analogal affections, saying
that metaphorical speech applied to God ( viz. about desire, hope, etc.) is
rather equivocal then analogical, concerning desire, hope and fear in God: Some
Arminianizing or Vorstizing have spoken dangerously: Yea some Socinians, as
Crellius (Vide Horndeeck. Socin. Confut. lib. 2.) do positively maintain
affections to be properly in God; And although to mollify their opinion, they
sometimes have fair explications of themselves, yet they grant the things
themselves to be in God, which we call affections; Hence they call them often,
The commotions of Gods will, which are sometimes more, sometimes less; Yea
they are so impudent, as to say the denial of such affections in God, is to
overthrow all Religion: But this opinion is contrary to the pure simplicity and
immutability of Gods Nature, as also to his perfect blessedness; and by the
way observe the wickedness of these Heretics who take from the Divine
Nature, the persons thereof, as also some glorious Attributes, such as
Omniscience, etc. and yet will give to the same such things, as necessarily
imply imperfection.

To return, Affections are not in God as they imply any defect, yet we are by
Scripture to conceive of some transcendent perfection in God eminently
containing them; and this being laid for a foundation, we may then bewail the
great deformity that is upon our affections, the unlovelinesse of them, if
comp^^ed to the Rule; Do we love as God loves? He does infinitely love
himself, and all things in subordination to his own glory. But the love of our
selves, and all things in reference to our own selves, is that which does most
formally exclude and oppose the love of God: The poison and sinfulness of all
the affections does arise from the sinfulness of our love. It is corrupt love
that causes corrupt anger, corrupt hatred, corrupt sorrow, and therefore the
way to crucify all other affections is to begin with love: But oh the
irreconcilable and immediate opposition that is between our love, and his love,
our love is to be copied out after his; We are to imitate God in our love, but
we place our selves in Gods room, and are carried out to love our selves, not
rationally, but according to a brutish appetite. as it were, hence whereas in
the love of others, we require some presupposed goodness, in the love of our
selves we look for none at all. The vilest and most profane sinner, who ought
to judge himself worthy of the hatred of God and all creatures; yet he does
intensively love himself even to the hatred of God: Had we infinite holiness,
infinite purity and perfection as God has, then we might love our selves
principally; but because the goodness we have is a rivolet from that Ocean, a
beam-line from that Sun, therefore we are to love our selves in reference to
God; Our love to God should make us love our selves; but how impossible and
paradoxal is this to our corrupt natures? As our love is thus distantial from
Gods love, so our hatred and anger also is, for the hatred of God is only
against sin; It Is sin he punishes, it is sin that he has decreed to be
avenged of to all eternity; Wicked men and Devils are damned, because of sin
in them, could that be taken out of their natures, they would be the good and
acceptable creatures of God: But oh the vast difference between Gods hatred and
ours, for that is not against sin, but that which is truly godly and holy; so
desperately and incurablely are we corrupted herein!

SECT. XII.
Their dullness and senslesness, though the Understanding declare the good to be
embraced.
SEcondly, The native defilement of the Affections is greatly demonstrated in
that dullness and senslesnesse which is in them, even though the understanding
does powerfully and evidently declare the good they are to embrace. And this can
never enough be lamented, that when we have much light in our mind, we find no
heat in our affections: Indeed the Question is put, How the affectious, though
in regenerate persons can be affected with any thing that is spiritual, for
they being of a material and corporeal nature, have no more proportion, or
sutablenesse with spiritual and supernatural objects, then the eye has with
immaterial substances; so that as the eye cannot see a spirit, neither can
material affections terminate upon immaterial objects?

But the Answer is, That the affections being implanted in us, as hand maids to
the rational parts, and subjected to them by an essential subordination;
therefore it is, when those superior parts of the soul do strongly embrace any
spiritual good, the affections also by way of concomitancy are stirred up
therein, only as it is with the will, though that be made to follow the
understanding, and (as some say) does necessarily yield to the ultimate and
practical Dictate thereof, yet the will does need a peculiar sanctification of
its own nature, neither is the illumination of the mind all the grace the will
wants; So it is with these affections, although they be appointed to follow
the directions and commands of the mind and will, yet they must be sanctified
and enlivened by the peculiar grace of God, else they move no more than a
stone: Now this necessity of enlivening and quickening grace upon the
affections, the godly are experimentally convinced of: How often do they
complain, they know Christ is the chiefest good, they know eternal glory is an
infinite treasure? Oh but how barren are their hearts, no affections, no
cordial stirrings of their soul when they think of these things? Do the
children of God complain of any thing more than their want of affections in
holy things? They have them as hot as fire for the things of the world, but are
clods of earth in spiritual duties; This makes them cry so often with the
Church, Draw us, and we will run after thee; This makes them pray, Arise, O
Southwind, and blow O North, upon the garden of my soul, that the flowers
thereof may send forth a sweet fragrancy; Thus that saying is true, Cito
prevolat intellectus, tardus sequitur affectus: If therefore there were no
other pollution upon the affections, then their dullness and senslesnesse as to
holy things; This may make the godly go bowed down all their life time; Their
affections are green wood, much fire and frequent blowing will hardly inflame
them; and hence it is that the godly are so well satisfied, and do so
thankfully acknowledge the goodness of God to them, when they find their
affections stirring in any holy thing: Insomuch that they judge that duty not
worth the name of a duty, which is not an affectionate duty; That prayer not
worthy the name of prayer, which is not an affectionate prayer; But how dull
and heavy are these till sanctified, as to any holy object; Yea, such is the
perverse contrariety that is now come upon the superior and inferior parts of
the soul, that when the more noble parts are intensively carried out to any
object, the inferior are thereby debilitated and wholly weakened, so that many
times the more light, the less heat; the more intellectual and rational, the
less affectionate; Now this is contrary to our primitive creation, for then
the more knowledge of heavenly things, the more affections also to them did
immediately succeed: But now experience does confirm, That those men whose
understandings are most deeply engaged in finding out of truths, their
affections are at the same time like a barren wilderness; Hence you may often
find a poor inconsiderable believer more affectionately transported in love to
Christ and holy things, than many a great and learned Scholar; That as natural
fools have a greater stomach to meat, and can digest better than wise men,
whose animal spirits are much tired and wearied out; So it is here, the less
disputative, the less head-work a godly man has, many times he has the
better heart-work: Oh then bewail this in thy self as a most degenerating thing
from primitive rectitude, when thou find thy knowledge, thy controversal
Disputes dry up thy affections! So that truth is indeed earnestly sought after,
but the goodness of it does not draw out thy affections. When David commended
the word of God above the honey and the honeycomb, it was evident he found
much experimental sweetness of the power of it upon his affections.

SECT. XIII.
The Affections being drawn out to holy Duties from corrupt Motives, shows the
Pollution of them.
THirdly, Herein also is apparent the original pollution of our affections,
That when they are moved and stirred up in any holy duties, yet it is not a
spiritual motive that draws them out, but some corrupt or unlawful respect.
Thus there is a world of guile and hypocrisy in our affections, we think it is
the love of God that affects us, when it is love to our selves, to our own
glory, to accomplish our own ends: Thus in our sorrow, we think it is for sin
that we grieve, when it is because of temporal evil, or some outward calamity:
Insomuch that this very consideration of the hypocrisy and deceitfulness of
our affections may be like an Abyss or deep to swallow us up, when the heart
is said to be so desperately wicked, and that none can know it but God; by that
is meant in a great part our affections: none knows the depths of his love,
of his fear, of his sorrow; How often does he bless himself, when he finds
these things moving in him, especially in holy duties? Whereas (alas) it is not
any consideration from God, any heavenly respect moves him, but some earthly
consideration or other: You may observe this in Jehu, what ardent and burning
affections did he show in the cause of God, destroying Idolatry, and executing
the judgments of God upon his enemies? But what moved his affections all this
while? It was not the glory of God, but self-respects, self-advancement: Oh
this is the treacherous deceitfulness of our affections, we may find them very
strong in preaching, in public prayer with others, and the fire to them be
only vainglory! Yea our affections may be blown up with our own expressions
and delight in them; so that as it is a long while ere thou can get thy
affections up to any holy duty, so it is as difficult to search out, What is
the cause of them? Why they rise up? Those in Mat. 7. 21. that would cry Lord,
Lord, did by the ingemination of the word demonstrate lively affections, yet
they were such whom God would bid depart, as not knowing of them: Here
therefore is the misery of man, that as all the speculative knowledge in the
world, unless it be also accompained with an affectionate frame, does not at
all commend us to God, so all hot and strong affections do not presently
suppose the truth of grace within: Experience does sadly confirm this, that
many who have had great affections and workings of heart in the profession of
godliness, have yet desperately apostatized, and become at last a senseless
and as stupid about heavenly things, as any profane ones are: The Jews are
said for a while to rejoice in John's light, Joh. 5. 35. The word signifies
more then ordinary affections, even such as to make them trepidate and leap for
joy, yet this was but for a season: So Mat. 13. there are some hearers, who yet
had not root enough, that did receive the Word with joy. By these instances it
is plain, That our affections are full of deceit, full of falsehood, we know not
when to trust them; It is hard to tell, what it is that draws them out, even
in our holy duties; and if the godly (though in some measure regenerated) find
the power of this deceit upon their affections, certainly the natural man, he
is all over cosened, his affections are altogether a lie to him; he says, he
loves God with all his heart; he says, he is grieved for all his sins, when
all the while his affections are moved from other respects.

SECT. XIV.
Also they are more zealously carried out to any false and erroneous way, then
to the Truths of God.
FOurthly, Herein also is manifested the great pollution of our affections,
That they are more earnestly and zealously carried out to any false and
erroneous way, then to the truths of God. Let a man be in an heretical way, in
a superstitious way, in any deluded way of Religion, and you will find such to
be more affectionate in their way, then the godly can be in a true way, and the
reason is, because our affections have more sutablenesse with what is corrupt
and false, then with what is true and of God: Observe all the false religions
that are in the world, may you not admire at the zeal, at the pains they take
for the propagation of their opinions, how restless they are? Which certainly
may exceedingly shame the children of the truth, that men should be more active
for the Devil, then they can be for God: Our Savior observed it of the
Pharisees, how they compassed sea and land to make proselytes; And Paul
speaking of the Jews, Romans 10* 2. He bears them record that they have a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge. The more affection in a wrong way, the
more dangerous it is. It is good to be zealously affected (says the Apostle)
in a good thing, Gal.4. 18. This he speaks, because the false apostles did
appear with a great deal of affection, none seemed to manifest such passionate
bowels to people as they did, but (says Paul) they zealously affect you, but
not well; It is not from spiritual and heavenly motives that they are thus
affectionate toward you; Well then, this is sadly to be bewailed, that our
affections will vehemently run like a torrent down any false or erroneous
way, whereas to that which is truth indeed we can hardly raise them up. Wonder
not then, if you see the Papist in his superstitious way, the erroneous person
in his false way to be so full of affections and devotion in his persuasions;
for (alas) it is easy falling down the hill; error and supersition is
agreeable with the corrupt nature of man: When we read what some Monks and
Hermites have done in solitary places, afflicting themselves, macerating their
bodies, we may admire, how their affections in that way could hold out so long,
but man's heart like the earth will bring forth nettles and weeds of it self,
but it cannot corn or flowers without diligent managing of it. Let us then
mourn for this evil that is come upon our affections, look upon all the
superstitious and false ways in the world; See with what greediness and
vehemence they are carried out to them; but as for thee, whom God preserves in
the truth, and keeps in his ways, thou art quickly weary in well-doing: Oh
be afraid, lest all the pains and diligence of man in false ways, do not rise
up to condemn thee for thy slothfulness in Gods ways!

SECT. XV.
They are for the most part inlets to all sin in the Soul.
HErein are these motions of the soul greatly depraved, In that they are inlets
for the most part of all sin into the soul: They are the weakest part of the
wall, and therefore Satan does commonly begin his batteries there, this is (as
it were) the thatcht part of the building, and so any spark of lusts falling
upon it does immediately set the whole building on fire: It is true, the senses
they are the outworks and porches (as it were) of the soul, and therefore
temptations begin there; but then the affections are the second Court (as it
were, so that for the most part the mind and the will are carried on to sin,
because the affections are first corrupted; these lie as Readiness men did, all
asleep, while his enemies had the opportunity to take away not only his spear,
but his life: Now it is good to know, that the order and method of the souls
motions to any outward objects in its first creation, was very rational, and
commensurate to the true rule, for then the understanding did first apprehend
and take notice of the objects to be loved, which it did consider without any
ignorance or error, upon this clear proposition of the object: The will did
readily receive and embrace it, and when this was all done then the affections
were subsubsequent, they immediately followed without any delay, so that Adam
had this perfect method in all his actions before his apostasy, reason did
begin and affections did end, but what confusion and disorder is now brought
upon us, affections do now begin, not the eyes but the feet do lead, the Devil
and sin get their first entrance into the soul by the affections; so that as
the Philosophers say in a natural way, Quicquid est in intellect^, prius fuit
in sensu, whatsoever is in the understanding, was first in the sense, so may we
say morally, Quicquid est in voluntate, prius fuit in appetitu sensitivo,
whatsoever is in the will was in the affections, and no wonder it is so now,
seeing that the Devil did bring sin into the world by beseiging the
affections at first, and thereby corrupting the understanding; for as Satan did
first tempt Eve the weaker vessel, and so beguiled Adam, whereupon the woman is
said to be first in the transgression, so even in man, he did first begin with
the affectionate part, the Eve (as it were,) and by that did overcome the
rational part which was like the Adam; Eve then was tempted to sin, although
she had no corrupt principles within her, merely because the bait laid for her,
was suitable to her sense and affections: how much more then do affections like
so many thieves open all the doors, and let iniquity come in every where, when
reason and grace have no command over them. Sit down then and well consider
this particular, That thy affections do first beatray thee, Thy ruin does begin
in them, and therefore whosoever would keep any sin from taking the Castle of
the soul, he must watch over his affections, he must be sure to put out every
spark of their fire (as it were) Job made a covenant with his eyes, because
they would quickly carry sin to the affections, Vt vidi, perii said he, from
seeing he came to perish, but that was from seeing he came to be affected with
the object, and so perished. This is notably expressed, Jos. 7. 20. 21, When
Achan was tempted to steal the Babylonish garment, he acknowledged that when he
saw them, that he coveted them, and coveting of them made him steal them; we
may then conclude that there is scarce any sin committed by thee, but thy
corrupt affections do begin it, the frame (as it were) is first laid there, all
bodily sins of drunkenness and uncleaness; It is plain, that they are the
product of sinful affections, sinful love, sinful desires, sinful joys, and
pleasures are the puddle, (as it were) wherein these vermin are bred: That as
in muddy lakes, frogs, and toads are produced, thus it is in these gross and
polluted affections, and it is no wonder that these come out from the
affections, seeing the sins of the more noble rational part are also
procreated by these corrupt affections; Heresies and Idolatry, these are sins
of the understanding, yet they arise from sinful and inordinate affections; The
rushes grow in such miry places, men seek after profit, applause, or other
carnal advantages, and thus these are like a bribe to blind the eyes of
wisdom; so that it behooveth every one in the way of Religion that he
professes, to consider, whether they be pure conscientious grounds, or corrupt
affections that instigate therein: There are very few that have the Scripture,
lay the first stone in the building of their faith, their affections have first
closed with an opinion, their affections have secretly embraced such a
religious way, and then they go to Scripture to confirm it; Thus they bring
Scripture to their affections, not affections to Scripture, thus as any little
dust does quickly hinder the eye in seeing, so the least corrupting of the
affections does obnubilate the understanding, and what the Sun and the Earth
are in the great world, the same is the sensitive part in man the little world,
and as their constant vapors and exhalations from the earth, do frequently
cloud the Sun and deprive us of the comfortable light thereof, so here our
affections do continually ascend like so many smoking vapors, whereby we
run into dangerous ways: It is therefore a rare and a most blessed thing,
when a man is able to say, O Lord it was no affection, no passion, no corrupt
interest has prevailed with me to take up this way, to forsake my former
opinions, but the powerful light of the Scripture shining into my heart: But
these precious flowers are hardly to be found, as affections corrupted do
generally corrupt the understanding in matters of faith, so also in matters of
public administration. What is the reason of unjust Magistrates, of unjust
Officers, that righteousness in places of judicatory is so often perverted, is
it not because affections do judge, affections do determine, how many times
does the Law say one thing, conscience and righteousness say one thing, but
affections they cry another thing: They were sinful and wicked affections that
put the High Priest and Elders upon the condemning of Christ, Pilate saw that
they did it for envy, and that is a compounded affection; hence are those
frequently commands to all that are concerned in righteous administrations to
have covetousness, to accept of no men's persons, to do nothing for fear or
favor; what does this signify, but that all justice and righteousness is
perverted by sinful affections, sin is not punished, offenders are not
restrained, wholesome Laws are not put in execution, because men are carried
by sinful affections: Therefore in the Aereopagite Court, which was so famous
for integrity, and their Decrees were reverenced like Oracles, all causes were
pleaded in the night, in the dark, that the Judge might not know who pleaded
lest his affection might be pre-possessed, and here all their pleadings were to
be without any Preface or affectionate expressions, all which show how hardly
it is to be a righteous man in his place, while affections are not conquered.

SECT. XVI.
The Privacy of the Affections.
ANother particular is, The privacy of them, they do inordinately impropriate
all things to a man's self, so that they are self-affections, not affections for
Gods glory, or the public good, they are private affections, not public
affections; so that herein they are greatly distempered, in that they are not
carried out to the most common and universal good, but to what is selfish and
particular, whereas if our affections did retain their primitive integrity,
they would have been in the first and most principal manner carried out to what
is the chiefest, and most principal object, whereas naturally every man is a
Nero, and will (...) Let Heaven and Earth be mingled together when I am dead;
And thus though God have no glory, though the public be ruined, so as he have
his self-affections promoted, he mattereth not! This is that which you have
heard, that man in his Apostasy from God did cadere a Deo in seipsum, he fell
from God into himself, and hereupon refers the whole world, even God himself
to his own welfare, as if God were for him, and he not made for God: It was not
thus from the beginning; but as we see in natural things, they all deny their
particular motions to serve the public; or as Philosophers say about the
Orbs, they are carried on by the motion of the primum mobile, even contrary to
their particular motions: Thus it was also in the first constitution of man,
yea better; for the affections had no private particular propensity to any
object, which the rational part did not direct unto: But oh the sad change that
now sin has made upon our affections in this particular, making them to
monopolize all things, and to prefer our selves more then the honor of God
himself, especially in two particulars we may greatly lament the sin of our
private affections, in opposition to public.

First, The glory and honor of God is to be esteemed by us, as infinitely more
worthy then all the world, then all Angels and men, and therefore not to be
affected to our selves more then that. It will easily be granted, That an
infinite good is to be preferred before a finite one, an univesal illimited one
before what is particular, and limited, an ocean before a drop; Now such is God
comparatively to man, yea to all the Nations of the world, Isa. 40. If then God
be thus infinitely transcending us in goodness, and our love is to be drawn
out according to the goodness of the object; if a greater good, then a greater
love; if the greatest good, then the greatest love, then it follows that our
affections are to be carried out infinitely more to the honor of God, then to
our own glory: If the people of Israel could say to their King, because a
public person, Thou art worth ten thousand of us; How much more may we say to
God, his glory, his honor, his truth is worth all our estates, all our lives,
yea such ought to be our affections to Gods honor, that we ought to prefer
it above our own salvation, so although through the goodness of God, his
honor and our salvation are so inseparably joined together, that one cannot be
parted from the other, yet in our minds we are to esteem of one above the
other, Gods glory above our own happiness; But the highest degree of grace in
this life does hardly carry a man to this, much less can nature elevate him
thus high.

The second particular, wherein the privacy of our affections is to be
lamented, is in respect of the public good, we are not only to prefer the
glory of God above our selves, but also The public good of the Church, yea
the public good of the Commonwealth above our particular advantages. What a
notable demonstration of this public affection do we find in Moses and Paul,
which may make us ashamed of all our self-affections? We have Moses his
selfdenial mentioned Exodus 32. 32. where he desires to be blotted out of the
book of life, then that the sins of the people should destroy them, he had
rather be undone in his own particular, then have the general ruined; and when
God proffered to make him a great name by consuming the Israelites, he would not
accept of it; It was Tullie's boast, That he would not accept of immortality it
self to the hurt of the public; but this was breath, and sound of words only,
Moses is real and cordial in what he says. As for Paul's public affections
to the salvation of others, viz. his kinsmen after the flesh, Romans 9. 3. they
break out into such flaming expressions, that great are the disputes of the
learned about the lawfulness of Paul's wish herein, however we find it recorded
as a duty, that we ought to love our brethren so much, that we are to lay down
our lives for them, 1 John 3. 16. Now how can this ever be performed, while
these selfish-affections like Pharaoh's lean kine devour all things else? Groan
then under these straightened and narrow affections of thine, thou can never
prefer Jerusalem above all the joy while it is thus with thee.

SECT. XVII.
The hurtful Effects of the Affections upon a man's body.
THirdly, The sinfulness of our affections naturally is perceived by the
hurtful and destructive effects which they make upon a man. Therefore you
heard they were called passions; These affections immoderately put forth, do
greatly hasten death, and much indispose the body about a comfortable life, 2
Cor. 7. 10. The sorrow of the world is said to work death: Thus also does all
worldly love, all worldly fear and anger, they work death in those where they
do prevail. If Adam had stood they would not have been to his soul, as they are
to us, nor to the body, like storms and tempests upon the Sea; They would not
have been passions, or at least not made any corruptive alteration upon a man,
whereas now they make violent impressions upon the body; so that thereby we
sin not only against our own souls, but our own bodies also, which the
Apostle makes an aggravation in the guilt of fornication, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
Instances might be given of the sad and dreadful effects which inordinate
passions have put men upon, and never plead that this is the case only of some
few, we cannot charge all with this, for its only the sanctifying or
restraining grace of God that keeps in these passions of thine; should God
leave thee to any one affection, as well tempered as thou think thy self to
be, it would be like fire let alone in combustible matter, which would
presently consume all to ashes, of thy own self, having no more strength than
thy own, and meeting with such temptations as would be like a tempestuous wind
to the fire, thou would quickly be overwhelmed thereby.

SECT. XVIII.
The sad Effects they have upon others.
FOurthly, The sinfulness of these affections are seen, not only in the sad
effect they have upon our selves, but what they produce upon others also. They
are like a thron in the hedge to prick all others that pass by; Violent
affections do not only disturb those that are led away with them, but they do
greatly annoy the comfort and peace of others; The Prophet complained of living
among scorpions and briars; and truly such are our affections if not
sanctified, they are like honey in our gall, they imbitter all our comforts,
all our relations, They disturb families, Towns, yea sometimes whole Nations,
so unruly are our affections naturally: Why is it that the tongue (Jam. 2.) is
such an unruly member, that there is a World of evil in it? It is because
sinful affections make sinful tongues.

SECT. XIX.
They readily receive the Devils Temptations.
LAstly, In that they are so readily receptive of the Devils temptations.
Herein does appear the pollution of them; The Devil did not more powerfully
possess the bodies of some men, then he does the affections of men by nature;
Are not all those delusions in religious ways, and in superstitious ways,
because the Devil is in the affections? Has not the Devil exalted much error,
and much fals-worship by such who have been very affectionate? Many eminent
persons for a while in Religion, as Tertullian, have greatly apostatized from
the truth, by being too credulous to such women who have great affections in
Religion; So that it is very sad to consider, how greatly our very affections
in religious things may be abused, how busy the Devil is to tempt such above
all into error, because they will do him the more service; affections being
among other powers of the soul like fire among the elements; They are the
Chariot-wheels of the soul, and therefore the more danger of them, if running
into a false way. The Devil has his false joy, his false sorrow, and by these
he does detain many in false and damnable ways: Hence the Scripture observes
the subtilty of the Devils instruments, false teachers, how busy they are to
pervert women, as being more affectionate, and so the easilier seduced, Matthew
23. 14. The Pharisees devoured widows houses by their seeming devotions. Thus
false teachers (1 Timothy 3. 6.) did lead captive filly women; by which it
appears how dangerous our affections are, what strong impressions Satan can
make upon them; So that it is hard to say whether the Devils kingdom be more
promoted by the subtilty of learned men, or the affections of weak men.

CHAP. VI.
The Sinfullnesse of the Imaginative Power of the Soul.
SECT. I.
This Text explained and vindicated against D. J. Tailor, Grotius, the Papists
and Socinians.
GENESIS 6. 5. And God saw that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart
was only evil, and that continually.
WE have at large discovered the universal pollution of the Affections, which
we have by nature, and handled them in this order (though the Doctrine about
the sinfulness of the Imaginative power should have preceded) because they
have such an immediate connection with the will, belonging to the appetitive
part of a man.

The next seat of original sin in man I shall consider of, is the Fancy,
which we shall find to be instrumental to great iniquities, because in it self
it is polluted sinfully. To which truth this Text will give in a full and
pregnant testimony.

To open which you must understand, that we have here related the Cause of that
universal and dreadful judgment which God brought upon the whole world; The
cause was that universal and desperate wickedness, whereby all flesh had
corrupted their ways; The long-suffering of God would bear no longer,
especially they being so often admonished by Noah the preacher of
righteousness: Thus the general actual impieties every where abounding on the
face of the earth, is the proxim and immediate cause of drowning of the world.

Secondly, We have the remote and mediate cause, which is internal, and that
is, the universal sinfulness of every man's heart by nature, which is always
emptying it self into sinful thoughts and lusts, so that it is never quiet, or
like a fountain sealed up, but diffusing it self into poisonous streams; There
are always sparks flying out of this furnace.

Now this natural pollution is described in the most emphatical manner that can
be.

There are some who complain, that we are too tragical in explaining the nature
of original sin, that we aggravate it too much; but if we consider the scope
of the holy Ghost in this place, we will easily be persuaded that none can say
enough in this particular. For

1. Here is the heart said to be evil, that which is the very life of man, and
is the fountain of all actions and motions; Not the eyes or the tongue, but the
heart, which is the whole of man, which implies also, that he sins not by
example and outward temptation only, but from an inward principle.

2. In this heart that is said to be evil, which we would think is not capable
of sin, at least of very little, the thoughts, not only the affections, or
the will, the appetitive parts of the soul, but the sublime and apprehensive.

3. He does not only say the thoughts, but the imagination, the very first
rising and framing of them: It is a Metaphor from the Potter who does frame his
vessels upon a wheel in what shape he pleases: Thus the heart of man is
continually shaping and effigiating some thoughts or other: Now these are not
only sinful when formed, and it may be consented unto, but the very first
fashioning of them, even as they rise immediately from the heart are sinful:
If we explain it as others do, who observe this word signifies to frame a
thing with curious art and industry, then it aggravateth likewise, informing of
us, that those thoughts which are polished by us in the most accurate manner
they are altogether evil.

4. Here is the Universality, Every Imagination; In those millions and millions
of thoughts which arise in a man, like the motes in the air, there is not one
good thought, all and every imagination.

5. Here is not only the extension of this sin to every thought, but the
intention likewise, It is only evil, there is no good at all in it; Godly men
in their best actions have some sinfulness adhering to them; There is some
water in their best wine, but here is all dross and no gold at all, only evil.

Lastly, Here is the Aggravation of it from the perpetuity; It is thus only
evil, and that continually; Thus the holy Ghost, which is truth it self
represents our Blackmore natures to humble and debase man, as also to justify
God under any effects of his wrath and vengeance that he may bring upon us; How
wretched then are the attempts of some Writers, who lay out the utmost of their
power and wit, to make this sin nothing at all, (as Doctor Tailor, and as
Papists) or to have very little guilt in it? If you say, This Text speaks of
actual sins, of evil imaginations, I grant it, but as flowing from original
pollution, it speaks of bitter fruit, but as flowing from that bitter root
within; And (...) the Scripture use to speak of this sin commonly, as putting
it self (...) immediate evil motions; because though original sin be not
peccatum (...) yet it is peccatum actuosum (as has been said;) It is an
acting, and an active sin, though not actual. Pererius would evade this Text
by having it to be an hyperbole, or else to be true only of some particular
wicked men, the Giants in those days; As for the hyperbole, which both Papists
and Socinians so often fly unto, when the Scripture does intend to exagerate
this sin, we shall easily in time convince of the falsehood and vanity of such
an exception.

And as for the second particular, we will readily grant, That the actual
impiety of all men generally was exceedingly heightened, so that this gave the
occasion to mention that internal corruption which is upon all mankind, but yet
we must necessarily say, that besides those actual impieties, original sin is
also aimed at as being the cause of them; for the scope of Moses is to give an
universal cause of that universal judgment; seeing therefore the deluge
drowned Infants as well as grown persons, and they could not be guilty of
actual impieties, it remains that the native pollution they were born in, was
the cause of their destruction; and indeed original sin did greatly aggravate
those actual wickednesses, for hereby was demonstrated the incurableness of
their natures; No patience, no mercy would do them any good; for they are not
only evil, but their hearts the fountain of all was evil likewise, and then how
could grapes ever grow from such thorns? Neither may we limit it, (as some
would) to particular great sinners, who then lived, because Chap. 8. 21. we
have the same sentence in effect repeated, when yet the wicked men of the world
were destroyed, when those eight persons only were alive and preserved, God
gives this character of man's nature. Besides, it is spoken indefinitely, the
imagination of man's heart, not of those men, or of such particular men.

Why this very reason should be used, Genesis 8. 21. that God would not destroy
the world any more, which is in this Text brought for the destruction of it, is
to be showed when we come to treat of the effects of original sin.

In the mean time, Let us consider what a late Writer (Doctor Jer. Tailor of
Repent. Chap. 6.) who uses to sharpen his weapons at the Philistims forges,
the Papists, and commonly the worst of them, as also the Socinians, with whom
we reckon Grotius, from these (I say) he delivers his poisonous assertions:

First, It is pretended, That the Scripture makes this their own fault, and
not Adam's because verse. 12. it is said, All flesh had corrupted his way upon
the earth. But

This is very feeble and weak, for it is willingly acknowledged, that the
increase of actual wickedness was the immediate and proxime cause of this
general judgment, had not their iniquities in that age risen higher, and cried
louder for vengeance then ordinarily sin did, we may conceive God would not
have proceeded to such an unheard of, and extraordinary judgment: Therefore
verse. 5. it is said, God saw the wickedness of man was great in the earth; The
Hebrew word comprehends both the greatness in quantity, it was exceedingly
multiplied as also in quality; They were enormous sins, all this the Text is
clear for, but this is not all; The Text goes higher, to aggravate these
impieties from the fountain, which is a corrupt nature, even as David, Psalm.
51. does heighten his actual wickedness from the sinful nature he was born in;
Therefore both actual sins, as the fruit and original sin as the root, is
here made the cause of that universal judgment.

The second Exception, to which the third may be adjoined, is, That this
corruption is supposed by those who hold it to be natural and unavoidable, and
therefore God could no more punish mankind for that, then for sleeping or being
hungry; Be^^ (...) by were eight persons excepted, when all were alike, Is not
this a respect of (...)

Answer this, Here is either gross ignorance, or else a wilful mistake about
the word natural and unavoidable: We grant it to be natural and unavoidable in
some sense, but not in that which he takes it, as if it were natural like
sleep or hunger, which are not culpable, or have any guilt in them; But of this
largely in its time, because the Adversaries do usually in an odious manner
represent this inevitableness of sinning unto their Reader, though we say
voluntarily contracted at first, and seem much to triumph in it.

As for the other addition [Eight persons were excepted] It is answered, That
those who were godly then, and escaped that judgment, they were delivered from
the dominion and guilt of this original sin, and therefore it being pardoned
to them, though the remnants in some measure continued in them, they were not
involved in this judgment.

Lastly, What ignorance is manifested in saying, [It must be respect of
persons] If God amongst those that were equally guilty spared some, and
rejected others; For he may learn out of Aquinas and his followers, That
respect of persons cannot be in matters of liberality and munificence, for
where that is, there is some justice and debt supposed. Now if God had not
saved any one man, more then any apostate Angel, I suppose he would not have
charged God with in justice.

Thirdly, It is questioned, If it were the natural corruption God complained
of, Why did he it but thus, as if it were a new thing?

It is answered, The though original corruption was in all mankind, as soon as
ever the Image of God was lost, and therefore Seth is said to beget his son
after his own likeness sinful and mortal, yet because it did not break out
into those violent torrents of iniquity before, as it did at this time; Hence
it was that God did more severely take notice of it, as putting it self forth
in such bitter effects.

Fourthly, It is objected, That Noah the Preacher of righteousness was sent to
draw the world off from that which was likely to destroy it, but no man can
think, he would dehort them from being guilty of original sin.

To this we also answer, That as for being guilty of original sin in our
birth, and how that can be our sin, then, when we were not capable of a
precept, I have at large treated of it, and so shall not actum ager^^ as also
how far original sin is to be repented of; Only to the present Objection
we say, That though the Ministry be not to hinder us from being born in sin,
yet it is to be instrumental in working our Regeneration (which great gift of
God those that deny original sin must also necessarily deny) which is a
subduing and mortifying of original sin in some degree, and is a renovation
of all those parts which original sin had corrupted; For Regeneration ( John
3.) is proved necessary from the supposition of original sin, Whatsoever is
born of the flesh is flesh.

The Text then thus vindicated from corrupt glosses, for the imagination and
devices of many men, though learned, have been very evil, and that continually
in the interpretation of it; I shall only add this, That although by the
imagination of the thoughts be chiefly meant the working of the mind, and the
understanding, yet because the imaginative power or fantasy in a man, is
immediately subservient to the understanding in its operations, and is
therefore called ratio imperfecta, imperfect reason, and Cogitativa facultas,
the cogitative faculty in the soul, I shall therefore treat of it only from
this verse, for the original pollution of the understanding has been
abundantly discovered. From the Text then observe,

That that power of the soul, whereby we imagine or fancy any thing, is
universally corrupted. It imagines only evil, and that continually; we have
sinful fancies as well as sinful affections.

SECT. II.
Of the Nature of the Imagination in a man.
BEfore we insist on the particular pollutions thereof, let us briefly take
notice of the Nature of this Imagination in man. And

First, It is taken two ways; For either by imagination we mean the power it
self, whereby we do imagine, or the acting thereof, even as the word Wib is
sometimes taken for the power, and sometimes for the act, so is fancy and
imagination.

Secondly, Consider, That Philosophers do affirm, that besides the rational and
immaterial faculties of the soul, as also besides the external senses, there
are internal material senses, about the number whereof they greatly dissent;
Some make five, The Common Sense, the Fancy, the Imaginative Power the
Estimative, and the Memory; Others there; Others four; Some but one; only it
may seem many, because of the several manners of operation; It is not worth the
while to contest herein; it is enough to know that there is in man such a
power, whereby he does imagine and fancy things, witness those dreams which
usually rise in our sleep: The use of this imagination is to preserve the
species suggested to order them, and judge of them, and thereby is necessary to
our understanding, according to that Rule, Oportet intelligentem phantasmata
speculari; And certainly, The power of God is admirably seen in this
imaginative faculty, whether in men or beasts; For how do birds come so
artificially to make their nests, and the Ants and Bees to be such admirable
provident, creatures in their kind, but from that natural instinct in them,
whereby their phansies are determined to such things? So it is from this
imagination that the Sheep is afraid of a Wolf, though it never saw one before;
especially in man his imagination being perfect, there are many admirable
things about the nature of it, which, when learned men have said all they can,
they must confess their ignorance of; only you must know, that as the
affections are very potent in a man, to turn him this way or that way, so also
is the imagination and fancy of a man; Insomuch that it is a great happiness to
have a sanctified fancy, that is commonly in men, the womb wherein much
iniquity is conceived. It is greatly disputed in Philosophy, What the power and
strength of imagination is. Some have gone so far as to attribute all
miracles, whether Divine or Diabolical to the strength of imagination: Yea
Abilardus his position was, That fides was estimatio, Faith was nothing but a
strong fancy, but these are absurd; Only it is granted, that some strong
impressions it may make on the party himself, as also on the fruit of the womb
in conception: As for Jacob's art of laying parti-colored sticks before sheep,
when they came to be watered, that in the time of gendring they might bring
such colored lambs, though imagination might be something conducible
thereunto, yet rather ascribe this (with some learned men) to a miracle, and
the peculiar blessing and power of God toward Jacob. But I shall not hold you
any longer here, let us proceed to the discovery of the natural sinfulness
thereof.

SECT. III.
The Natural Sinfulness of the Imagination appears, in making Idols, daily
Supports, and vain Conceits, whereby it pleases it self.
FIrst, The metaphorical expression in the Text does fully declare it; For as
the Potter does make vessels upon the wheel daily, or as some explain it, as
the Artificer does of his wood and other materials make Idols, which he
worshippeth as gods, though they be vanities; Thus the imagination of man does
daily fabricate such fancies and Idols to it self, making gods of them, and
putting confidence therein; And if you observe what rises daily in the heart
of a man devoid of grace, you shall find, That it is a continual Idol-maker, it
makes daily puppets and vain conceits, whereby it pleases it self, and
accounts it self happy therein. Thus we see what shops (as it were) our
hearts are; The imagination having that sinful artifice, as to make and erect
Idols all the day long; Even as children naturally delight to make babies, and
then to play with them, so do all men by nature; How many vain Idols do the
ambitious men, the unclean men of the world daily build up in their fancies?
Hence it is that the glorious things, the pleasant things they please
themselves with, are more in the imagination then in any real possession, as is
more to be dilated upon: In the mean while let us sadly mourn under this
horrible corruption of the imaginative part of a man, that it should be daily
making new gods, continually erecting Idols, in which we are apt to put our
confidence: Lapide on the 8th Chapter, and Verse 21. (where we have the like
expression and metaphor,) does offer ntollerable' violence to the sacred Text;
for whereas it says, The imagination is only set to evil, he would make two
shops (as it were) wherein this imagination does work, a shop of sin, wherein
it only fabricateth evil; and a shop of virtue, wherein it imagines good
things; but what can be directly to confront a Text, and to put the lie upon
it, if this be not? Let us then be willing to be found out in all this evil;
Let us acknowledge, that our imagination does continually set up vanities,
Idols; we make to our selves gods, and so leave the only true God.

We have made some entrance already upon the discovery of that wound and deadly
blow the imaginative power of man has received by original sin; and wonder
not if in the managing of this point, we often mention thoughts, discourse,
invention and apprehensions, attributing these to the Imagination; for although
the understanding be properly the power of the soul, from whence these
operations do proceed; yet because (as you have heard) the imaginative faculty
is so near to the inteliectual, that in all is operations it has some
dependence on it, so that it is hard to know or perceive when some internal
parts of the soul are the operations of the fancy, or of the mind; Though
indeed sometimes reason does correct our imaginations, even as they do sense:
Yea Divines and Philosophers do commonly attribute some kind of opinion, and
judgment, yea imperfect discourse unto it; and this difference is given
between the common internal sense and the imagination: The common sense does
receive the simple impressions of things, as of a stone, of bread, as the wax
receiving the impression of a seal, not the seal it self, but the image of it;
Thus does the common sense receive the species of things, and retains them;
But the fancy does go higher, it does compound these single species together,
witness those many dreams, and also Chimeraes which many do Imagine, that
never had any existence in the world; Therefore by this office it has, we see
how near it is to the understanding; yea Suidas says, That Aristotle calls
it (...) ( viz.) (...), because it has in it, (...), and (...), because it is
with forms and species that it does apprehend things, and therefore says
Suidas, it is called (...) quasi (...), because it does (...), make those forms
and appearances to consist: however this be, we may conclude, because of the
immediate subserviency to the understanding and conjunction with it, we may
without any absurdity say, The thoughts, the opinion, the judgment thereof:
And so I proceed to the further manifestation of its pollution.

SECT. IV.
In respect of its Defect from that end and use which God did intend in the
Creation of man, by making him with this Imaginative Power.
SEcondly, In respect of its defect from that end and use, which God did intend
in the Creation of man by making him with this imaginative power. We must
readily yield, that as God did show his wonderful wisdom and power in making
of man, which the Scripture often observes, comparing the workmanship of our
body, to the curious needle work of some skillful woman, Psalm. 139. 15. so all
these powers and parts of the soul were made for singular and admirable use,
and therefore the imagination as well as the rest; yea we are to know, that in
all those visions and dreams by which God did appear to the Prophets and
others, it was by exciting and working upon their imagination; so that God has
exceedingly honored that part of the soul in this way. The use of this
imaginative power, is twofold, as of the other senses; The one proxime and
immediate, which is to perform their operations for which they were given to
men; The other remote and more general, which is to be instrumental to the
salvation of the soul, and also to the glorifying of God; For by the
imagination we are to glorify God, as well as by other parts of soul and body;
The former end of the imagination, I may call natural; The later, moral; I
shall not speak of the former, because whatsoever defect is now upon the fancy
in that way, not being able to do its office, as at first Creation, it is
merely penal, a punishment, and not so much our sin; Thus, that men are
subject to madness in their fancy, that the imagination by any distemper in the
organ, where it is fixed, may be wholly perverted, as we see in seavers, and in
phrensies, and sometimes in dying men; This is not so much a sin in the
fancy, as a punishment, even as death is inflicted upon us, because of Adam's
transgression. It is true, that Adam, though created with full and perfect
knowledge in naturals and supernaturals that was necessarily required to his
blessedness, yet as Suarez well determines, ( De Creatione homines lib. 3.
cap. 9) in the use of his knowledge he had recourse to phantasmes in the
imagination, because that is a natural way to the soul, while joined to the
body, only in that state, as the organ was not subject to any bodily
distempers, so neither could his imagination any way err; but the sin of
Adam has not only brought on that part an obnoxiousness to many bodily
distempers, but filled it also with sinnefulness, which is eminently seen in
its aberration from that twofold main end it was at first bestowed on us for:
The one whereof is, the salvation of our souls; for if the sense of hearing the
Word of of God, and of seeing the wonderful works which God has wrought, be
so greatly instrumental to our sanctification, why should not the imagination
much more? but who may not complain what an impediment and hinderance his fancy
is to his souls good, it imagines evil and vanity, it is wholly pleased with
empty and vain things, neglecting the true solid good, so that there is no man
that is acquainted with the frame of his soul, but may groan under the sinful
unruliness of his imagination, especially (as is to be showed) in holy and
religious approaches to God; When all the powers should be united in one way,
then what swarms of roaring imaginations? What importunate and impertinent
fancies are ready to fill thy soul, as flies sometimes did Egypt? Was it thus
in the state of Creation? Did God create us with such fickle confused and
erratique imaginations? how greatly would it dishonor God to affirm so? Affect
thy heart therefore greatly with this, to think that that which was so
exceedingly conducible to thy souls happiness, is now such an impediment and
enemy thereunto. It is a corrupt licentious opinion, which Speranza (though a
Papist) attributes to several famous Schoolmen, viz. That a man is not bound
to repel an evil thought, if there be not danger of consent to it, but may
suffer it to be in his mind, as some natural thing, even with advertency that
it is there: but this is justly called by the foresaid Author, ( Spiranza
scrip. sell. dig. de cong. punct. 11.) Offendiculum animarum, an opinion that is
a stumbling block and scandal to souls, neither may our sinful imaginations
greatly humble us, if this were true. And as for the other end, which is to
glorify God; Wherein has God been more dishonored then by the imaginations
of men? Whence has that Idolatry filled the whole world? How come
superstitious magical divinations but by the sin of imagination? These
phantasmata on (...), in the brain make these Idols which men fall down and
worship, so that they may well have the same name. The Apostle Romans 1. speaking
of the Heathens, and that in their high profession of wisdom, yet says, They
became vain in their imaginations, and why so? because of their Idolatry,
turning the glory of God into birds, and beasts, insomuch that the sinnefulness
of the imagination of man has caused all the Idolatry of the world; They have
not gone to God as revealing himself in the Word by faith, but according to
their natural light, by carnal and gross imaginations; whereas therefore Images
were brought into the Church at first, that they might be (as Gregory said)
ignorant men's Books; the truth is, they did teach, and confirm in erroneous
imaginations, for from such pictures do ignorant people still conceive of God,
as an old man, and of the Holy Ghost as a Dove, they imagining such things, as
these Images do represent. The imagination then of man does arise unto an high
degree of impiety, when it will fancy or conceive of God without the guide of
the Scripture; if so be the understanding cannot comprehend this infinite
Essence, how much less can our imagination? if he said Quinquid de Deo dici
potest, eo ipso est indignum, quia dici potest; and, Tunc Deum digne estimamus,
cum inestimabil indicimus: If I say he be thus above the highest contemplations
of our minds, no wonder if he infinitely transcend our imaginations. It is an
evasion that some Papist has, (as I have read, though I cannot remember where
for the present) when pressed with this Argument, that it is a great dishonor
to God, and full of reproach to his Majesty, to represent him under such
external forms and shapes, he would (I say) evade by inslancing in the
imagination, as a natural faculty in the soul; The understanding cannot
apprehend of God, but by the imagination, and the imagination does necessarily
receive Images and represents species about God; otherwise we cannot at all
think of him, and yet this is no Idolatry. But

First it may be answered, These forms and representations in the fancy, when
we think of God, arise from the natural constitution of man, so that it cannot
be avoided; It does arise from our finite and corporeal nature, whereby nothing
can come into the understanding before it has been in the sense and the
imagination, but their Images and Idols are external gross and voluntarily set
up to worship God by. And

Again, Howsoever such shapes and forms may come into the imagination of man
about God, yet it is the duty of the understanding to expel them, and to
conceive of God without any corporeal form, as a Spirit of infinite Majesly,
and therefore the imagination must not guide the understanding, but the
understanding lead the imagination, that so we may not have the least thought
about God, but what becomes his glorious being: but of this more in a
particular by it self, because of its great concernement. Thus we see how the
imagination is wonderfully defective from its main end, both in reference to
Gods glory, and man's own salvation and happiness.

SECT. V.
The Pellution of the Imagination is manifest by the Restlesness of it.
THirdly, The imaginative power of man is greatly polluted, In the restlesness
of it, in the perpetual constant workings thereof; insomuch that thereby the
sinfulness of it is continual, as the eye is always twinkling: Is there a
moment, wherein thy fancy is not busied about some object or other? And whereas
other parts of the soul are subject to sin, while we are awake only; The
will, the mind, they only sin at that time, this fancy is many times very
sinful in the night time; how many polluted and wicked dreams do men fall into
at such a time, at which they tremble and abhor themselves when awakened?
Thus though all sleep, yet sin does not, but lives and acts in the
imagination: But of the sinfulness of dreams by the corrupt imagination, more
afterward: Only for the present let us humble our selves under the perpetual
and incessant motion of our sinful fancy, there being no hour or moment wherein
we are free from the corrupt stirrings thereof: If there could be a breathing
time or a respite from sin, this would at least lessen the damnable guilt
thereof, but to be daily minting and fashioning corrupt imaginations without
any intermission; how heavily should it press us down, and make us to judge
our selves worse then beasts, yea equal to the apostate Angels in perpetuity of
sinning? For whereas it is said, that in this particular man's wickedness is not
so great as the Devils, because the Devils sin continually, they neither
slumber or sleep, as God who keeps Israel does not; so neither they who
oppose Israel; The Devil does vent his enmity, and never has any stop therein
by any natural impediment. Now whereas in man by reason of sleep, there is to
be a natural intermission and interruption of evil, the imagination being
corrupted, does thereby keep the fire of sin, like that of hell from going
out; Cry out then unto God, because of this daily oppression that is upon thy
soul; yea how happy would it be if thou could judge it to be an oppression,
and a slavery? but these sinful imaginations are matter of delight and
titillation to thee, thou art pleased and ravished (as it were) with them all
the day long.

SECT. VI.
The Universallity, Multitude, and Disorder of them.
FOurthly, As the perpetual sinful actings of them may humble us, so the
universallity and multitude of them: They do extend themselves to ens and non
ens, to every thing, and to nothing; Insomuch that the multitude of thy
imaginations do even overwhelm thee, for this being the difference between the
external senses and the imagination, that the outward senses, they are never
moved or excited, but by the present objects; The imagination, that is
constantly working about absent objects; hence it is that your fancyes they are
many times roving and wandering about those objects that are many hundred miles
distant from thee; as God complained of the people of Israel, That they drew
nigh with their lips, but their heart was afar off; They showed much love,
but their heart went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Thus it is with us
continually, when we pray, when we hear, our imaginations are running many
miles off; They are like Cain, vagabonds, and have no settled abode; which
brings in the next instance of their sinfulness.

SECT. VII.
Their roving and wandering up and down without any fixed way.
FIfthly, Their roving and wandering up and down without any fixed and settled
way; They fly up and down, and frisk here and there; so that although they were
a multitude, yet if in a settled ordered way, there might be some spiritual
advantage made of them; As a great Army, if well marshalled, may be useful,
but now here is nothing but confusion and disorders in thy imagination; so that
sometimes many fancyes come into thy head at the same time; that thy head and
heart is all in uproar, which breeds another particular of sinfulness, and
that is, The hurry and continual noise that a man has daily within him, as if
a swarm of Bees were in his soul; Christ told Martha, She was troubled about
many things, but one thing was necessary, Luke 10. 41; The word signifies, she
was in a crowd (as it were) There was a great noise within her, as men make in
a market, or some common meeting; As those in a Mill have such a noise within
that they cannot hear any speaking to them without: Thus it is here, the
imagination fills thy soul with cumbersome thoughts, with confused noises, so
that thou can seldom make quiet and calm approaches unto God in any holy
duty; and if so be the ground tilled and dressed, does bring forth such briars
and thorns, is it any wonder that the wilderness does? If in a godly man,
there be nothing so much annoyeth him, which is so constant a burden and
complaint to him, as these tumul^ouns imaginations, these roving fancyes,
flying up and down like so many feathers in a stormy wind, what can we think is
continually in the imagination of a natural man?

SECT. VIII.
The Impertinency and Unseasonableness of the Imaginations.
SIxthly, The impertinency and unseasonableness of thy imagination, this is
also to be bewailed: Indeed the unregenerate man finds no load or burden
here, therefore if these weeds choke up all the corn, if sinful imaginations
fill his heart full all the while that religious duties are performing, he
never mattereth it, he had rather his heart should be full of dung and earth,
then of pearls, he is more desirous that his soul should be fraughted with
pleasing imaginations, then attentive to those things that are spiritual and
heavenly. But oh the sad complaints the people of God make in this particular,
the unseasonableness of their fancy in heavenly approaches to God, commonly in
religious duties more then at any other time do roving imaginations obtrude
themselves, which even the children of God can no more hinder, then the birds
flying in the air: This is the sad temptation that you have most of Gods people
exercised with, and for redemption out of this bondage they do earnestly pray
to God, but as long as the soul though sanctified is thus joined to the body,
and acts dependently upon the organs thereof, it cannot be otherwise, but as
when a stone cast into the water makes one circle, and that makes another:
This it is in man's imagination, one fancy causes another, and that another,
whereby the soul is scarce ever quiet in any duty, but these phantasmes lie
knocking at the door, and do breed great disturbance; and which is saddest of
all, the Devil (as is to be showed) does usually at such times cast in his
fiery darts, his blasphemous injections do oftentimes violate the soul; so that
in stead of drawing nigh to God, it is filled with doleful and terrifying
imaginations.

SECT. VIII.
It eclipseth, and for the most part keeps out the Understanding; With many
instances thereof.
SIxthly, Herein does the sinfulness of it appear, that it does eclipse, yea
for the most part exclude and keep out the understanding, which is the more
noble light, and to which it ought to be subservient, so that men (whether in
religions or civil affairs) are more led by fancy then by reason, there
imagination is more predominant then the understanding. It is with man the
little world, as the great world, God made in this two great lights, the Sun
and Moon, one to rule in the day, the other in the night: Thus man has two
lights created in him, which are to direct him in all his operations; the Sun
that is the Understanding, the Moon is like the Imagination, which gives a
glimmering light, and that only in particular and corporeal things. Now as it
would be an horrible confusion in the world, if the Moon should shut out the
Sun, and take upon it to rule in the day time all the light the Moon has
(let it be supposed it has some of its own) would not suffice to make a day:
Thus it is in man, his fancy which has not light enough to guide him in his
actions to his true end, yet that usurpeth upon the understanding, and does in
effect command all: Thus the inferior light prevails over the superior: Oh
what groaning should the new creature be in, till it be delivered from this
bondage: See then to thy self, and examine all things that pass through thy
soul more narrowly and exactly. It may be thy imagination is the cause of all
thy Religion, of all thy opinions; It may be it is not faith but fancy; It may
be it is not conscience, but imagination that instigateth thee; Those
expressions me thinks, and I imagine so, are not high enough, or becoming those
glorious actings of faith in the soul, which the Apostle calls (...), Heb.
11. 1. The substance of things hoped for. Aristotle opposes (...), to those
apparitions that are made in the air, as the Rainbow, which has no real
subsistency; and truly such are the conceits and apprehensions many have in
Religion and Piety; They are not of a solid, true, and well-grounded knowledge,
but are like meteors in the air: Thus do their opinions fly up and down in
their head. We may observe it a very ordinary thing in controversies and
polemical writings, that both parties will often charge one another with their
fancies and their imaginations, that there is no such thing in Scripture or in
reason, but a figment in the brain; Yea the Pelagians and Socinians call this
very Doctrine of original sin, Augustini figmentum, Austin's fancy, as if it
were an evil imagination to hold, That the thoughts and imaginations of the
heart are only evil, and that continually. Thus you see in what confusion we
are in, when sometimes the solid Doctrine of the Scripture is traduced for a
mere imagination; And again, mere fancies applauded and earnestly contended
for, as sundamental pillars of Religion and Piety. Seeing then our imaginations
are so apt to get into the chair of the understanding, and as Athaliah
destroyed the seed royal, that she might reign; so fancy bolteth out all solid
reasons and arguments, that it alone may do all, it behooves us the more to
watch over our hearts in this respect, and to be sure they are the solid works
of faith, and not the fickle motions of the fancy that do guide thee, and the
rather, because it is the perpetual custom of wicked and ungodly men, to brand
and stigmatize both the true faith and all solid piety with the reproach of a
mere fancy. Do not Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and the like, exclaim against
the Protestant Doctrine, as if it were but an Idol of Calvin's and Luthers
making, when they condemned the blessed Martyrs to burn at the stake, they
concluded such suffered but for their fancies and their humors. It being
therefore the constant charge by all enemies to truth, that it is not thy faith
thou pleadest for, thou suffer for, but thy mere fancy, it behooves thee to
be the more diligent in Scripture knowledge, and to pray, that the Spirit of
God may thereby quicken thee up to a found and sure faith: Thus also it is in
practicals, Let a man set himself to the power of godliness, walk strictly, in
opposition to the looseness and profaneness of the world; Let his soul mourn for
sin, and his heart grieve for his evil ways, what do carnal people presently
say, This is your fancy, these are your melancholy conceits, they judge it to
be some distemper in your imagination, that it is a kind of a madness. Now that
we may withstand such accusations, it behooves us to seek after, and pray for
such a thorough work of sanctification, that we may be assured it is no more
fancy then that we live or have our being, that if to be godly, if to be
converted be a fancy only, then to be a man, or to be a wicked man is only a
fancy also. Well, though we must take heed of calling faith a fancy, and the
work of grace a melancholy conceit (for that is a kind of blaspheming the holy
Ghost) yet experience does evidence, That many have not faith, have not true
piety, but mere empty shadows and imaginations in Religion, witness the
Skepticism of many in these days, who are of no faith, and no Religion, who
change it often, as they do their garments, who have no rooting or immovable
foundation, but are as the water which receives every impression, but
retains none, that are Reeds shaken with every wind, and are clean contrary
to Christ, for they are not the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: Can
you say, this is the work of Gods Spirit? Can we say, this is the
Scripture-truth? No, you read the Character of such, who have true faith, and
that in a sanctified manner, If it were possible to deceive the very elect,
Matthew. 24. 24. Certainly the prevalency of the imagination above the
understanding in religious things, is one of the sore evils which original
sin has brought upon all mankind.

SECT. IX.
In the Imagination are conceived for the most part all Actual Impieties.
SEventhly, This also does greatly manifest the sinfulness of the Imagination,
That (as in the affections, so likewise) in it are conceived for the most part
all actual impieties. The Imagination and the Affections joined together are
commonly that dunghill, wherein these serpents lay their eggs; yea sin many
times lies a long while breeding in the imagination, before it be brought
forth into action, yea many times it is never brought forth, but the womb of
sin is also the tomb, it lived and died in the imagination: We may observe
the Scripture attributing the greatest works of impiety to the imagination, as
the cause of it, Psalm. 21. Why do the people imagine a vain thing? All the
opposition of wicked men, and their carnal policy to overthrow the ways of
Christ flow from this imagining: Thus Psalm. 38. 12. They imagine deceits all
the day long, Zech. 7. 10. All the injustice, oppression and fraud that may be
used to other men is attributed to this, Let none of you imagine evil against
his brother in his heart. It is true, this Imagination spoken of in the Text,
comprehends also acts of the mind, yet because (as you heard) the mind acts
dependently upon the imagination, therefore we conjoyn them together: How
polluted then must that fountain be, which sends forth so many polluted
streams? Sin (as we told you) may be a long while breeding here, before it be
completely formed and actuated; yea and God beholds and takes notice of thy
sins thus prepared in thy imagination long before the commission of them: We
have a notable instance for this, Deuteronomy. 31. 21. where Moses in the name of God
testifying against the people of Israel, that when they come into Canaan, they
do not fall off from God, uses this expression, For I know their imagination,
which they go about even now, before I have brought them into the Land which I
swear unto them; God did before they come into Egypt, see what was working in
their imaginations, what they were making and fashioning in their hearts; in
which sense some expound that place of the Psalmist, Thou know my thoughts
afar off, Psalm. 139. 2. And this is good and profitable for us to consider,
we many times wonder to see how such gross and loathsome sins can come even
from the godly themselves. Alas, marvel not at it, these Serpents and Toads
were a long while breeding in the imagination; The pleasure or profit of such a
sin was often fancied before; It was again and again committed in thy
thoughts, before it was expressed in thy life, so that a man can never live
unblameably in his life, that does not keep his imagination pure and clean;
Hence you have so often evil thoughts complained of as the root of all
bitterness, Jer. 4. 14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge in thee? Mark
15. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts: As exhalations and vapors
ascending from the earth, which are scarce perceptible, yet at last are
congealed into thick and dismal clouds, so those sins which while in the
thoughts and imagination were scarce taken notice of, do at last grow into soul
and enormous transgressions.

SECT. X.
That many times sin is acted by the Imagination with delight and content,
without any relation at all to the external Actings of sin.
THirdly, The sinfulness of the Imagination is further to be amplified, In that
many times sin is acted with delight and content there, without any relation
at all to the external actings of sin. So that a man while unblameable in his
life, may yet have his imagination like a cage of unclean birds, and this is
commonly done, when there are external impediments, or some hindrances of
committing the sin outwardly; The fear of men's laws, outward reproach and
shame, want of opportunity may keep men off from the outward committing of some
lust, when yet at the same time their imaginations have the strong impressions
of sin upon them, and so in their souls they become guilty before God; The
Adulterous man, Is not his imagination full of uncleanness? The proud man, Is
not his fancy lifted with high and towering conceits? As the Apostle Peter
speaks of some whose eyes were full of adultery, and that cannot cease from
sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. or as some read it according to the original [Adulteresse]
imagination made them have her in their eyes continually, though absent, for if
their eyes were, their imaginations also must necessarily be, because of the
immediate natural connection between them; so then when there are no outward
sores or ulcers to be seen upon a man's life, yet his imagination may be a
noisome dunghill, what uncleanness fancied, what high honors imagined, that
whereas thou art restrained from the actings of sin, yet thy heart burns
like an oven with lusts inwardly; It is the emphatical similitude that the holy
Ghost uses, Hos. 7. 8. They have made ready their heart like an oven; The
meaning is, that as the oven heated is ready to bake any thing put therein, so
was the heart of those evil men prepared for any kind of naughtiness; Some
understand it of the adultery of the body only, as if that were the sin
intended by the Prophet; Others, of the spiritual adultery of the soul, by
which name Idolatry is often called in Scripture; Others refer it to both; we
may take it to be a proverbial expression, denoting the readiness of a man's
heart to commit any sin, that it lies in the heart and the imagination day
and night, men highly sinning against God inwardly, when outwardly they are
restrained; Know then that when the grace of sanctification shall renew thy
spirit, soul and body, thou will then be very careful to look to thy very
imagination, that no tickling fancies or conceits of any lust do defile thee,
thou will keep thy imagination as a precious Cabinet, wherein precious pearls
shall be treasured up, not dirt and filth: As we fitly use an expression
concerning delight in sin, that it is the rolling of honey under the tongue,
so there is a rolling of sin in the imagination with great titillation and
pleasure, when sin cannot be committed in action, we do it in our
imagination; Hence it is that by the imagination old men become guilty of their
youthful lusts, when they have not bodies to be as instrumental to filthiness,
as they have been, yet in their imaginations they can revive their bypast
sins many years ago committed: Thus men became (as it were) perpetual sinners
in their imaginations: Consider of this more seriously, and pray for an holy,
chaste and pure imagination, knowing thou have to do with an omniscient God
that knows what is working therein, though it be hid from the world besides;
think not sinful imaginations will escape the vengeance of God, though no
suitable operations of impiety do accompany them.

SECT. XI.
Its Propensity to all evil, both toward God, and toward man.
NInthly, Our Imagination is naturally corrupted, Because of its propensity to
all evil, both toward God, and toward man. And

First, Toward God, Let us take up that which was but glanced at before, and
that is, How prone we are to provoke God in his worship, declining from the
true Rule, and merely because of our Imaginations. The pleasing of them has
been the cause of all that displeasure which God ever had in his Church
concerning the worshipping of him: No, sin does more provoke God then the
corrupting of his worship, to adulterate this is to meddle with the apple of
his eye; God bears other sins a long while till his worship become to be
corrupted, and then he will endure no longer: Now the original of all
sinfulness in this kind has been our imagination, we have not attended to what
God has commanded; we regard not his institutions, but our own fancies, the
pleasing of them: Hence when God promises a restoration to the people of
Israel, and a reformation from their former Idolatries, he says, Neither shall
they walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart, Jer. 3. 17. It
was this Imagination carried them out to Idolatry, whence came those goodly
Images, those glorious Altars, and many other superstitious ways of worship,
but because the fancy was pleased herein, what is pleasing to the senses is
also carried with delight to the Imagination: Insomuch that those Heathens Numa
and others, who would have no Images to adore their gods by, thinking it
unbe^eeming their greatness, were carried by reason, and did not give way to
the Imagination; and this is a very necessary truth, for all such who are so
difficulty taken off from their Idolatries and Superstitions, for what is it
but thy fancy thou would have satisfied, thou do not look upon Ordinances
and the worship of God; as spiritual means to quicken thy faith, and to make
thee more spiritual, but as that whereby thou would have thy Imagination take
some corporeal refreshment and satisfaction: Even Aristotle saw the vanity of
this, and therefore would not have any musical delights in the worship of their
Heathenish gods; And Aquinas following him herein, is against musical
instruments in the service of God: what God appointed in the Old Testament
cannot be brought as an argument for any such custom in the New.

Secondly, Toward man; here the imagination is as full of evil, as the sea, of
water, Prove. 6. 16. One of the seven things that are there said to be an
abomination unto the Lord, An heart that devises wicked abominations; How
crafty and subtle is the abomination of man to devise wicked and malicious
purposes? This is the forge of all those malicious bloody and crafty designs
that ever have been acted in the world; Read over profane and sacred
Histories, and there you will admire, what subtle foxes men have been
sometimes, what cruel lions they have been at other times; all which does arise
from this sinful imagination, which is prone to find out all manner of ways to
vent the wickedness that is bound up in the heart: so that we need not exclaim
on the Devil, as if he put this into their hearts; for though no doubt
sometimes he does, as in Judas, yet the heart of it self is ready for any evil.

SECT. XII.
It continually invents new Sins, or occasions of Sins.
ALthough much has been said concerning the original pollution of man's
imagination, yet still more is to be discovered; so that there is a very (...)
resemblance between man's imagination, and those chambers of imagery, which
Ezekiel beheld in a Vision, upon the walls thereof were pourtrayed the form of
creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the Idols of the house of
Israei, Ezekiel. 8. 9, 12. Thu* is every man's imagination a table (as it were)
whereon are pictured all the forms and shapes of all kind of evil; It may well
be called the chamber of man's imagery where are images of jealousy daily
created, such forms received that do provoke God to wrath and jealously: Let
us therefore proceed.

Tenthly, In this we have an open field wherein man's imagination does act
numberless evils, because of its invention, it is continually inventing new
sins or occasions of sins; As if the old sins and trespasses which had
filled the world were not enough, What new ways of impiety are invented, new
fancies in evil ways? For although invention be indeed principally an act of
the understanding, yet because (as you heard) the understanding in its
operations has recourse to the imagination, and that is subservient and
under-agent to it, therefore we may attribute the same things to both,
especailly the things of invention, because a man's imagination has a peculiar
influence therein; Now in this respect, if there were no other, the sins of
the imagination will increase like the sands upon the seashore: It were
possible to show, by going over every particular Commandment, that the
imagination of man does constantly invent new sins against them; the Apostasy
of man from his first rectitude is emphatically described by the Scripture in
this, as the general and sum of all, that he sought out many inventions,
Eccles. 7. 29. where the wise man having declared that amongst men and women,
though less amongst women, one not so much as good in an ethical and moral
sense could be found; for in a spiritual sense there is not one man amongst a
thousand, no not in all mankind that is good, but the speaks of external and
moral, enquiring then after the cause, why such an universal corruption should
overflow all mankind; insomuch that there is not one amongst a thousand that
deserves the name of a man, not such an one as the primitive righteousness did
require, but not so much as reason judging rightly by ethical Rules would
commend, he does clear God from being the Author of this; And because this
truth is of such great consequence, he uses a word of attention [Lo] Ecce,
Consider it diligently; And secondly, he tells you, how he came to the
knowledge of it, I have found it, (viz.) in the Word of God. where you see this
Doctrine concerning original corruption is not to be investigated by humane
reason, as it is discovered by divine revelation. I have found it after much
and diligent study; Oh that those corrupt teachers, who deny this original
pravity, could with Solomon say, They have at last after much study found out
this truth also! Now the Doctrine found out is, That God made man right, full
of righteousness and holiness, not only negatively without sin, but
positively, full of righteousness; but they, that is, Adam and Eve, which are
called the man Adam in the words preceding, Sought out] not being contented
with that measure of knowledge and happiness God created them in, affecting to
be like God. Many inventions] that is, found out many ways of sinning, when
they once forsook the strait Rule, they diverted and wandered into many crooked
paths: The Hebrew word Chishbonoth is very emphatical, it is used but once more
in the Old Testament, and that is 2 Chronicles. 26. 15. where it is said, Vzziah
used engines invented by cunning men, to shoot arrows and great stones withal:
So that by this word is denoted that subtilty and great artifice which is in
man's Imagination to invent any evil way, sins that never were acted before
are found out: Every age almost has new sins, and whence is this, but from
the subtilty of man's Imagination to find out new ways of sinning? Hence Romans
1. 30. one character in the Catalogue of those sins attributed to the
Heathens, is to be Inventers of evil things; And certainly here the Imagination
of man is very prone, that whereas to learn Trades, or the Arts, there they
must have teachers, and much time must be allowed them to learn; In the
invention of evil things there men are taught of their own corrupt hearts to do
so. We might instance in diverse things, wherein the sinful Imagination of man
is discovered about inventing of evil, new sins, new oaths, new blasphemies,
new ways of cheating and dishonesty, especially in those new ways for
nourishing pride, and wantonness, Which is the ridiculous, absurd and uncivil
fashions in apparel and deportments of body, which are truly and properly the
genuine issue of the sinful fancies of men. The Ape being a creature of strong
Imagination, but wanting reason does strive to imitate more then any other
creature; And thus it is an argument that that man's imagination and fancy are
far greater then their wisdom and prudence, who are ambitiously ready to
imitate every foolish and childish fashion that men's corrupt imaginations have
produced. Look upon all the several fashions, all the changes and mutabilities,
which are in men's and women's apparel, and you will presently be persuaded, that
their imaginations are corrupted; From this also arises the use of auxiliary
beauty, painting, spotting, etc. and which is the highest aggravation of our
sinfulness; herein we do not only conform to such foolish and indecent
fashions, but we plead for the lawfulness thereof; but remember to let
Scripture-gravity, modesty and chastity be more powerful in thy heart, and
manifested in thy garments and gestures, then the sinful impressions of
unjustifiable fashions upon thy imagination: To how many transforming
themselves into the new guises and modes of the times they live in, if the
gravity of the Minister would permit it as well, as the vanity of the subject
deserve it, may you apply Martials verse, Si mihi cauda foret,
Cercopithermeram. Bassianus the Emperor did so greatly degenerate into
effeminateness, that he would not only conform to women's attire, but would also
make his name feminine, he would be called Bassiana not Bassianus. By this you
see, how corrupt fancies will make men degenerate from the gravity and prudence
of a man, much more the holy deportment of a Christian, this is to show that
all the sinful fashions and ridiculous ones which are in apparel, gesture and
otherwise, they come from the imaginations of men defiled. To this head also is
to be referred all those new amorous Songs, all sinful Comedies and Plays,
with a world of such kind of impiety, that the imagination of man has the
greatest share therein, so careful are we how we please that, how we walk
according to that in every thing.

SECT. XIII.
The Sinfulness of the Imagination manifests it self in reference to the Word
of God, and the Ministerial Preaching thereof.
ELeventhly, The sinful Imagination of a man does in a great measure manifest
it self, in reference to the Word of God, and the Ministerial Preaching
thereof. Here it discovers much enmity and contrariety to what is godly; For
the Word it self, How greatly is the Imagination offended thereat, both in
respect of the style and the matter? The language is not so imbellished and
polished, that the fancy should delight therein; This has been a rock of
offense to many great but unsanctified wits; They have disdained the simplicity
of the style, and affected a more gaudy Oratory; This is the sin of the fancy
chiefly. Austin in his Confessions does much bewail his pride and tumor in
this particular; He disdained to become like a little child, and to lay aside
the admiration of humane eloquence; by which he was so much puffed up; What
profaneness and the love to their filthy lusts do to some in making them
opposite to Scripture ways, The same does an unmortified fancy, especially
where there are learning and parts in others; Even as we see Christ became a
stumbling block to many, because he came not in that external dignity and pomp
of a King which they desired; Thus also it is with the Scriptures, because they
are not in such pleasing words, such florid expressions as their Imagination
would have: Hence it is they take no delight in the reading of them, or in
meditating therein, whereas they are never satisfied in reading of Comedies,
Histories that are full of delight and exact language, in reading of Poetry and
Romances, thou read (it may be) not one Chapter in the Bible to many of
these: Oh do thou humble thy self under that vain and proud fancy, It is a
great enemy to thy conversion! If ever God open thy eyes, thou will with Austin
bewail thy folly herein, and at last regard fruit more than leaves, substances
more than shadows. This was also Hierom's temptation to be much inamoured with
humane Oratory, and therefore speaks of himself, what terrors, yea bodily smart
he was in, hearing a voice at the same time, saying, Ciceronianus es non
Christianus. I do not speak this as if humane Oratory and Eloquence were not
lawful; yea where it is well used, it is an excellent gift of God. Cyprian and
others carried this Egyptian gold out of Egypt to Canaan. Chrysostom,
Nazianzen, Basil, were so many Divine Orphe^^'s to change the natures of
beastly men; Therefore it may lawfully be used where God gives it; Hence in
the Scripture we have metaphors and similitudes, yea Christ is full of
Parables, which do in their nature please the fancy representing spiritual
things by sensible; but then we must be sure, that we stay not in this
eloquence, that it be not like music affecting the ear for a while, having no
operation at all, as Ezekiel's preaching was to his hearers, but it is to be
like the sugar that makes us swallow down the bitter pills more willingly: To
admire the Artifice of a Cup, and never drink of the liquour within, is a
childish vanity; to be affected with the words and language of a Minister, and
not to consider what wholesome food it is to thee, whether it be the bread of
life to thee or no, is absurd impiety: As the proud fancy of a man is thus
offended at the Word of God, so also it is at the preaching thereof in a solid
and substantial manner in a soul-saving way; This is not according to a man's
fancy, which looks for pleasure not profit. Austin confessed this also in
himself, that he did with great delight go to hear Ambrose preach, not that he
regarded the spiritual matter and heavenly truths delivered, but because of the
eloquence and pleasing elocution which Ambrose had. Though it is true, such was
the goodness of God to Austin, that though hearing Ambrose only for eloquence
sake, yet secretly some power of truth was instilled in him, which made to his
conversion; So that from looking to the art in the Sermon, he came at last to
mind the grace of God in it: Even as it is said of Apelles, that by his often
beholding and looking on the woman, whose picture he was drawing, though at
first he minded his Art only, yet secretly love did creep into his affections
at the same time, which made him languish away, till Alexander helped her to
him as his wise. But though admiration of gifts and oratory may sometimes thus
be blessed, yet commonly it is otherwise, and the inclination of such a fancy
is to reject with scorn and contempt the powerful preaching of the Gospel
without words of man's wisdom, as a most low and despicable thing: Thus the
preaching of Christ crucified was foolishness to the Gentiles, who gloried in
humane literature, 1 Cor. 1. 23. Though it is true, God will by these weak
things bring to naught the great admired things of the world. Thus 2 Cor. 10.
5. The ministerial weapons of the Gospel are mighty through God, to pull down
strong holds, and to cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts
it self, as Cannon-shot does strong Castles; By this of the Apostle you see the
imaginations of men raise up strong and mighty opposition against the Word
preached, though the Word of God set home by his own power overcomes every
thing that does withstand it. It is good then, especially for men of quick
parts and raised fancies to suspect themselves, to fear lest from them arise
all their destruction, lest these be the bolts and bars that keep Christ out
from possessing of their hearts.

SECT. XIV.
It is more affected with Appearances then Realities.
TWelfthly, The sinfulness of the Imagination is seen, in that it is more
affected with the appearance of things, then the reality, yea we do wholly
satisfy our selves with things, as they are in our fancy only, and never
attain to what is really good or happy. Our comforts are but imaginary
comforts; our delights but imaginary delight, yea our wealth, our honors are
but in imagination only; It Is usual with the Scripture to speak of the Nations
of the world comparatively to God, as a drop, as a little dust; How often is a
man's life compared to a shadow? Insomuch that neither our life and delight are
worthy of the name; All the things of this world are but in imagination; What
seems to be more substantial than wealth, which is said to answer all things?
yet Solomon says, Why do thou set thy eyes upon that which is not? Prove.
23. 5. Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon it, is in the original? It
shows our ardent desires after that thing which is not: Hence a wicked man in
his greatest triumph and glory is compared but to a dream, Job 20 8. He shall
flee away as a dream, and shall not be; All the while we pursue riches,
honors, all the while our hearts are hastening after the creatures, we are but
in a dream; What is true riches? What is true food? What is true glory? We
miss and embrace only a shadow: This is notably represented by the Prophet,
Isa 29. 8. The enemies of the Church that had in their hopes and expectations
devoured Zion, are compared to an hungry man that dreameth he eats, but when
he is awakened his soul is empty: Thus it is in all these worldly enjoyments,
this life is but a dream, we are not awaked till we come within the borders of
eternity: Oh that this were truly considered, how greatly would it mortify
that inordinacy in us to these sading things? When the child rejoices in his
bauble, it is but his Imagination that is pleased, his counters he takes for
money, it is but his fancy that contents him; and truly no more are all the
great things of the world in respect of God and eternal things.

SECT. XV.
The sinfulness of the Imagination in respect of fear, and the workings of
Conscience.
13. AS the Imagination makes us rejoice and account our selves happy, when
there is no solid foundation for it, so on the other side, When the conscience
is awakened for sin, many times the imagination does work so terribly, and
fills us with such sad apprehensions, that we fear, where no fear is, we flee
when none pursues; So that a disturbed imagination does many times work with
the troubles of conscience, hindering both the working of our judgment, and of
faith, representing God and Christ to us far otherwise then they are. Job
complains, Chap. 7. 14. that God did scare him with dreams: Oh it is very
sad, and a grievous condition, when God shall turn a man's fancy against his own
self; To have our conscience against us, and our imaginations against us is an
hell upon an earth, and it is just with God to fill these Imaginations that
once received nothing but lustful and pleasant impressions with terrible and
dreadful ones, and both these ways draw from God, both joyful delights, and
terrible apprehensions! That great change which we read made upon
Nebuchadnezzar, who from a great Monarch of the world is become like a beast
living amongst them, his hairs being grown like Eagles feathers, and his
nails like birds claws, was nothing else (as many Expositours judge) but a
judgment brought upon his Reason and Imagination by a deep melancholy; So
that the terrors of a troubled Imagination (especially when joined with
troubles of conscience) do drive from Christ, oppose the comfortable way of
the Gospel, as well as proud and unclean motions do the pure and holy way
thereof.

SECT. XVI.
Of the Actings of the Imagination in Dreams.
IN the fourteenth place, Herein the pollution of it does manifest it self,
That when the senses and the rational part are bound up, so that they cease
from operation, even then that is acting, and most commonly in a sinful manner
by dreams. Dreams are the proper work of the Imagination, and Divines do make
three sorts of them, Natural Dreams, which arise from natural causes, and these
commonly either have much sinfulness in them, or great troublesomness.
Diabolical, such as are cast into the imagination by the Devil; or Divine, such
as are caused by God; for the Spirit of God has used the imagination in some
operations thereof: Thus Joseph and others were warned by God in a dream; And
Joel 2. the promise is, That their young men should dream dreams. These Divine
dreams Tertullian (Lib. 3. de anima) does divide into Prophetica, such as are
merely foretelling things to come; Revelatoria, such as reveal something to be
done, as Peter's vision concerning Cornelius; Aedificatoria, such as build up to
any holy duty; And Vocatoria, that call to some spiritual service, as that
vision of Paul inviting him to come into Macedonia. Concerning Diabolical
Dreams they are not a man's sins but afflictions, unless a man does directly
or indirectly consent thereunto, or walk so that he deserves God should leave
him to such unclean or polluted apprehensions. But we speak of Natural Dreams,
and not such as are merely natural, that arise from some natural cause, but
such as have had some voluntariness antecedent thereunto, while waking, such
now are proud dreams, malicious dreams, unclean and unjust dreams. All these
do either expressly or virtually come from a polluted Imagination while we are
awake, though happily we cannot remember any such thoughts we had. The
sinfulness then of our dreams we are to be humbled under, as coming from sin
the cause, and being also sins in themselves: No doubt but Adam would have
dreamed, (it being common to all mankind, only it is said of Nero, That he
seldom or never dreamed till after the murder of Agrippina, after which he was
afrighted with terrible ones; As also of the Atalantes, that none dream amongst
them. Though Tertullian faith, Perhaps same did deceive Aristotle in that
report,) yet his dreams had been merely natural, not having the least connection
of any sin, or any disquieting with them: But how greatly is confusion
brought upon us in this very respect? Insomuch that what the Devil cannot tempt
to, while waking, he does allure unto, while dreaming: Indeed it is folly and
superstition (as many people do) to regard dreams so as to make conjectures and
prophesies thereby, but so to observe them, as to take notice of the filthiness
and sinfulness of them, that is a duty, for although the reason and the will do
not operate at that time, yet there is sin in our dreams, because they are
the effects of the sinful motions of thy soul sometimes or other. Let it then
be thy care to have pure and sanctified imaginations both dreaming and waking,
and do nothing that may provoke the Spirit of God to leave thee to the
defilements thereof

SECT. XVII.
It is not in that orderly Subordination to the rational part of man, as it was
in the Primitive Condition.
15. THe imagination is hereby deprived, That it is not now in that orderly
subordination to the rational part of man, as it was in its primitive
condition. Every thing in Adam was harmonical, he was not infested with
needless and wandering Imaginations; Even the birds of the air, as well as the
beasts of the field God brought to Adam, that he should give names to them; The
birds though flying in the air, yet come and submit to him; so it was in his
soul; Those volatique Imaginations and flying thoughts which might arise in
Adam's soul, they were all within his power and command, neither did any
troublesomly interpose in his holy meditation; but now how predominant is thy
imagination over thee? How are good thoughts and bad thoughts conjoined, as
there were clean and unclean beasts at the same time in the Ark? Especially
do thou not labor and groan under thy wandering imaginations, even in thy
best duties, and when thy heart is in the best frame? Is not this the great
Question thou propoundest to thy self, How may I be freed from wandering
thoughts and roving Imaginations in my addresses to God? Oh that I were
directed how to clip the wings of these birds, for they are my burden and my
heavy load all the day long? Surely the experience of this in thy self may
teach thee what a deep and mortal wound original sin has given every part of
thee: Had thou the Image of God in the full perfection of it, as Adam once
had, as Christ's humane nature had, and as we shall have when glorified in
Heaven, then there would not be one wandering thought, one roving imagination
left as a thorn in thy side to offend and grieve thee? This imagination being
of such a subtle and quick motion, does presently fly from one thing to
another, runs from one object to another, so that hereby a great deal of
sin is committed in the very twinkling of an eye. The soul indeed being
sinite in his essence, cannot think of all things together, but not to consider
that which it ought to do, or to rove to one object, when it should be fastened
on another: This is not a natural, but a sinful infirmity thereof.

SECT. XVIII.
It is according to Austin's Judgment the great Instrument of conveying
Original Sin to the child.
16. THe Imagination is so greatly polluted, That according to Austin 's
judgment, it is the great instrument of conveying original sin to the child;
For when he is pressed to show how original sin comes to be propagated, how
the soul can be infected from the flesh, though this be not his chief answer,
yet he does in part run to this ( viz.) the powerful effect of the
imagination; The vehement affection and lust in the parent is according to him
the cause of a libidinous disposition in the child, hereupon he instanceth in
the fact of Jacob, who by working upon the imagination of the females, did by
the parti-colored sticks produce such a color in their young ones; Yea one
thinks, that this instance was by a special providence of God, chiefly to
represent how original sin might be propagated from parents to children; And
it cannot be denied but that many solid Philosophers and Physicians do grant,
that the imagination has a special influence upon the body, and the child in
the womb to make great immutation and change: Austin instanceth ( lib 5. contra
Julian. cap. 9) in the King of Cyrus, who would have a curious picture of
exquisite beauty in his chamber for his wife to look upon in the time of her
conception; Yea Histories report strange, and it may be very fabulous things
herein, therefore we are not to run to this of the imagination when we would
explain the traduction of this sin: It is true, some imbre qualities are many
times transfused from parents to children, parents subject to the Gout and
Stone have children also subject to such diseases, and blackmores do always
beget blackmores, and so no doubt but in the conveighing of original sin
there is a seminal influence, but how and in what manner it is hard to
discover; but though the corrupt imagination cannot be the cause, yet it may in
some sense dispose for the propagating of it.

SECT. XIX.
How prone it is to receive the Devils Impressions and Suggestions.
LAstly, The imagination is greatly polluted, In that it is so ready and prone
to receive the Devils impressions and suggestions. When we lost original
righteousness, which is the image of God, not only original sin like an
universal leprosy did succeed in the room thereof, but the Devil also did
thereupon seize upon us as his own: our souls and all the parts and powers
thereof are his habitation; he reigns in the hearts of all by nature, we are
all his captives; so that as a man is said to dwell in his own house, it is his
home, he may do what he will, such a right and claim has the Devil to a man's
soul by nature, he dwells in it, he moves and reigns in it: Now the
imagination is that room of the soul wherein he does often appear. Indeed (to
speak exactly) the Devil has no efficient power over the rational part of a
man, he cannot change the will, he cannot alter the heart of a man, neither
does he know the thoughts of a man, so that the utmost he can do in tempting of
a man to sin, is by swasion and suggestion only; but then. How does the Devil
do this? even by working upon the imagination. Learned men make this his
method, that he observes the temper and bodily constitution of a man, and
thereupon suggests to his fancy, and injects his fiery darts thereinto, by
which the mind and will come to be wrought upon; for it is Aristotl's rule,
That Phantasmata movent intellectum, sicut sensila sensum; so that as the
object of sense, being present, does presently move the sense; so do phantasmes
and imaginations move the understanding. The Devil then, though he has no
imperious efficacy over thy will, yet because he can thus stir and move thy
imagination, and thou being naturally destitute of grace can not withstand
these suggestions; hence it is that any sin in thy imagination, though but in
the outward works of the soul, yet does quickly lay hold on all; and indeed by
this means do arise those horrible delusions that are in many erroneous ways
of Religion, all is because their imaginations are corrupted; yea, how often
are these diabolical illusions of the imagination taken for the gracious
operations of Gods Spirit? Divines give many excellent Rules, how we may
discern between those delusions of the imagination by Satan, and the savourie
workings of Gods Spirits in illumination, and consolations: It is not my
purpose to enter on that Subject, only bewail and humble thy self under this,
that the Devil has such command over thy fancy, that he can so quickly dart
in, like so much lightning so many unclean or blasphemous imaginations, it is
from hence that many have pretended to Enthusiasmes, that regard dreams, that
they leave the Scripture, and wholly attend to what they perceive and feel
within them. And thus much for the opening of this noisome dunghill also.

SECT. XX.
Some Corollaryes from the Premises.
NOw from the corruption which you have heard of all the parts of the soul both
the rational and sensitive part of a man conjoined together, we may see the
unspeakable misery of man in these particulars; and oh that every auditor would
smite upon his breast and say, O Lord I am the man thus polluted! O Lord all
this poison and pollution lies here! For

First, In having all the powers of the soul thus defiled, both superior and
inferior, hereby man has lost all liberty, and is become a miserable slave and
vassal to sin and Satan. For whereas man was made only to serve God, and by
love to cleave to him, the creature is come in his room, and thereby man is
inslaved in his affections to these temporal things only; so that we do very
improperly say, that a man is the Master or the Lord of such an estate, of such
an house, for indeed he is a slave to them, Fiunt servi, dum domini esse
desiderant, as Austin, while thou do so earnestly desire to be master of such
an estate, thou art indeed made a servant to it; but remember thou can not
serve God and the creature, these are two contrary masters.

Secondly, He has by this pollution lost all true judgment to discern of
things, he does not know what are the best things, yea he does grossly
misjudge, he prefereth earth before gold, dross before pearls. The natural man
cannot discern spiritual things, because he wants a spiritual eye; he mistaketh
about God, he misjudgeth about true blessedness, he is deceived about the true
nature of godliness; so that he can no more judge of these things, then a worm
can of Angelical actions: The Apostle speaks fully to this, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.
Thus we are become like children, yea natural fools as to spiritual things;
when we are invited to this feast, we pretend excuses; when Christ is tendered
to us, we had rather keep our swine; when exhorted to labor for everlasting
bread and riches and an eternal crown of glory, we had rather have our
Barley-Corn, then all these: Thus we have lost all spiritual judgment and will
not part with our bables, though for an inheritance in heaven.

Thirdly, A man being thus in his intellectuals and affectionate parts of his
soul carried out only to these earthly things, and from God; hence is it, that
he is as it were made one with them; we may say, earth thou art not only in
respect of thy body, but also of thy soul; for if the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 6.
17, he that is joined to the Lord is made one spirit; may we not also say, he
that is joined to sin, to creatures, is made (as it were) the same with them.
Although (says Austin) the mind when it inclines to these bodily things is
not made corpus, a body, yet by these appetites and desires quodammodo
corporascit, it does (as it were) become bodily; It is as if a mighty Prince
should come from his throne of glory, and wallow in the mire like a swine; this
is our state comparatively to that primitive happiness and holiness; we are now
no better then those lusts and those creatures that we do adhere unto; Junge
cor tuun aternitati Dei, and cum ille aeternus eris; and again, Si terram amas
terra es; Thou art in Gods account that which thy heart is set upon; Oh then,
God cannot look upon thee as his primitive creature, he sees his image and
superscription defaced, and another brought in the stead thereof very loathsome
and deformed; Even as they that worshipped Idols are said to be like them, to
become as abominable, yea and as senseless, and as stupid, as they are, so it is
in this case.

Fourthly, From hence also arises that impossibility of loosing our selves
from the creature to return again to God from wn^m we fell; Had not the Lord
showed mercy to some of mankind, none of them could ever have recovered out of
their lost estate, no more than the Devils can to that habitation which they
forsook; All these creatures are the bird-lime that now hinder the wings of the
soul from flying to Heaven: Oh that we could say, The snare is broken, and we
are delivered; Who will give me wings that I may fly as a Dove, and my soul
find rest with God! Yea as a man has no power to break these bonds of sin,
so neither has be any desire, for he is kept thus fast joined to sin by
delight and by pleasure; so that the more sin and the creatures delight him,
the more strongly is he possessed; Samson was as much under Dalilah's power,
though it was by his delight and consent, as when under the Philistims by force
and constraint; So that the will and affections of man are hereby so glued to
sin and the creature, That nothing is more offensive and troublesome to them,
then to be divided from these things: So that whereas David having experience
of the sweetness of Gods favor, says, It is good for me to draw nigh to God;
They (on the contrary) judge it their greatest good to draw nigh to, and
possess the creature, Hence

In the fifth place, There is that difficulty in man to bear the want of the
pleasures of sin, and the delight of the creatures, yea the exceeding great
sorrow under the losing of them: Were not man fallen from that glorious state
of holiness, and enjoyment of God, he could not so sadly deplore and bewail the
loss of any creature, no more then a man should be troubled to have the Moon
taken away when the Sun is in the room thereof; but because, when fallen from
God, we center upon these earthly things; therefore it is, that as we have
inordinate delight in the possessing of them, so immoderate sorrow in the
losing of them; For that is a true Rule about all these things, Non est earendo
difficultas, nisi cum in habendo est cupiditas; Now all this trouble and
perplexing grief arises from the pollution of the soul being destitute of that
glorious Image.

Sixthly, Man having lost the Image of God thus in his soul, hence it is that
he lives a wretched instable and unquiet life, for being off in his heart from
God, he therefore is tossed up and down according to the mutability of every
creature; Hence no man having no more then what he has by Adam, can live any
quiet, secure and peaceable life, but is tossed up and down with contrary
winds, sometimes fears, sometimes hope, sometimes joy, sometimes sorrow, so
that he is never in the Haven, but always floting upon the waters; Thus
miserable is a man's life, till the Image of God be repaired in him.

Lastly, From this universal pollution upon a man, it follows, That be
abuses every good thing he has, that he sins in all things, and by all
things; That whether he eats or drinks, whether he buyeth or sells, he
cannot refer any one of these to the ultimate end, which is Gods glory, but to
inferior and self-respects: Oh wretched and miserable estate, wherein thou
have abused every mercy God has given thee to his dishonor and thy damnation!
Thou have turned all thy honey into gall and poison; thou wast never able to
fulfill that command, 1 Cor. 7. So to use the world as not to abuse it; Thy
meat, thy raiment, thy health, thy wealth, they have all been abused; neither
has God been glorified, or the salvation of thy soul promoted thereby.

CHAP. VII.
Of the last Subject of Inhesion, or Seat of Original Sin (viz.) the Body of
a Man.
SECT. I.
1 THESE. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
HItherto we have been discovering the universal pollution of the soul by
original sin, and that both in the upper and lower region, the rational and
sensitive part thereof; Our method now requires, that we should manifest the
defilement and contagion that is upon the Body also: For as it was in the
deluge, that did overflow the world, the cause did precede both from above and
beneath, Genesis 7. 11. The fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the
windows of Heaven were opened; from above and below did come the overflowing of
waters: Thus it is in that spiritual deluge of sin, which does overflow all
mankind, There is corruption in the superior parts of the soul, and there is
also in the body the lowest and meanest part of man: So that whatsoever goes
to the making of man, is all over defiled; There is nothing in soul or body but
is become thus polluted, we therefore proceed to the last subject of Inhesion,
or seat of original sin, and that is the body of man, which will be declared
from the Text we are to insist upon.

SECT. II.
The Text explained.
FOr the Coherence of it, observe, that the Apostle having in the former verses
enjoined many excellent and choice duties; In this verse he betaketh himself to
prayer to God in their behalf, that God would sanctify them and enable them
thereunto, for in vain did Paul water by this Doctrinal Information, unless God
did give the increase; and withal we see, that is a true Rule, That precepts
are not a measure of our power; They declare indeed our duty, but they do not
argue our power, otherwise prayer thus to God would have been needless.

In the prayer it self we may consider, the matter it self prayed for, and that
is set down,

1. Summarily, and in the General. And then

2. Distributively, in several particulars.

The General is, That they may be sanctified wholly or throughout (...), the
Thessalonians were supposed to be sanctified already, but yet the Apostle does
here pray for their further sanctification, which does evidence, That the
Doctrine of perfection in this life, is a proud and presumptuous error; If
they had, attained to the highest pitch of sanctification already, why should
they still grow in it? Thus the Apostle does often press Gospel-duties upon
such as attain to them already, but because they have not perfection, therefore
they are to be urged forward: Thus the Apostle writing to those that were
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. says, We pray you be reconciled to God; So to the
Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new
man, etc. He speaks as if the work were now to begin, as if they had not as
yet been partakers of this new creature; Not but that they were so, only there
was much behind still to be perfected, much leaven was to be purged out, they
were still imperfect, and therefore are to forget what is behind, pressing
forward to the mark.

In the second place, you have the Distribution of this whole in its parts;
This Sanctification is to be exercised in a threefold subject, your Spirit,
Soul and Body; It is not Sanctification simply he prays for, but growing and
increasing, that it be (...), as in the Original, that it have all, that the
lot ((...) is a lot) what the condition of them does require, what holiness is
the spirits portion, the souls condition to have, that they are to partake of,
but because this will never be gradually perfect in this life, though
integrally it is, therefore he says (...), without blame; Though the godly are
not preserved without sin, yet they may without falls, such as may make them
notoriously culpable and faulty before men, but because it is not enough for a
time to be preserved, and then afterward to be left to our selves, for then we
should quickly lick up our old vomit again, he therefore adds, that this
preservation should be even to the coming of Christ.

Now that which I intend chiefly out of these words, is the Subject to be
sanctified, and that not the two former ( viz.) Spirit and Soul, of whose
uncleanness we have largely treated already, but of the Body, which is last of
all; Only it is necessary to speak a little to the explication of these three
parts of man, how they differ, for commonly when the Scripture speaks of man
it enumerateth but two parts, the Soul and the Body, as Eccles. 12. 7. and in
the creation of man, we have only two parts instanced in, which are his Soul
and his Body; Because of this there have been various conjectures upon this
place, for some have hence made three parts of man, his Body, his Soul, which
they make to be the sensitive part of man, and his Spirit, which they make to
be some part (as it were) flowing from the essence of God, and this they
acknowledge immortal, but the soul and the body (they say) are mortal; And the
ancient Heretics the Apollinarists might run to this refuge, who denied
Christ to have any rational soul, but his Divine Nature, and his sensitive soul
and body, do make upon Christ. The Manichees also affirmed two souls in men,
the one rational that was good, and of God; The other evil, and the fountain of
evil, the sensitive soul, coming from the Devil. Yea Cerda upon Tertul. (de
anima lib. 3.) says, not only Dydimus, but others of the ancients did incline
to this opinion, that the Spirit was a distinct part in a man from soul and
body, which opinion Austin opposed.

Thus this Text has favored (as some think) that opinion of two souls in a
man, his rational and sensitive, not in the Manichean way, but in a
Philosophical way; and some learned men indeed have thought by holding two
distinct souls, many inconveniences would be avoided, which are maintained in
Philosophy, and also the conflict and combat that is between the flesh and the
spirit, would be better explicated. But certainly the Scripture speaks
constantly of man, as having but one soul, What will it profit a man to win
the whole world and lose his soul? not his souls, which Chrysostom used as an
argument to make man watchful to the salvation of it, saying, If thou have
lost one eye, thou have another to help thee; if one arm, another to support
thee, but if thou losest thy only soul, thou have not another to be saved.

Others therefore that they may avoid this inconvenience of holding three parts
in a man, do by spirit understand the work of grace in a man; Thus the Greek
Interpreters of old, and some learned men of late, but this does not appear any
ways probable, nor will the Context runn smoothly, to make grace (as it were)
a part of a man; neither is it coherent to pray, that God would preserve our
grace, our soul and body, but rather grace in them; Therefore we take spirit
and soul for the same real substance in a man, only diversified by its several
operations. Lactantius calls it an inextrieable Question, Whether animus and
anima be the same thing in man, meaning by anima, that whereby the body is
enlivened; by animus that whereby we reason and understand, but there seems
to be no such difficulty therein, the Scripture promiscuously calling it
sometimes a soul, and sometimes a spirit. It Is called the spirit in regard of
the understanding and reason, as Ephesians 4. 23. Be renewed in the spirit of your
mind, and soul because of the affectionate part therein; so that the Apostle
does not mean two distinct parts in a man, but two distinct powers and offices
in the same soul; You have a parallel expression Heb. 4. 12. where the word of
God is said, To divide between soul and spirit, which afterward is expressed
by discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart: Thus when Mary said,
Luke 1. 46, 47. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in
God; she means the same part within her, only gives it diverse names.

This being explained, whereas we see the Apostle praying for the
sanctification of the body as well as the soul, it is plain, That it is unclean
and sinful as well as the soul, else it did not need Sanctification. From
whence observe,

That the body of a man naturally is defiled and sinful; Sanctification
extends adequately to our pollution: Seeing then it is required of man, that
his body be holy, and he is to glorify God in that as well as in his soul, and
this cannot be without the sanctification of it, it remains that our bodies
are not only mortal but sinful; And indeed under the corruptibility of them,
we do readily groan and mourn under the diseases, pains and aches of the body,
but spiritual life is required to be humbled for the sins of the body.

Object. And if you say, How can there be sin in the body, seeing that is not
reasonable, all sin supposes reason, now the body being void of that, it
should seem that it is no more capable of sin, then bruit beasts are?

Answ. To this it is answered, That the body is called sinful, not because
sin is formally in it, for so it is in the soul, but because by it as an
instrument sin is accomplished; The subjectum quod, or of denomination of
sin, is the person man himself; The Principium quo formale, is the soul, the
mind and will; The medium or instrumentum quo is the body, not that the body is
only an instrument to the soul, for it is an essential part of man with the
soul, as is further to be showed. Thus we truly call them sinful eyes, sinful
tongues, because they do instrumentally accomplish the sinfulness of the heart;
when the Apostle prays, That they might be sanctified wholly in spirit, soul
and body, he prays for the reparation of Gods Image again; Now when that was
perfect in Adam, the spirit was immediately subject to God, the soul to the
spirit, the body to the soul; So that what the spirit thought, the soul
affected, and the body accomplished; but now this excellent harmony being
dissolved, as the spirit is disobedient to God, the affections to the spirit,
so also in the body to both, and thereby it becomes a co-partner with the soul
in sin, and therefore must be joined with it in eternal torments.

SECT. III.
Scripture Proof of the sinful pollution of the Body.
THat the very body of a man is sinful and needs sanctification, is plain
from these Texts, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness; This is
spoken to those also that are regenerated, none is perfect, they must be
perfecting; As Apelles, when he drew his line would write faciebat in the
Imperfect tense, not fecit, as if he had finished it, he would be still making
it more exact; so should we be in our best holy duties, Amabam not amavi,
credebane, not credidi, there remains a further complement and fullness to be
added to our best graces; Now this perfection is by cleansing of the flesh and
spirit, that is the body and the soul. It is a great error among some Papists,
that they hold the spirit and mind of a man free from original contagion, and
therefore confine it only to the inferior bodily parts, but that has
sufficiently been confuted, yet we deny not but the bodily part of man is
likewise greatly contaminated, and like an impure vessel defiles whatsoever
comes into it. The uncleanness of the body appears also from that command
Romans 12. 1. where the Apostle enjoyneth, that we should present our bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable; So that whatsoever we do by our body it
is to be holy and acceptable unto God: Now this exhortation was needless, if we
did not naturally offer up our bodies a sacrifice to sin, and to the Devil:
For merely a natural man serves sin and the Devil with all the parts of his
body: Therefore the Apostle speaking to persons converted, Romans 7. 19. says,
As ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, so now
yield your members servants to righteousness; Thy eye was once the Devils and
sins, thy tongue was, thy ear was, by all these sin was constantly
committed, so now have a sanctified body, an holy eye, a godly ear, an heavenly
tongue, a pure body; And indeed we need not run for Texts of Scripture,
experience does abundantly confirm the preparedness and readiness of the body
to all suitable and pleasing iniquity; Consider likewise that pregnant place,
Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a pure heart in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water; As the heart must be cleansed from all sins, that our consciences
may condemn us for, so our bodies likewise must be washed with pure water; it
is an allusive expression to the legal custom, which was for all before they
drew nigh to the service of God, to sprinkle themselves with pure water, to
take off the legal uncleanness of the body; And thus we must still in a
spiritual way, that so the body may be fitted for Gods service: As it is said
of Christ, Heb. 10. 5. A body thou have prepared for me, because the Spirit of
God did so purify that corpulent mass, of which Christ's body was made, that
being without all sin, he was thereby fitted for the work of a Mediator; For
as for the Socinian Interpretation, who would apply it to Christ's body, made
immortal and glorious, as if it were to be understood of Christ entering into
Heaven, the Context does evidently confute it, that which the Apostle,
following the Septuaginnt in the original, calls, Preparing the body, out of
which it is alleged, Ps. 40. 6. It is, my ears have thou opened, aliuding to
the Jewish custom, who when a servant would not leave his Master, his ears were
to be boared, and so he was to continue for ever with him; The ears were
boared, because they are the instrument of hearing and obedience, and thereby
was signified, that he would diligently hearken to his Masters commands: Thus
it was with Christ, his ears were opened, his whole body prepared to do the
will of God; Now as it was thus with Christ, so in some respect it must be with
us; God must prepare and fit a body for us, till grace sanctify and polish it,
there is no readiness to any holy duty, The seeing eye, and the hearing ear,
God is said to make both, Prove. 20. 12. By these instances out of Scripture,
you see what a Leprosy of sin has spread over the body as well as the soul:
Oh that therefore we were sensible of these sinful bodies that are such clogs
to us, such burdens to us in the way to Heaven! But let us proceed to show the
sinfulness thereof in particulars.

SECT. IV.
The Sinfulness of the Body discovered in particulars.
. 1.
It is not now Instrumental and serviceable to the Soul in holy Approches to
God, but is a clog and burden.
FIrst, The Body is not now instrumental and serviceable to the soul in holy
approaches to God, but is a clog and burden; whereas to Adam abiding in the
state of innocence, the body was exceeding useful to glorify God with. The
body was as wings to the soul, or as wheels to the chariot, though weighty in
themselves, yet they do ableviate and help to motion: They are both Onera and
adjumenta, oneranda exonerant: Thus did the body to Adam's soul, but now such
is the usefulness, yet the hinderance of the body to the souls operations, that
the very Heathens have complained of it, calling it Carcer animae, and
Sepulchrum animae, the prison of the soul, the very grave of the soul, as if
the soul were buried in the body: How much more may Christianity complain of
this weight of the body, while it is to run its race to Heaven. Mezenius is
noted for a cruel fact of binding dead bodies to live men, that so by the
noisome stink of those carcasses the men tied to them might at last die a
miserable death; Truly by this may be represented original sin not fully
purged away by sanctification; The godly do complain of this body of sin, as
a noisome carcass joined to them, and with Paul cry out, Wretched men that we
are, who shall deliver us from this bondage?

. 2.
It does positively affect and defile the Soul.
SEcondly, The bodies sinfulness does not only appear thus privatively, in
being not subservient and helpful to the soul, But it does also positively
affect and defile the soul; not by way of any phisical contact, for so a body
cannot work upon a spirit, but by way of sympathy; for seeing the soul and body
are two constituent part essentially of man, and the soul does inform the body
by an immediate union, hence it is that there is a mutual fellowship one with
another, there is a mutual and reciprocal acting (as it were) upon one another;
the soul greatly affected does make a great change upon the body, and the body
greatly distempered does also make a wonderful change upon the mind, and if
thereby man fall into madness and distractions, why not also into sin and
pollutions of the mind: Thus the corrupt soul makes the body more vile and the
corrupt body makes the soul more sinful, and so they do advance sin in a
mutual circle of causality; Even as vapors cause clouds, and clouds again
dislolving do make vapors; Thy sinful soul makes thy body more wicked, and thy
sinful body heightens the impiety of thy soul.

. 3.
A man acts more according to the body and the inclinations thereof, then the
mind with the Dictates thereof.
THirdly, Herein is the pollution of the body manifested, In that a man does
act more according to the body and the inclinations thereof, then the mind with
the dictates thereof; He is body rather then soul, for whereas in man's
Creation, the soul had the dominion and the body was made only for the use of
the soul, now this order is inverted by original sin, the body prevails
over the soul, and the soul is enslaved to the propensities thereof; Even
Aristotle said, that homo was magis sensus quam intellectus, more sense then
understanding, and so more corporeal then spiritual; man is compounded of two
parts, which do in their nature extraemly differ from each other; the body that
is of dust and vile matter, and such materials God would have man formed of
even at first, he did not make man's body of some admirable, quintessential
matter, as Philosophers say the heavens are made of, but of that which was most
vile and contemptible, to teach man humility, even in his very original and
most absolute, estate; now in being consistent thus of a body, he does partake
with beasts and agrees with them; But the other part of man, is spiritual
immaterial and immortal substance breathed at first into Adam by God himself,
and herein he does agree with Angels: According to these two constituent
principles a man does act, either according to the soul or the body. In the
state of integrity his soul was predominant, he was like an Angel in this
particular, but now since man is fallen, his body is principal and chief, and
thereupon is become like the bruit bea^^, living and walking according to the
inclinations and temptations of the body; This the Psalmist observed, Psalm. 49.
12. Man being. in honor abides not, he is like the beasts that perish; And
verse.20. man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish; Here you see, that though a man be exalted to never so much glory and
dignity in the world, yet if he understand not, if he does not live according
to the true principles of reason and grace, he is but like a beast, not only in
that he perishes like a beast, but also in that he lives and walks like
one; Hence it is that the Scripture does so often compare wicked men to beasts,
to the Ass, to the Wolf, to the Dog and Swina, because they fall from the
principles of a rational soul, and become like them in their operations: Thus
evil men are said, 2 Timothy 2. 26. To be taken captive by the Devil at his will,
or (as in the Greek) taken alive; As the hunter does drive wild beasts into his
nets and so takes them alive; Thus are wicked men brought (as it were)
willingly into the Devils hands and are tame under him; and if so be the (...),
his will be referred to the Devil (as some do) then it shows in what willing
subjection they are in to Satan's lusts, but because it is not (...), but (...),
it therefore relates rather to the remote antecedent which is God, implying
that it is by Gods just judgment, that man is thus become a miserable slave,
and does the Devils drudgery, even as we make beasts do our work. And thus it
is with all men since the fall, they are not worthly the name of a man,
therefore the whole body of wicked men are compared to the Serpents seed, as if
they were the offspring of such a poisonous creature rather then of man; yea
does not experience confirm this, take men without the work of grace, either
internally sanctifying of them, or externally restraining of them; take them as
left to their own natural principles, and having no more to walk by, what do
you perceive in them more then a beast? Indeed their body is still upright, and
so they differ from them, but in their life and manners they are conformable
unto them; Oh that men would consider and lay this to heart, to be affected
with this original sin that has thus degraded us even from the honor (as it
were) of a man! There does not appear in us the actings and workings of a
rational soul, we are as our body, and the inclinations thereof do carry us
away.

. 4.
The Body by original Sin is made a Tempter, and a Seducer.
FOurthly, The body by original sin, is made a tempter, and a seducer, it
does administer daily matter and occasion to sin; As the Devil is a tempter
without, so the body is the tempter within; we are incited and drawn away to
many bodily sins from the temptations thereof, hence we read in the Scripture
that the word flesh is so often put for the sinful part of a man, and spirit
for the regenerate part, and why is it called flesh, but because it is so
intimately adhering to the body, and by the body so much iniquity and
sinfulness is expressed: Thus sin is called our flesh, as if it were no
longer a quality polluting of us, but our very bones and corporeal substance;
There are several bodily sins which are bred (as it were) in this noisome
pudddle of the body, as drunkenness, this is a bodily sin, and where this
vice is accustomed unto, how greatly does the body crave and importune for the
accomplishing of it? this makes repentance of it, and a through reformation so
difficult, because it is now soaked (as it were) in the body; that as you see
it is with the food we eat, while in the mouth or stomach it is with some ease
exonerated, but when digested and by nourishment turned into the very parts of
the body, then it cannot be separated: Thus when sins come to be incorporated
into thee, when thy body is habituated to any vice, it requires much prayer
and agony, much humiliation and supplication, ere such a lust can be
disposessed. Oh then bewail thy body, that is thus become an enemy to the soul,
that is like a furnace sending forth continual sparks of fire: That as the tree
by the moisture and softness thereof does cause worms to breed in it which do
at last destroy it. Thus out of thy body arise such lusts that will at last be
thy eternal perdition: As drunkenness so uncleanness, this is also a lust of
the body, this sin arises from it, and although that be very true which the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 18. That fornication and such uncleanness they are
against the body, because the body is to be kept holy and pure it being the
temple of the Holy Ghost: where a man is sanctified, yet take it as corrupted
and polluted, so these lusts are very suitable and consonant to it; who can
think then, that the body is such as at first Creation, such a ready instrument
to much bodily wickedness, yea a tempter and a seducer? This is the Dalilah
that does so often plunge us into soul sins, there was no root of bitterness
in man's body at first, but as it was with the ground, when cursed for man's
sin, then it did naturally and of it self bring forth weeds and thorns, so
does the body thus defiled, it is now the continual nourisher, and fomenter of
vice, we damn our souls to please our bodies, we are become slaves to our
bodily pleasures and delights, though we know they are to the eternal perdition
both of soul and body at last; nourish it we must, provide for it we must, yet
we cannot nourish that, but sin also is thereby strengthened; Hence you have
that holy Apostle himself much afraid of his body, that it may not rise up in
rebellion against the work of grace, 1 Cor. 9. 27. he uses two emphatical
words to this purpose (...), I keep under my body, an allusion to those who did
fight for masteries by way of exercise; so that when one did beat the other
black and blue about the face ((...)) is the countenance, and ((...)) are those
marks upon the face; Hence Hysichius rendereth (...), an humiliation of the
body) this was (...) (not to speak of those who read it (...).) Corinth was
well acquainted with these exercises of the body, and although there were five
kinds of them, yet the Apostle instanceth in two only ( viz.) of racers and of
wrestlers, as being most suitable to his purpose. Now by this Metaphor the
Apostle would teach us, what an enemy and adversary the body is to the soul,
what snares it lays for us, what great danger may arise to us from it alone;
He does not name his fighting with the world and the Devil, though these be
potent enemies, but the body only, because these adversaries cannot do us any
hurt, till this domestical enemy and home-adversary do betray us; and as it
signifies, that the body is an enemy, so it declares also with what austerity
and mortification we are to observe our bodies, for they are like our beasts,
if we take not their provender from them, they will quickly grow too unruly, as
is implied in the next word. It is true, the Apostle does not say, I kill my
body, nor I mutilate my body, for that had been unlawful; neither does this
Text give any encouragement to those Popish Penances and Discipline they use to
their bodies (although their learned men think this place alone to be enough to
justify their flagellations, their whippings and scourgings of the body) but
commands such an abstinence about our bodies, that thereby they may be the more
prepared and useful for any spiritual duty, for such who live in bodily
excess, they make their bodies a very noisome sink or dunghill to the soul;
Hence the word is to be understood metaphorically, as Luke 18. 5. where it is
applied to the importunate widow that troubled the Judge: And although the
Apostle by the body does chiefly mean the carnal and sinful part of a man, yet
he names the body, because that, if not diligently watched unto and observed,
will quickly produce many carnal lusts; The other Greek word is (...), I bring
it into subjection; by this is denoted, That the body is like some rebellious
and stubborn servant, or some pampered and untuly horse, which with much art
and strength must be brought under: Thus also the body is, it is unruly and
masterfull, it will prevail over the soul, and even overcome the workings of
grace, if we do not carefully attend: As in deep mines there do sometimes arise
such foggy vapors that put their light out who are digging there, and so
endanger them if they do not diligently observe them: Lusts then and sins lie
in the body (as it were) like fire in the slint, any temptation will draw them
out: It was the speech of one, who (though sick) yet would not have the
temptation come nigh him, saying, Auferte ignem adhuc enim paleas habeo; Take
away the fire, for I have yet chaff within me: Thus if Paul be afraid of his
body, if he fear himself lest temptations arise from thence, what should we do?
if the Ram fear so, what should the Lamb do? as Austin upon this point; If
the green tree thus fear burning, what should the dry one do? Though bodily
sins are very many in number, so that it would be too tedious to reckon up
all, yet I must not pass by one more, which the Apostle is so large in, and
that is the sinfulness of the tongue, that is one part of the body, yet the
Apostle says, a world of evil is in that, how many worlds of evil are then in
the whole man? James 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. The Apostle from his former council given,
that they should not be many masters, that is, as some expound it, and that
most probable, Do not affect to produce new opinions, and so to create many
Disciples to follow you, as if you only found out this or that Doctrine; (Like
that of our Savior, Matthew. 23. 10. And be ye not called Masters, for one is
your Master even Christ,) and that they must depend upon your authority only;
From this council (I say) he does occasionally declare the evil and general
wickedness of the tongue, because where there are contrary masters, and they
hold contrary opinions, commonly these are maintained by them with much pride
and arrogance, with bitter censuring and condemning of one another: Therefore
the Apostle does fully inform us, what an instrument of evil the tongue is,
that it sets on fire the course of nature; It is from the tongue that
houses, Towns, Cities, yea the whole world is set into combustion, and no
wonder, for that is set on fire from Hell, that is, from the Devil, who by the
corruption of man does now reign and rule in him; yea it is so full of deadly
poison, and such an unruly evil, that no man can tame it; From which expression
Austin did well gather the necessity of Gods grace, for the tongue only is so
ready to evil one way or other, that without Gods grace it cannot be tamed, and
though nature has given teeth, and lips, as so many bars to keep in the
tongue, yet grace only must over rule it: As then the Physician by looking on
the tongue does discover the heat and disease of the body within, so by thy
tongue, thy passionate tongue, thy unruly tongue, thy raging tongue, original
sin which is in the whole man, is notoriously manifested; How quickly is the
poison in the heart emptied into the tongue? Neither may you object, saying,
That drunkenness, adultery, and evil bitter words are actual sins, and what
is this to original? Yes, very much, as the fruit to the root, as the streams
to the fountain; For were not the body thus originally polluted with the soul,
the fruit would be then answerable to a pure and perfect root; And well may we
discourse after this manner, seeing we have the Apostle a President herein; for
Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. having asserted both Jew and Gentile to be under sin,
so that there is not one good of all mankind by nature; he demonstrateth this
both by the soul-sinfulness and the body sinfulness, and that by actual
impieties, Their throat is an open sepulcher, the poison of Asps is under their
lips, their feet are swift to shed blood: Thus it is plain, that original sin
lying latent in the heart of a man, is discovered by the actual impieties of
the body, and all the parts of the body are one way or other executive of the
fruit of this sin.

. 5.
It does objectively occasion much sin to the Soul.
FIfthly, The body is not only a tempter thus to sin, and so as Saul purposed
about Michal, is become a snare to us, a worse evil then is in that
imprecation, Let their table become a snare to them, for our body, which is so
dear and so intimate, that is also become a snare, But then objectively it does
occasion much sin to the soul. In the former particular our bodies had some
kind of efficiency and working in those sins, but here it is passive (as it
were) an object that does allure and draw out the soul inordinately to it, so
that we mind the body, look to the body, provide for the body more than the
soul; so that whereas the soul is far more excellent and worthy than the
body; so that our thoughts and studies should be infinitely more zealous to
save that then the body, yet till grace does sanctify and life us up to the
enjoyment of God, who does not look after his body more than his soul, which
yet is, as if (says Chrysostom) a man should look to his house to see that be
repaired, and that be in good order, but neglect his own self: The soul that is
properly a man, the body is but his house, and a vile one also, is an house of
clay; it is but a garment to the soul, and a ragged tottered one. Now it is
good to take notice in what particulars our bodies are thus objectively a cause
of sin to us. And

First, It is evident in that diligent and thoughtfull way of car we have about
the feeding and clothing of it. Does not our Savior even to his very
Disciples, prohibit this perplexing care, Matthew. 6. 25. Take no thought for
your life what ye shall eat, nor for your body what ye shall put on; but how
faulty are we here, comparatively to our souls? we that have so many thoughts
to provide for the body, how few have we about the soul? Is not the body well
fed, when the soul is starved? Is not the body well clothed, when the soul is
naked? How justly may thy soul cry out murder, murder, for thou art destroying
and damning that every day? Will not thy soul witness against thee at the day
of judgment, the body was taken care for, the body was looked to, but I was
neglected? Will it not cry out in hell, Oh if I had been as diligently attended
unto, as the body, I had not been roaring in these eternal torments.

The second particular, wherein the body does objectively and occasionally
tempt the soul to sin, is about the adorning and trimming of it, not only the
care to provide for it, but the curiosity to adorn it does provoke the soul to
much sinni. And whereas our very garments should put us in constant mind of our
original pollution (for there was no shame uponnakedness till that first
transgression) and thereby greatly humble us; we now grow proud and vain from
the very effect of the first disobedience: Every morning we put on our
garments, we should remember our original sin; The body before sin was not
exposed to any danger by cold and other damages, neither was the nakedness
thereof any cause of blushing, but all this and more also is the fruit of the
first sin, and if so, how inexcusable is it, to be curious and diligent in
trimming up, and adorning our bodies by those very garments, the thoughts
whereof should greatly debase us, but this is not all; The great attendance to
the glory of the body does wholly take off from the care of the soul; How happy
were it, if persons did take as much pains to have their souls clothed with
the robes of righteousness, to have them washed and cleansed from all filth, as
they do about their bodies, one spot, one wrinkle in the garment is presently
spied out, when the soul at the same time, though full of loathsomness, is
altogether neglected, as if our souls were for our bodies, and not our bodies
for our souls. The Platonists indeed had such high thoughts of the soul, and so
low of the body, that their opinion was, Anima est homo, the soul is the man,
they made the body but a mere instrument, as the Ship is to the Pilate, or
musical instruments to an Artificer; This is not true in Philosophy, though in
a moral sense it may have some affinity with truth, but if we do regard the
affections and actions of all by nature, we may rather say, The body (...) man;
Yea the Apostle goes higher, he makes it some men's God, Phil. 3. 19. Whose
belly is their God, Why their God? Because all they look at in Religion, all
they mind is only to satisfy that. The Monks belly in Luther's time was their
god; When then a man lives his natural, civil and religious life only to have
his belly satisfied, this man makes his belly his god. And again, there are
persons, whose backs are their god; For never did Heathens or Papists bestow
more cost upon their Idols and Images to make them glorious, then they do on
their backs, little remembering that we came naked into the world, and that we
shall not carry any thing out with us; If this care were for soul-ornaments, if
thou did spend as much time in prayer to God and reading the Scriptures,
whereby thy soul might be made comely and beautiful, as thou do about thy
body, this would prove more comfortable; If thou did as often look into the
glass of Gods word, to find out every sin thou do commit, and to reform
it, as thou do into the material glass to behold thy countenance, and to
amend the defilements there, thou would find that the hours and day so spent
will never grieve thee, whereas upon the review of thy life spent in this
world, thou will at the day of judgment cry out of, and bewail all those
hours, all that time in unnecessary adorning of the body; The Apostle gives an
excellent exhortation, 1 Pet. 3. 3, Whose adorning let it not be of plating the
hair, or of wearing of gold -- but let it be the hidden men of the heart, in
that which is not corruptible, The Apostle does not there simply and absolutely
forbid the wearing of gold in such who by their places and calling may do it,
for Isaac gave Reb^ccah earings of gold; but he speaks comparatively, rather
look to the adorning of the soul, then of the body, spend more time about one
then the other. It is a known History of that Pambo, who seeing a woman very
industriously trimming her self to please that man with whom she intended
naughtiness, wept thereupon, because he could not be as careful to dress up
his soul in such a posture as to please God: Oh then look to thy body
hereafter; Let it not steal so much time from thee, as thereby to neglect thy
soul, and to lose those opportunities thou may have of humbling thy self
before God!

Thirdly, The body does objectively draw out sin from the soul, In that the
fear of any danger to that, especially the death thereof, will make us damn
our souls and greatly offend God, which does plainly discover, that our bodies
are more to us, then God or heaven, or our souls are: Therefore we have our
Savior pressing his Disciples against this fear, if fear about hurt to the
body may ensnare the godly, and keep them from their duty, no wonder if it
totally prevail with the natural man. Mat. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4. I say to you may
friends, fear not them which can kill the body only but fear him who can cast
both body and soul into hell; But what Apostacies, what sad perfidiousness in
religion has this love to the body caused? the inordinate fear of the death
thereof has made many men wound and damn their souls: Times then of dangers
and persecutions do abundantly discover how inordinate men are in their love to
their bodies, looking upon bodily death worse then eternal damnation in hell;
although our Savior has spoken so expressly, What will it profit a man to gain
the whole world and lose his own soul, Mark 8. 36. It is the Scriptures command
that we should glorify God in soul and body which are Gods, our body is Gods,
that is bought with a price as well as your soul, so that it ought to be our
study how we should glorify God by our eyes, by our ears, by our tongues: It
is not enough to say thou have a good heart and an honest heart if thou have a
sinful body; now though there be many ways wherein we may glorify God by our
bodies, yet there is none so signal and eminent as when we do willingly at the
call of God give our bodies to be disgraced, tormented and killed for his sake,
then God says to thee, as he did to Abraham upon his willingness to offer up
his son Isaac, Now I know thou love me; Thus you have Paul professing, Gal.
6. 17. I bear in my body the marks of the Lords Jesus, The Greek word
signifies such marks of ignominy as they did use to their servants, or
fugitives, or evil doers, now though in the eyes of the world such were
reproachful, yet Paul gloryed in them, and therefore he gives this as a
reason why noue should trouble and molest him in the work of the Ministry this
ought to be a demonstration to them of his sincerity, and that he seeks not
himself, but Christ, hence also he says, Phil. 1. 20. Christ shall be
magnified in his body, whether by life or by death. By this it is evident that
we owe our bodies to Christ as well as our souls, and that any fear to suffer
in them for his sake argues we love our bodies more then his glory.

. 6.
The Bodies indisposition to any service of God, a Demonstration of its
original Pollution.
BUt let us proceed to another particular wherein the original pollution of the
body may be manifested, and that is by the indisposition that is in the body to
any service for God, though it may be the soul is willing and desirous. The
drowsiness, dullness and sleepiness of the body does many times cause the
soul to be very unfit for any approaches unto God; Our Savior observed this
even in his very Disciples, when he said, The Spirit is willing, but the flesh
is weak, Matthew. 26. 41. when our Savior was in those great agonies, making
earnest prayer unto God, and commanding his Disciples To watch and pray, that
they might not enter into temptation, yet they were heavy and dull, and
therefore were twice reproved for their sleep; and this sleepiness of theirs,
was at that time, when (if ever) they should have been thoroughly awakened; but
thus it falls out often, that in those duties, and at those times, when we
ought most to watch and attend, then commonly the body is most heavy and dull;
Hence is that drowsiness and sleepiness while the Word is preached, whereas
at thy meals, or at thy recreations, and in wordly businesses there is no such
dullness falls upon thee; This arises partly from the soul, and partly from
the body; The soul that is not spiritual and heavenly, therefore it does not
with delight and joy approach unto God, and then the body is like an instrument
out of tune, as earth is the most predominant element in it, so it is a clog
and a burden to the soul; Therefore bewail thy natural condition herein; Adams
body was expedite and ready, he found no indisposition in his body to serve the
Lord, but how often, even when the heart desires it, yet is thy body a weight
and trouble to thee. Nazianzene does excellently bewail this, How I am joined
to this body, I know not (says he) how at the same time I should be the Image
of God, and roll in this dirt (so he calls the body) -- It is a kind enemy, a
deceitful friend, How strange is this conjunction, Quod vereor amplector, quod
amo perhorresco? Does not God suffer this wrestling of the body with the soul
to humble us, that we may understand that we are noble or base, heavenly or
earthly, as we propend to either of these. ( Orat. de pauperum cura) This
should also make thee earnestly long for the coming of Christ, when all this
bodily sinfulness shall be done away: Oh what a blessed change will there then
be of this vile, heavy, dull and indisposed body, to an immortal, glorious and
spiritual body, then there will be no more complaints of this body of thine,
then that will cause no jarre or disturbance in the glorious service of God.

. 7.
How easily the Body is moved and stirred by the passions and affections
thereof.
FOurthly, The body is from the original defiled, in that it is easily and
readily moved and stirred by the passios and affections thereof. It cannot be
denied but that Heathens and Heretics have declamed against, and reviled the
body of man, (as appears by Tertul de Resurrect. Carmi.) as if it were an
evil substance made from some evil principle, hence it is written of Piotinus
the great Platenist, that he was ashamed his soul was in a body, and therefore
would by no means yield to have the picture of it drawn, neither would he
regard parents, or kindred, or country, because his body was from them; but we
proceed not upon these men's account we follow the Scripture Light, and by that
we see the body consociated with the soul in evil, whereof this of the passions
is not the least. The passions they are seated in the sensitive and material
part of a man, and therefore have an immediate operation upon the body, being
therefore called passions, because they make the body to suffer, they work a
corporal alteration: Hence anger is defined from its effect, an ebullition or
bubling forth of blood about the heart; and thus grief, because it is so
immediately seated in the body, is therefore said to be rottenness to the
bones, and it is said to work death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. But it was not thus with the
body from the beginning, Adam indeed had such passions as do suppose good in
the object, such as love and delight, though they were bounded and did not
transgress their limits, but then he was not capable of those passions which
do suppose evil and hurt, as anger, fear and grief, for these would have
repugned the blessed estate he was created in; but since original sin has
made this violent breach upon the whole man, the body is become the foaming and
unquiet sea, while tempests and storms blow upon it, How quickly do these
passions of love, anger, fear and grief put the whole body out of all order? So
that it is not fit to hear, to pray, to do any service for God; when we are to
pray, we are to life up our hands without wrath, 1. Tim. 6. 8. and so without
any other inordinate motion, for these make an earthquake (as it were) in the
body; These are like a rushing wind and fire, but not such as the holy Ghost
will appear in; We may therefore lie down and roll our selves upon the ground
with shame and confusion, considering what an unquiet, restless and disturbed
instrument to the soul, our body is now become, sometimes anger that set it on
fire, sometimes sorrow that is ready to drown it; Even as we read, Matthew. 17.
15. the poor lunatique person vexed with the Devil, he did ofttimes fall into
the fire, and often into the water two contrary elements, but dangerous: Thus
where passions do reign in the body; They often fall into the fire of anger, and
then as often into the water of grief and sorrow; so that thy body is molded
according to thy passion, even as iron heated appears no longer iron but
fire. Surely the experience of this should grieve thee, and break thy very
heart; How many tempests and storms do arise in thy body daily; What whirlwinds
of passions do carry thee away violently from reason and grace: Oh remember
this was not in the state of innocence, neither will it be in the state of
glory. Therefore be so far from being proud of the beauty or strength of thy
body, that the very thoughts of thy body, as now vitiated by original sin may
justly humble thee; and though Plotinus the Platonist (as you heard) was justly
to be reproved for the hatred of his body, proceeding upon evil principles, yet
Austin commends the modesty and humility of Paulinus, for when Sulpictius
Severus sent to him to have his Image or Picture, Paulinus refused it, and that
because of the pollution upon it by original sin, and that the Image of God
was now lost, -- Erube copingere quod sum, non audeo pingere quod non sum --
Durat enim mihi illud prime Adam virus paternum quo universitatem generis sui
pater praevaricatus infecit; Thus he being ashamed to give the picture of his
body, because contamnated by original pollution.

. 8.
The Body when sanctified is become no less glorious then the Temple of the
holy Ghost.
FIfthly, Even the very body of a man, when sanctified, it become no less
glorious then to be the Temple of the holy Ghost, which does demonstrate, that
till a man be regenerated it is not such a Temple, but a dunghill or stie,
wherein swinish lusts, yea and the Devils themselves do reside, as in their
proper habitation. It is necessary to take notice of several things relating to
the body, which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 6. 13, 15, 19. For having there
spoken briefly to the disputes that were then very prevalent about meats, the
using or not using of our liberty therein, he gives this remarkable reason
against too much servency in debate thereof, because God shall destroy both
belly and meats; These were corruptible things, and were but for a temporary
use, and therefore their hearts should be more attentive to those things which
are of eternal consequence, A necessary truth to moderate our spirits in
disputes of that nature. Having done this, being to aggravate the sin of
fornication, which was then generally thought either no sin, or very venial,
he brings in some arguments that being general make against any sinfulness of
the body as well as uncleanness; As 1. The body is for the Lord (that is
Christ) and the Lord for the body; our body is intentionally not for any sin,
but the Lord Christ, and he demands it as a body dedicated to him; How
powerful should this reason be to make us watch against any bodily pollution
whatsoever? 2. He argues, Know ye not that your bodies are the members of
Christ? Know ye not? He supposes that this ought to be; If it were an
undoubted received truth, That our bodies when regenerated do become members to
Christ their Head; and if so, Shall I take the members of Christ and make them
the members of an harlot? God forbid; He apprehends matter of trembling and
abomination at such a thing, and this holds of every bodily sin, Shall I take
the eye of Christ, the ear of Christ, the tongue of Christ, and employ it in
any lusts or passions? God forbid. And at the 19th verse he goes yet higher,
with a Know ye not again, that your bodies are the temple of the holy Ghost,
which is in you, and which ye have of God? This does denote an holy dedication
of the body to God; So that every sin committed in the body has a sacrilege
in it, with what purity, reverence and sobriety should we use our bodies, thus
it ought to be; but take a man in his natural condition, there is his whole
body set apart to the Devils work, all the parts thereof are to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; but when a man is regenerated there does become an intimate
and unspeakable conjunction, not only of our souls, but our bodies also with
Christ's body; so that he does say, We are bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, but the body naturally is far from any such mystical conjunction with
Christ.

Lastly, The pollution of the body from the womb is seen, in regard of the
senses of the body, which are the most noble parts thereof. They are the
windows or gates to let in all wickedness; The greatest part of our impiety
enters into the heart by the bodily senses; The subordinate end of the senses
were to be a preservation to the body, and to maintain the natural life
thereof; but the principal and chief end was to be instrumental to the
salvation of the soul: God gave us eyes and ears chiefly thereby to glorify
him, and to help forward the salvation of our selves; but how greatly are the
bodily senses fallen from this principal end, Rev. 2. 7. and in many other
places we have that expression, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear; no
man has an ear to hear till God open it; and by that phrase is denoted, that
the ear is principally for this use, to hearken to what God says, and
therefore Romans 10. Faith is said to come by hearing; Thy ear is not given thee
to hear stories and merry jests, chiefly for commerce with men, but to hearken
what God out of his Word says to thee; And so for the eyes, they are not to
behold wanton objects, or to take delight in sights, but to behold the
creatures, that thereby God may be glorified; Therefore our eyes, our ears need
Gods grace to sanctify them and prepare them for any heavenly duty, Prove. 20.
12. The hearing ear and seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them.

Let the Use be even to amaze and astonish thee with the thoughts of this
universal pollution upon thee, the soul in all the parts thereof, the body in
all the members thereof; Nothing clean and pure, but all over leprous and
ulcerous, How can thou any longer delight and put confidence in thy self? Why
do thou not with Job sit abhorring of thy self, and his indeed were ulcers
of the body only, and they were a disease, but not sin, whereas thou art all
over in soul and body thus defiled, and that in a proper sinful way? Oh that
the Spirit of God would convince all of this sin! The Prophet Isaiah was to
cry, All flesh is grass, and the flo^rer thereof fades away to prepare for
Christ, but in that was chiefly comprehended, All flesh is sin, and the fruit
thereof damnation: What though this be harsh and unpleasing to flesh and blood?
What though many erroneous spirits deny it, or extenuate it, yet seeing the
Scripture is so clear and evident, with which every man that has experience of
his own heart, does also willingly concur? Believe it seriously and humble
your selves deeply, think not transient and superficial thoughts will prevail,
as the weighnness of the matter does require; If ever thy heart can be broken
and softened, let it be discovered here, rise with the thoughts of it, walk with
the thoughts of it, and leave it not, till thou find the belief thereof drive
thee out of thy self with fear and trembling, finding no rest till thou art
interessed in Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Subject of Predication; Showing that every one of Mankind (Christ
only excepted) is involved in this common sin and misery.
SECT. I.
The Text opened and vindicated.
LUKE 1. 35. Therefore also that holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall
be called the Son of God.
WE have at large (though not according to the desert thereof) described and
amplified the subject of original sin, wherein it is seated. By which it
appears, that man all over is become corrupted, both the totus homo, and the
totum hominus, the whole man, and the whole of man. The next thing to be
considered is the omnis homo, or the Subject of predication, as Divines call
it; The former being called the Subject of Inhesion.

Our work then is to show, That Christ only excepted, every one of mankind is
involved in this common sin and misery, there is none that can plead any
exemption from it; For seeing it is made the peculiar privilege of Christ to
be so born, because conceived after a miraculous manner, it therefore
necessarily follows, that all others are comprehended under this guilt;
Though you may see some men from the youth up, less vicious then others, more
ingenuous and civil then others, yet even these are by nature all over sinful;
so that there is no such thing as a natural probity and goodness, of which the
Socinians dispute, as in time is to be showed; That it is the prerogative of
Christ only to be freed not only from all actual sin, but also original and
birth-sinne is evident by this Text, which contains an answer of the Angel
Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, who with some trouble and amazement had questioned,
how she should conceive a Son, who knew not a man? The Angels answer
consists in the information of the manner, how it shall be, and the
consequent issue, and event thereof; The Manner is expressed in the efficient
cause, and his efficacy. The Efficient cause is said to be the holy Ghost, and
the power of the Highest. A person not the virtue only of God, as the Socinians
blaspheme, as appears ^n that we are baptized into the name of the holy
Ghost, who is reckoned one of the three with the Father and Son, as also by
the personal operations and characters attributed to him, which cannot be
cluded with the figure of a Proso-(...), as some endeavor: It is true, The
works of God ad extra, are common to all the three Persons, yet there is a
peculiar order and appropriation, and therefore the preparing and forming of
Christ's body out of the Virgin Mary, is peculiarly ascribed unto the holy Ghost.

The Efficacy is set down in two words, (...), which is to be understood of the
operation of the holy Ghost, not his essence, for that is every where; The like
expression, though to another purpose is Acts 1. 8.

The second word is (...), concerning which there is more difficulty; The word
in the New Testament is applied to a Cloud covering a man, with a Dative Case,
though Favorinus and Stephanus make it to have usually an Accusative, Matthew.
17. 5. Mark 9. 7. and Acts 5. 15. such an overshadowing, as they expected
virtue and efficacy thereby; So Heysichius (...). In the Old Testament by the
Septnagint it is often rendreed for defense and protection, because in these
hot Countries the shadows of trees were a great preservation against the
extreme scorchings of heat; And in this sense rather then in any other, we take
the word in the Text, that the holy Ghost should protect and defend her, not
only in the inabling of her against nature to conceive without a man, but also
against all accusations and dangers she was to be exposed unto by this means;
Thus Virgil used the word, Et magnum Reginae nomen obumbrat. Others which may
be additional to the former, render it, The holy Ghost shall fill her with
glory, therefore she is said to be highly favored; And thus also among Poets
the word is said to be used, Olympiacis umbratur tempora ramis, Stat. Some make
it to be as much as (...), as if the meaning were the holy Ghost should (as it
were) pourtray and draw the lineaments of the body Others make it an allusion
to the hen, which by covering her egg, does by the heat thereof produce a live
young one, to which also the Scripture is said to allude, Genes. 1. 2. when it
is said, The Spirit moved (or was incumbent) as the water; Thus by the power of
the holy Ghost in an unspeakable manner, the body of Christ was formed of the
mass, and fleshly substance administered by the Virgin Mary; But this we are to
take heed of, lest the mind of man should apprehend any indecent thing in this
great mystery; Therefore Smalcius the Socinian, his assertion is to be rejected
with great abomination, that feared not to affirm, That by this expression is
secretly and modestly implied the work of the holy Ghost, as supplying the
place of a man, his blasphemous and abominable expressions, I shall not relate
( Small. refut. Smigl. cap. 17, 18, 19.) We shall then keep to the first
interpretation understanding it of Help and Protection in this wonderful work.

The second particular is the consequent and event thereof, which is expressed;

1. By note of Inference.

2. The Subject. And

3. The Predicate.

The Subject is, That holy thing which shall be born of thee, (...), the
Present for the Future, though some apply it not so properly to the conceiving,
(...), so Christ is called; the Neuter gender is emphatical, for though it be
sometimes put for the Masculine, as 1 John 5. 4. yet here it is emphatical to
show the extensiveness of Christ's holiness, that he is all over holy, having
not the least spot of sin, and that not only as God, for so he is essentially
and infinitely holy, nor only by the personal Union with the Godhead, but in
his humane Nature, both originally having no natural sin in him, and
habitually and also actually, in which sense he is every way holy.

The Predicate is, He shall be called the Son of God, that is, he shall be
indeed so, and also famously and publicly declared to be so. And

Lastly, There is the note of Inference, (...) Therefore also. At this the
Socinians greatly catch, for they denying Christ to be the Son of God by
eternal generation, say, That he is called the Son of God for many other
Reasons, whereof one is gradual to another; so that he was not completely the
Son of God, till after his Resurrection, when he was endowed with that
glorious power God had given him, sitting down at the right hand of God.

Now the first reason, why Christ is called the Son of God, is (say they) not
because of any eternal generation from the Father, as if he had been God before
he was man from all eternity, but from this miraculous and wonderful
production in time; And they affirm, Nothing can be plainer, because when he
had said, The holy Ghost should over shadow her, then is added, Therefore he
should be called the Son of God. The Remonstrants they do (or at least seem
to do) hold Christ to be the Son of God by eternal generation, Apol. Confess.
c. de Trin.
and also to be called so for other causes also, as ( viz.) by this miraculous
production; And it may not be denied but Maldonate the Papist does plead for
this, as the reason in the Text, why he should be called the Son of God: So
that (says he) if Christ had been a pure man, yet by this miraculous
production, he would have been made the Son of God. But Gontzen his fellow
Jesuit does answer his reason; Zanchy also is too liberal in this point,
acknowledging that Christ is here to be called the Son of God, because of
this miraculous communication of an humane being to him. But his is no ways to
be received, for the note of inference is not from the holy Ghosts
overshadowing, as a cause of his filiation, but as from the sign; It is (I say)
an argument not from the cause, but the sign; so that the meaning is, This
extraordinary way of conceiving without a man, is a sign that he is the true
God, who was before promised by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 9. That a Virgin
should conceive, and his Name should be called Immanuel, God with us; For that
there is a respect to that Prophecy, appears plainly by Mat. 1. 23. And
indeed it must needs be so, for Christ is never called the Son of God, because
born of a woman, though in a miraculous manner, but the Son of man always;
And if this Exposition should be granted, Christ would have two filiations, one
as whereby he was made the Son of God, and another as whereby he was made the
Son of man. It is also absurd to say, Christ may be called the Son of God
for several causes, when there is one true and proper one, he that is a Son
by natural generation, cannot be by Adoption, or any other adventitious cause.

Again, That particle (...), is urged both of old and late, That also which is
born of thee, etc. implying, that he had no other being, though now he assumed
this.

Thus you have the Text vindicated, only one thing more is to be observed, the
expression used by the Angel, (...), Which shall be born of thee, does fully
demonstrate, That Christ had a body framed by the holy Ghost of the substance
of the Virgin Mary, that he had not a fantastical body, neither did he bring a
body from Heaven, and so pass through the Virgin Mary, as some of old and late
have dreamed; Therefore Marcion who denied the true body of Christ, and thereby
also his Conception and Nativity, did wholly evade this Chapter of Luke, and
would not receive it as Canonical, being called by Tertullian, Mus ponticus,
because of his corroding and gnawing out of Scripture, as he pleased, when he
saw any place make against him. The words thus explained, Observe

That Christ only is born holy, and that all the rest of mankind is polluted
with sin. It is a saying, Exceptio format regulam, if then Christ be
exempted, so that it is his peculiar privilege, then certainly all the rest
are included: As there are some, who make all men pure by nature; So some have
blasphemously vented, That Christ had original sin: Yea a Remonstrant
writes, That the humane nature of Christ had that fight and conflict in it
which is between the reason and the appetite, which we say must necessarly be
sin. The Socinians they affirm, That Christ had a holy of sin, but then by
sin they mean only infirmities and weaknesses, not that which is truly so,
for this alleging, Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 28. The true meaning whereof we shall
give anon, But with Christians we need not long to insist upon the proof of
this, That Christ was without all sin, either original or actual, typified
therein by the High Priest in the Law, who had this written upon him, Holiness
to the Lord, and therefore he is not only holy (...), but also (...), He that
sanctifies and makes us holy by his blood; And therefore the Apostle
demonstrateth his preheminency above all the Priests of the Law, That they were
to offer for their own sins as well as for the sins of the people, but so
it was not with him, if he had had sin in him, he could not have been our
Savior, but he would have needed a Savior himself; yea Dan. 9. 24. he is
called Sanctum sanctorum, the Holy of holies, or most holy: And to this truth
the Scripture speaks clearly, not only when it says, That be knew no sin,
and that no guile was found in his mouth, which happily might be thought to be
limited only to actual sin, (but also as to the original and radical evil of
man's nature,) that though he be a man of like nature with us, yet sin is
still exempted, Romans 8. 3. He sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, not in the likeness of the flesh, for he had our true flesh upon him,
but in the likeness of sinful flesh, he had not the sin of our nature,
though he had the nature it self: As the brazen Serpent was like a Serpent, but
it had not the poison and venom of a Serpent; And certainly speaking this as
the peculiar commendation of the Son of God sent into the world, it plainly
evidenceth that all other are indeed sinful flesh, and not only in the
likeness of it; Now he is said to be in the likeness of sinful flesh, because
he was subject to misery and death, which is the reward due to sinners; We have
likewise a comfortable place, Heb. 4. 15. for Christ's holiness is the
foundation of all our consolation; This is that which we must rest upon under
the accusation of the Law, under the strict demands of justice, when God shall
require, that righteousness we once had or call for that purity, which the Law
does command, our support is this, though we have not a perfect holiness, yet
Christ our High Priest and Surety has; and to this end is that place, when the
Apostle had showed, we had an High Priest who was touched compassionately with
a sense and feeling of all our infirmities, and that he was tempted in all
things like unto us, he adds, but without sin; That temptation is not meant
of enticing to sin, but it is as much as exercise and affliction, he was
subject unto the common miseries of man's nature; yea the Apostle means more,
not only the substance of man's nature, but the affections and qualities
thereof, he had grief and fear upon him, only all these were without sin;
And this is to be our comfort, that in all the miseries, all the oppositions he
conflicted with; yea in all those soul-affections and agonies, even when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me? yet still there was no
sin, now all this was for us, we needed a Savior that could in an holy
manner work out our redemption for us; So that it is not our inherent holiness,
but Christ's holiness that we must trust to, when we have to do with God. We
have the Apostle also again considering this property of our High Priest,
because it is so useful, Heb. 7. 26. It behoved us to have such an
High Priest, who is holy, harmless, undefiled separate from sinners, How many
glorious properties are here? The Socinians (Schlitingius in locum.) would
apply this to Christ's condition in Heaven, his immortality and glory there,
expounding this holiness and harmlesness not in respect of grace inherent, but
freedom from infirmities and miseries, because it is added, Made higher then
the Heavens; But these properties do belong to him while on earth, with
relation to what he shall have hereafter, for that shows Christ is above
Angels, and that no Angel could be our Mediator; Now those several properties
in Christ signify the same thing, only the last is very emphatical, Separate
from sinners, not that he was not among sinners, while he was in the world, but
this shows, that he was segregated, or divided from all men in respect of the
sin of their natures, though he communicated with them in their natures; and
therefore, though happily some Highpriests, as Aaron might be holy and
unblameable, yet none of them was separate from sinners. These places may
abundantly confirm this fundamental Article, That Christ only was pure from
original sin, and that all those who deny original sin, make Christ to have
no privilege in this respect, but that we are all alike, pure in respect of
nature; Well then, How shall we understand those places, Heb. 7. 27. where it
is said, Christ needed not to sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for
the peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up himself? The Socinian
Expositor Sci^laingius makes this to relate to both the particulars going
before, He offered up himself once for his own sins, and for the people, and
at the first sight it would seem so. But you must know that the later clause (
viz.) This he did once, does relate to the last passage only, He once offered
himself for the sins of the people, for if it should be connected with the
other passage, it would be contradictory to the Apostles scope, which is to
show, that he was separate from sinners, and therefore had no cause to offer
for any of his own. The other Text is, Heb. 9. 28. where it is said, Christ
shall appear the second time without sin, which might seem to imply, that he
had sin in the first coming; but the Text does not speak of any sin of his
own inherent in him, but of ours which was laid upon him, as the Apostle says,
He who knew no sin became sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. And indeed to say with the
Socinian, That Christ offered for his own sins, that is, his bodily
infirmities, is a most absurd expression, for all Sacrifices were for sin
properly so, or legally, and in a typical sense, not for what was a mere
affliction or bodily misery; So that from these things we may undoubtedly
conclude, That Christ and Christ only of all mankind, is not polluted with this
original contagion.

Let the Use then be to humble every one under this truth, thou hear none is
free; Therefore let every one say, I am the man that am by nature the child of
wrath; I am the man that was conceived and born in iniquity; This particular
appropriation should astonish and amaze thee; In thy breast has the spawn of
all evil, there is a fountain of all impiety; What miserable objects are those
persons who have cancers and wolves breeding in their breasts, that live to see
themselves dead (as it were) that do behold themselves as so many carkases, yet
thy condition is far more miserable, who have this original sin consuming
soul and body also; Think not that any greatness of birth or nobility does
deliver thee from this universal pollution, as sure as thou art a man so surely
a polluted and sinful one.

SECT. II.
CHrist (we heard) had this peculiar prerogative alone to be the holy one, the
contrary in the Text is true of every one born in a natural way; To every
mother, we may say, that unholy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the child of the Devil, for it is by nature the child of wrath, only it
may seem difficult to give the reason why he is exempted; for seeing he is a
man ejusdem speciei of the same nature with us, and though he had his humane
nature in an extraordinary manner by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, yet
that does not hinder but he is a man as well as we are: Even as Adam was made a
man after a different manner from his posterity, they by generation but he by
wonderful production out of the earth in respect of his body, yet we are men
of the same kind with him; seeing then Christ was a man though he had a
different original from us, will not that necessarily involve him in Adam's
sin? And if it be said that the power of the Holy Ghost sanctified that
corpulent mass of which Christ's body did consist, that may happily free him
from original inherent sin, but how can it from original imputed sin? Must
not Christ be said to sin in Adam though he had no inherent defilement
because he was a man? yea the Scripture does not only make him a man, but
calls him the seed of David and of Abraham, that he came out of their loins,
and which is more, Luke reckoning the genealogy of Christ by his humane nature
does carry it up to Adam making him the son of Adam, and if the son of Adam how
could he not but sin in Adam by imputation, though he had none by inhesion.
This consideration has so much strength, that Bellarmine though he is
laborious to prove that the Virgin Mary was exempted from original inherent
sin, that she had an immaculate conception, yet be confesses she had
original imputed sin that she sinned in Adam, because she was in Adam.

To answer then this Objection about Christ. The Arminians (as you heard) glory
in their invention of Arminius, as if he only had found out the true answer to
this, and not the Reformed Divines; The reason (says he) of Christ's immunity
from all sin by Adam, was because Christ had his being not by virtue of that
original blessing, Increase and multiply, but by a special promise made after
Adam's fall; so that Christ's being is not supposed till Adam had fallen, and
then upon a special promise ( viz.) The seed of the woman to bruise the head of
the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. Christ is to become man; Thus Christ could not be any
way included in him. This has some truth in it though the answer be not every
way cogent; for Isaac was born (as we argued formerly) by a special promise,
there being no possibility for his existence in a natural way, yet he was born
in original sin; and although to me it seems most consonant to Scripture,
that Christ would not have been made man, unless Adam had fallen, because the
end of his coming into the flesh is said to be a Savior and a Redeemer; yet
there are men of great learning that hold, Christ would have been made man
howsoever, though Adam had stood, and to such this reason would be of no great
validity. But it must be confessed, that Christ could not be included in Adam,
for the Scripture makes him a public person, and head to believers as Adam
was to all men; hence he is called the second Adam, so that Christ was a
public person and head as well as Adam, and one public person especially in
an opposite way could not be represented by another; Though this be so, yet we
shall adhere to the Answer that is commonly given by Reformed Divines, That
Christ therefore was free from sin, because conceived in that miraculous
manner, and though he had his being in respect of his corpulent substance from
the Virgin Mary, yet this was materially only, not by way of efficiency, and
any active disposition; so that Christ could not be said by imputation to be in
Adam, seeing there was no efficient disposition in Adam's posterity to cause
his humane being. That is justly rejected as a fond conceit of Galatinus and
others, who that they might maintain the flesh of Christ to be free from sin,
as well in himself as parents, affirm, That God did in Adam design and separate
as it were some part of his substance, that it might be preserved from the law
of sin, and that this was successively transmitted even to the Virgin Mary,
that so of it Christ's more pure body might be formed; of which absurdity see
Ferrins Sckolastic. orthodox spec. cap. 21.

Let us now consider this Doctrine as it is exclusive of all other of mankind,
only Christ (we say) is free, all the rest born of mankind in a natural way are
all over defiled with this native pollution. To clear this I shall proceed by
several Propositions.

First, That the only way by which original sin as inherent is communicated
to Adaems posterity is by natural generation; Not indeed by generation simply,
for that is by Gods institution, and a good thing in its kind, but by the
generation of a man that is fallen and corrupt; some few have thought that if
Adam had not fallen, Adams posterity would have been multiplied not by
generation but by some other way, which is a most irrational conceit: If then
Adams children abiding in integrity had been by generation, then thereby would
have been conveyed original righteousness, and an holy nature, as there is now
a sinful and impure nature; original sin comes then to us by generation from
sinful parents; so that if God should miraculously create some men de novo,
make children to Abraham out of stones, these would have no original sin;
neither if they should beget children would original sin be transfused to
them, because these would not be in Adam as a corrupt root; as for such a
Question, What if God should make a man or woman out of the rib, or shoulder,
or any other part of man now fallen, as Eve was at first made of a rib, whether
such a person would have original sin? It is a question of needless
curiosity, and so no Answer is to be formed to it: This is enough, That the
ordinary way and means whereby we become polluted in sin is, because we are
begotten and born of sinful parents, as David acknowledges, Psalm 51. Austin
indeed limiteth it to the libidinous disposition of mankind in begetting of
children, he seems to lay the whole cause upon that, but he is carried out
too immoderately in that point against the Pelagians; for though parents should
have no sinful actual lust, yet because they are sinful originally, this is
enough to infect their posterity; and if this were so, it would follow, That
godly parents the more sanctified and mortified they were, they would have
children less infected with original sin, then the children of those who are
grossly wicked and unclean; It is then because we are born of parents polluted
by Adam, that we also are polluted; as for that famous Question how original
sin should be communicated to the soul of a man by generation, seeing that is
created? we have already spoken to that: The sum whereof is, That though we
are to conceive of the soul, as pure, while coming from God, yet considering it
in termino, as the part of man who descended from Adam, so it is polluted, not
by any physical cause for that sin cannot have, but a moral one, which is the
first trangression of Adam; for although that has had no being these thousand
years, yet it is not requisite that a moral cause should exist to produce its
effect. Because then the soul in the same instance it is created, it is also
united, as a form to the compositum, which is man, Therefore it is deprived of
its primitive purity, not by any positive efficiency, but merely negatively,
God denying his image to it, because the soul is part of a man, it is
corrupted; therefore if the soul were only an assistant form not inwardly
compounding man, it would not receive pollution by generation. Hence

The second Proposition is, That the children even of holy and sanctified
persons, who have their original sin in the guilt of it quite taken away, and
in the filth and power of it much subdued, yet they beget children in original
sin, and such children are by nature the children of wrath as well as of the
most profligate and wicked men. It is usual with Papists and Lutherans to
charge upon the Calvinists, that they deny original sin in part (at least)
because they affirm, That the children of believers are holy; but herein they
do either ignorantly or maliciously calumniate, for they say no more then what
the Apostle speaks in that famous place, 1 Cor. 7. 15. Else were your
children unclean, but now are they holy; on the sense of which place I shall
not here enlarge, having insisted upon it before; The sum of which then
delivered is, That they are called holy, because of that external Covenant,
whereby God takes believers and their seed into his family, so that they have
not that uncleanness upon them which the children of Heathens have, but have a
right of admission into Church Communion; so that this outward Covenant
[holiness] may and does consist with that inherent natural pollution that they
bring with them into the world. And although parents be never so eminent in
holiness, yet their children are full of sin, and so obnoxious unto the wrath
of God; and the reason is, because they are fathers to their children, not as
godly, but as men, and original sin is the consequent of man's nature, whereas
the parents grace is a personal excellency, and so cannot be transmitted: Even
as learned parents do not conveigh learning to their children, but they are
born in ignorance as well as others; Those known similies of Augustine are full
to this purpose, A Jew that was circumcised, be begat children not circumcised,
but uncircumcised and the seed in the ground, though sewen without husks, yet
it produces corn with husks; seeing then holiness is a personal qualification
of the parent, and original sin the common consequent of man's nature
inseparable from it, no wonder if parents, who are the children of God by
grace, beget children of wrath by nature. Hence

The third Proposition is, That if any Infants should be converted even in the
womb, yet we may truly say of them, that they are by nature polluted with
sin, and deserve the wrath of God, for what they have by mere grace, does not
take away, but suppose they have sin by nature: There are two instances in
Scripture of Infants, that might be thought to be freed from original sin;
The first is of Jeremiah cap 1. 5. where the Lord says to Jeremiah, Before I
formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before then came forth out of the
womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet to the Nations. But

First, Every one may easily see this is nothing to the Prophets conception or
birth in sin, for what is said here in the Text, is attributed to Jeremiah
before any of these; so that all that could be prooved from hence would be,
that Jeremiah had no original sin, either before he was conceived or born,
and who says a man has original inherent sin before he has a being? But

Secondly, There is a twofold sanctification, the one by setting a part to an
office, and the other by making internally holy through renovation: now the
Context is clear, that this Verse speaks of the former sanctification, (
viz.) That God had from his very beginning, while in the womb, purposed and
decreed, that he should in time be a Prophet to preach to the people of Israel,
for that is expressly added, to show what kind of sanctification he means, I
ordained thee to be a Prophet to the Nations; we have two expressions like
this, one to the Prophet Isa. 49. 1, 5. which though in an eminent manner is to
be applied to Christ, yet was in some sense also true of the Prophet, The Lord
has called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention
of my name: And again, The Lord formed me from the womb to be his servant: This
is spoken of the office he was set apart unto; The other instance is, Gal. 1.
15. Paul says of himself, That God had separated him from his mothers womb,
that was not surely from original sin, for he speaks immediately before of
the sinfulness he had once been guilty of; but his meaning is, he was separated
from the womb in Gods Decree to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, though for a
long while he was a persecutor of his Church; Thus you see it is the former
sanctification the Apostle speaks of, and not the latter, and if we do
suppose that Jeremiah even in his mothers womb was then also sanctified in the
later way (for none can deny, but that even then God might renew his nature by
grace) yet that will not exclude him from sin but necessarily suppose it, for
he that needed to be made holy in the womb, it is plain he was sinful in the
womb; Ludovicus de Tena. who handles this Question about Jeremiah (lib. 2.
Isa. scrip. diffic. 12a) concludes, That by this expression is meant the
cleansing of Jeremiah from original sin in the womb of his mother, and in
debating arguments pro and con, does refuse that interpretation of the
deputation of the Prophet to his ministerial office, because otherwise here
would be no more peculiar thing promised to Jeremiah: And making an Objection
to himself from Austin, Renasci per gratiam supponit nasci per naturam, whereas
Jeremiaeh is thus sanctified before he was born, therefore we cannot understand
it of regeneration; He answers it thus, That their is a nativity in the womb,
for the person has a being before his local egress, and such a birth is enough
for regeneration; by which it appears, that if this should be interpreted of
Jeremiah's purgation from original sin, (which is not probable) it does not
incommodate us. And so we come to the second example, and that is, John the
Baptist, while in his mothers womb, of whom we read this admirable thing
recorded by the Evangelist Luke, cap. 1, 41. that when Elizabeth was saluted by
the Virgin Mary, The babe leaped in the womb, which is repeated again, v. 44.
As Soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in my ears, the babe leaped in
my womb for joy; now you must know, that this great motion of the child was not
in a mere natural way, as sometimes children may do in the womb, when the
mother is greatly affected, but it was in a divine and supernatural way, even
as Rebeckah, when her twins did strive in the womb; this was an extraordinary
prognostic caused in a supernatural way by God. And although Calvin on the
place says, That it is natural to the fruit of the womb to leap or move, when
the mother is moved with joy, yet he acknowledges that Luke does here note
some extraordinary thing, and that this leaping was by the secret motion of the
Spirit of God; which does detect the horrible impudence and slander of
Maldonate, who is not ashamed to say, That Calvin does own nothing besides what
is natural in this, for which (in derision) he calls him pius author, we see
by this, how little we may trust such men. We must then conclude even the babe
at that time was affected with joy upon the Virgin Mary's coming to his mother;
and this supposes, that the child also was filled with the Holy Ghost; yea v.
15. it is expressly said of John, That he should be filled with the holy Ghost
from the womb: But if this be granted, then it is greatly controverted, Whether
the babe did this with sense and knowledge that Christ was present; or whether
it was by the motion of the Spirit of God in the child, that knowing nothing at
all? There are probable arguments on both sides; The Lutherans they do greedily
embrace that opinion, that makes the child, while in the womb to have actual
faith and knowledge of Christ, and from thence they do peremptorily conclude,
That Infants have actual sins, and that they may have actual faith and other
graces; but this is against experience, and if we do grant, that John had such
actual knowledge of Christ, yet this was extraordinary and miraculous, and must
no more be attributed to all children, then speaking to all Asses, because
Balaam's once did. Many Authors conclude that John did rejoice with some sense
and apprehension, and for this reason he is said to be filled with the Holy
Ghost, and joy must arise from some knowledge and apprehension: neither (say
they) will it follow from hence that he did not loose this actual knowledge
afterward, but had it always while an Infant, for we see the Prophets (though
men grown up) yet had not the spirit of prophecy at all times. But come we to
our business, Let it be granted, that John had actual faith, that he was filled
with the Holy Ghost, that does not hinder, but that by nature he was a child of
wrath and full of sin; for this grace is bestowed upon him when by nature
sinful, and does no more argue he had no sin in him before, then persons
grown up have not, when the Holy Ghost was poured on them: And although it be
said, He was filled with the Holy Ghost, that does not imply, that all sin
was wholly taken out of him, no more then the Apostles and all others were
quite purged from sin, when they are said to be filled with the Holy Ghost.
Besides the Scripture (as Calvin considers well) does not say, John was
filled with the Holy Ghost in the womb, but from his mothers womb, which he
thus expounds, That John the Baptist did betimes, even from his Infancy
manifest what an excellent Prophet he was like to be, because the Spirit of God
did even then give many Demonstrations thereof, and thus (though not so
extraordinarily) God sometimes does give to some his sanctifying Spirit even
from the cradle almost, they begin betimes to put forth many excellent signs of
that grace, which will flourish more in their elder years. Timothy from a
child is said to have the knowledge of the Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.
15. And some have the fear of God planted so early in their hearts, that they
cannot know any remarkable time of their conversion, yea they cannot remember
but that always they had such a tenderness about sin, and love to good
things, yet we must not think for all this, they were not born in sin; we
must not say of them, as was said of Bonaventure for his hopefullness in his
youth, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam; No, these have by nature the same seed
of all impiety, and their younger years would have demonstrated this poison,
as well as it does in others, but the grace of God does prevent: Oh let such
Obadiah's that can say, They feared God from the youth, admire the goodness of
God to them! he might have suffered that original sin in thee, to make thee
wallow in such mire and filthy lusts, as other young persons do: Oh take heed
of thinking thou have a better nature then they, that thou have not so much
original sin in thee as others! but walk humbly, lest God sometime or other
leave thee to let thee see what is in thy heart, that all the sparks of
original sin are not put out, and then, though to thy great grief thou be
convinced there is a such a thing in thee.

SECT. III.
IT is the peculiar and incommunicable prerogative of Christ alone in respect
of his humane nature, to be exempted from original sin (as you have heard)
And therefore it is an inseparable and inevitable property following every one
of mankind: As it is said of Justification by Christ, Bond and free, Jew and
Grecian, all are out, Gal. 3. 28. So there is neither rich or poor, Christian
or Heathen, Noble or ignoble, civil or profane, male or female, but all are
one in original sin, because all are of Adam by natural generation, and
thereby original sin is propagated to all, which Doctrine is to be explicated
in more propositions. And

First, Though our natural generation from corrupted Parents, be the means by
which we all are born polluted and depraved, yet this does not exclude the
justice of God, and his righteous Decree, that from a sinful fountain shall
arise such polluted streams, from such a bitter root also bitter fruit, but
does necessarily presuppose it. So that the just judgment of God in punishing
of all mankind, for Adam's first transgression must always be acknowledged,
and we must not separate the natural propagation of sin from the sentence and
Decree of God; For if this were the only reason, that we became guilty of
Adam's sin, because in his lions, then all Adam's other sins should be made
ours, as well as that first act of disobedience in eating of the foridden
fruit, and the sins of our immediate parents in whose loins we were, should
be transmitted to us, as well as Adam's; yea happily, if this were so, then the
longer original sin has been propagated, it would still grow more evil, and
thereby men in the later age of the world become more polluted with original
sin, then men in the former age; but Cain and Abel, who were the immediate
offspring of Adam, were as deeply plunged in this native defilement, as any
are now. Therefore some learned men, though in this Controversy they do allow
the phrase of the Propagation of original sin, because commonly used, yet
would gladly have a more commodious and fit expression; Hence they do more
willingly use the word Traduction, or happily transmitting and transfusing; for
the sin is not properly propagated, but the humane nature to which original
corruption adhereth, because we have not that so properly from our parents,
though by them, as of Adam; for the reason why upon the conjunction of soul and
body an Infant is immediately defiled with sin, is not because born of such
parents, but because of Adam; and therefore though they be the cause of being a
man, yet Adam is of being a sinful man; So that as all the lines from the
circumference do equally meet in the center; Thus do all mankind in Adam, and
he that is now born, does as immediately partake of Adam's sin, as Cain did,
though so many thousand years ago born immediately of Adam; Original sin then
does not in length of time either increase or decrease, but we all have our
polluted natures, as polluted, directly from Adam, and immediately, though as
nature from our parents, and so administer the subject to which original is
applied, and so in a remote distance from our common parent; Let not then any
man think, what should we trouble our selves with Adam's sin, and complain of
him, who lived so many years ago? What is his transgression to us, who live so
many generations after him? For thou have this natural pollution, as
immediately from him, as if thou had been his immediate son, neither is thy
parents sinfulness communicated to thee, simply because thy parents, but
because Adams, who was the common parent; This rightly considered would affect
us as much as if we had lived immediately upon Adam's fall, neither would the
space of so many years since his transgression at all abate our sad and
aggravating thoughts of it.

SECT. IV.
Whether the Virgin Mary was born with Original Sin.
IT being thus the nature-sinne, Propos. 2.
and not a personal individual one, it is very absurd, either from a
preposterous admiration, or some other respect to exempt any born in a natural
way from this birth sin. In this way we find the Papists greatly offending
concerning the Virgin, out of a sinful admiration of her, thinking thereby to
honor Christ: Some of them do peremptorily conclude, That the Virgin Mary was
born without original sin, and thereupon they keep the feast of her
Immaculate and undefiled Conception: Yea some have gone so far as to say the
Virgin Mary's mother, was also without original sin; And if we proceed upon
their principles. Why should they not affirm so? For as they say, It is for the
honor of Christ to have a Mother without original sin, so it would be for
the honor of the Virgin, to have her Mother without sin likewise. Now (I
say) some of the Papists determine, That the Virgin Mary was conceived without
sin. Trithemius his great zeal and devotion in this point, is abundantly
declared by him in his Tractate of the praises of S. Anna, especially Chap. 7.
yea he is so confident in his assertion of the immaculate Conception of the
Mother of Christ, that he says, Si erramus pietas (imo Deus ipse) est in
causa; Piety, yea God himself is the cause of it. It has been a very hot
Dispute between the Deminicans and the Franciscans. Bellarmine goes a middle
way, he will not have it an Article of Faith to believe she was thus pure, but
yet he says, It is a most pious opinion, and therefore, he gives several
Arguments for it: But Estius says in Romans 5. the Scriptures and ancient
Fathers speak exclusively, that none but Christ was freed from original sin;
as if it would be an high offense in him to depart from them, though he does
not judge others. The late heretical Writer D. J. T. (as Austin would call him
if alive, for he makes every one that thinks not all mankind, except Christ,
to be born in original sin, so as the flesh of Christ and of other men should
be of equal purity, to be Detectandus Haereticus, Lib. 5. contra Julian. cap
9.) gloryeth in this; ( Vnum Necessar. cap. 6. Sect. 6.) Concerning the Dispute
between the Papists, which could never be ended upon their accounts, that he
Alexander-like has cut in pieces this Gordian-knot, Therefore he affirms,
not only her, but all her family (and why not all mankind?) were free from it:
but it is a Thrasonical boast, and withal full of falsehood, for hereby
original sin is wholly removed, made to be a mere Non ens; The Subject of the
Question is quite taken away, so that by his principles, all the Disputations
about original sin will be de non ente, as he acknowledges in some sense, a
striving about a shadow; yea, and which is the most horrible, every one shall
now be born as pure as Christ, in respect of his humane nature; There is no
difference between Christ and all the rest of mankind, as in respect of their
natural immunity from sin. His Clemens Alexandrinus would have informed him
better, when he says, Stromatum lib. 1, (...), The Word (that is, Christ) is
only without sin, for in all men it is imbred to sin, whatsoever Clemens at
other times may deliver about this original sin, here he acknowledges it,
and indeed it is easy out of the Ancients to bring contrary passages that seem
to savor opposite Doctrines; But concerning this poisonous opinion, we shall
have constant occasion to treat of. As for the Franciscans and other Popish
Writers, that plead for the Virgin Mary's purity, they can bring no Scripture,
but urge some plausible reasons, as thinking thereby to give her the more
honor, especially revelations and miracles are strongly urged in this point;
But the Scripture is to be our Rule in this matter, and there we see none
exempted. Besides the Virgin Mary calls Christ her Savior, which implies
necessarily, that she had sin, yea she had also actual sins, as might be
proved, although the Papists will not endure to hear of it; Neither does this
make to the dishonor of Christ, to be born of a mother that had sin in her,
for seeing he is separated from it, it is his greater glory that he alone is
exempted: And besides, we see that the more Christ was debased and made low
(but without sin) hereby is he the more honored as a Mediator: Hence it was
that he was born of one that was very poor and mean, not of a rich and great
person, as appears by the Sacrifice offered of two pigeons for her
purification, he was also born in a stable, laid in a manger, all which
demonstrate the lowliness of Christ's humane being; Hence the Evangelist Matthew
in recording the Genealogy of Christ, does name Thamar and Bathsheba whose
uncleanness was famous, and yet hereby there is no dishonor to Christ, because
the lower he humbled himself for our sake, the greater is his love
demonstrated; and so his glory of a Savior more exalted: This opinion of
honoring Christ in an humane way, has brought in several errors into the
Church; for it was because of this in part, that the Marcionists denied Christ
to have a true real body, they thought it ignominious to him to be born as
other children are, and so in Popery there are mavelous legends, and
wonderful miracles feigned about Christ while an Infant; The surest way then
to honor Christ is to keep close to his Word, and we see how one error
begets another; for from the opinion that she was without original sin,
they have proceeded to horrible Idolatry, attributing that which is proper to
Christ unto her, she is called the Mediatrix, she is called their hope; There
is a Roman Psaltery full of blasphemy in this kind, turning Dominus into
Domina, what is said of the Lordunto her the Lady: It is true, we do as she
foretold, acknowledge her blessed, among women; There was an high dignity
bestowed upon her in being the mother of Christ, but she was more happy in
having Christ in her heart by faith, then conceiving him bodily in her womb: It
is well observed by Cartwright in his Harmony, That whereas the parents of John
the Baptist are highly commended as righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments of the Lord, Luke 1. 6. there is nothing recorded of the holiness
of the Virgin Mary, that hereby she rather then other women had this privilege
vouchsafed to her, as if thereby the holy Ghost would prevent that horrible
Idolatry, which he foresaw would creep into the Church concerning her: As the
Papists, so the Turks they do fondly and foolishly boast of the impeccability
of their Mahomet, insomuch that one of their learned men was forced to fly for
his life, because he held Mahomet might have sinned a venial sin if he would.
( Vide Hornbeek summa. cent. de Mahumedisme.) And although they do not say,
Mahomet was born without sin, yet they have a prodigious fable concerning
him, That when he was a child of four years old, some Angels laid hold on him,
and carried him into a mountain, where they diffected him, washed his guts
clean, took out a black drop, which (they say) is in every man, as the seed of
the Devil, and all this without any grief, and by this meant he was freed from
sin. It is most dreadful to consider, what impieties and impostures are in
that Mahumetan Religion, and yet how greatly the propugners thereof have
prevailed, and that where Christian Churches were plant^^; They have also their
religious persons, which they call Nefesogli that they held are without sin,
yea that they are not born in an humane way of generation, of whose ecstasies
they do relate very stupendous things; by which we see how greatly the Devil
can prevail by bodily devotions, and such extatical raptures, as well as by
traditional superstitions; The Devil does not only by heresi and Idolatry, but
also by devotions and strange bodily raptures prevail, and enlarge his Kingdom.
But these are so fabulous they are not worth insisting on. Theodoret (as Sixtus
Senensis relates, Annot. in c. 5. Rom) speaks as if Seth, Euceh, Noah, and
such eminent men were free from original sin, as the Rabbis of Beaz, and
others, that they were without evil concupiscence: But though these had the
grace of God regenerating them, yet they were by nature full of sin; and
although when it is said, That the imaginations of man's heart were only evil
from the youth, it is said of Noah, But he was a righteous man and feared God,
and so found favor with him; This does not infer, that by nature his
imaginations were not as evil as others, but only by the grace of God he had
obtained a mighty change and translation from that natural condition.

SECT. V.
How absurd it is to exempt any from this Natural Pollution upon any ground
whatsoever.
THirdly, Original sin being thus a sin of the nature, as it is absurd to
exempt any from it upon Theological considerations, so likewise from any
Philosophical niceties; For there are some that bring forth strange and
paradoxal opinions about the nature of man, and these will not have all men
involved in Adam's sin, for there is an anonimous Author (truly nullius
nominis) has a written book De praeadomitis, his whole scope is to show, that
there were men before Adam, though the Scripture does not mention them, and he
says, A negative argument in matter of fact does not hold; There were none,
because the Scripture does not name them; no more then we can say, Melchizedech
had no father or mother indeed, because they are not mentioned, But Moses
relates what was in the beginning, and thereby does exclude any before Adam,
yea in the Scripture Adam is expressly called the first man, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
There are others, and they would from Philosophy prove, That all men are not of
the same kind, no more then birds and beasts, and therefore they did not all
come from Adam; They instance in the Antipodes, in those that are in the other
world or Hemisphere. The ancient Clement in his Epistle to the Corinthiant,
page 29. speaks of (...), worlds beyond the sea. But these all come from
Adam, for Act. 17. 26. it is expressly said, That God has made of one blend all
Nations of men that dwell on the earth; Therefore we need not matter these
fancies, no more then those that hold a world in the Moon, and men there;
Paracelsus that gloried he would reform Luther, as Luther had the Pope ( Vid^
Ludev. Crec. Syntag. cap. 28. page 811.) tells us of men found in mines, and
that there are Marini homines and Satyrs, who are capable of blessedness, and
that Christ died for them, as a certain Satyr is said to the famous Ermit
Anthony. Some also speak of men begotten in that unnatural way with beasts,
that are beasts and men, have these original sins; But we are to despise all
these niceties; Neither are fancies to be minded against the clear Doctrine of
the Scripture, wheresoever there is the nature of man in a natural way, there
the Scripture pronounces all obnoxious to this sin.

The last Proposition is, That this original sin is communicated to all
mankind, although they have not sinned after the similitude of Adam 's
transgression; For you may happily think, it is indeed just with God to punish
all such who sin like Adam, that imitate him in his wickedness; But as for
others, how does that appear becoming the righteousness and mercy of God? Now
for this we have a clear attestation, Romans 5. 14. Death reigned over them that
had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression; But what is meant
by this description is controverted. Those that leave out the negative, making
it to run affirmatively ( viz.) Who sinned after the transgression of Adam,
and also those who read it thus, Death reigned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, upon those who did not sin. As Verstius following Erasmus and
Chrysostom, are not to be regarded; neither is that Exposition to be endured of
that late Writer, with whom we have so often to do; As if the Apostle meant,
That death relatively to Adams sin had no effect further then to Moses, and
there it ceased, for this does palpably contradict the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 22.
where by Adam all are said to die. Therefore by those who sin not after the
similitude of Adams transgression; Some understand it thus ( viz.) not so
capitally and atrociously as he did, for he sinned against an express Law; but
the Apostle speaks of such, who sinned without such a declared Law, as Hos.
6. 7. They like men have transgressed (in the original) like Adam. Many
Expositors make it the proper name of Adam, hereby the Prophet aggravating
their sin, That as Adam in Paradise did voluntarily transgress Gods Law; So the
Jews in the good Land God had given them, did treacherously against him. But
Mercer rejects this, because in the Hebrew it is not C^hadam with (...)
emphatical, as it is commonly applied to Adam. There is such an expression in
Job, which some understand of Adam, Job 31. 33. where it is translated, If I
covered my transgressions as Adam, or as in the margin, After the manner of
men: This interpretation may be admitted as part; but 2. we are to understand
it more largely of all those who sin without a Law revealed; for the Apostle
had said, That sin is not imputed, viz. (to a man's conscience) where there is
no Law, men are apt to be secure in sin, when there is no Law expressly
threatening them; Now says the Apostle, let none think so, For as death so
sin was in the world before Moses his time, though there was not such severe
precepts against it; and therefore those who had not such an express command as
Adam had, yet death and sin was imputed to them; So that by this is
understood, That all those who live out of the Church, all Heathens and Pagans,
who have not the revealed will of God to walk by, even those who never heard of
Adam, and so could not imitate him in sinning are in this clause comprehended.

Lastly, By this also is declared, That all Infants, though they cannot
actually sin, yet because of original sin, death reigns over them
likewise, Though Calvin think the former sort chiefly aimed at, yet he
confesses Infants are herein included.

Thus we have finished this Text, the Doctrine whereof should make the world a
valley of tears in respect of godly humiliation, as it is indeed in respect of
miseries; As the shadow follows the body, so should holy sorrow the truth of
this point; Believe it and tremble, for it is every ones case, she out of thy
self to that Savior who delivers from original sin, as well as actual.
This is most properly the sin of the world.

CHAP. IX.
The Qualities or Adjuncts of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
The Text explained.
GENESIS 8. 21. And the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground
any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth.
I Have formerly treated on that parallel Text to this, Genesis 6. 5. but wholly
to another purpose; Though therefore this be of great affinity with the former,
yet I shall deliver altogether new matter from it.

From the twofold Subject of original sin, of Inhesion and Predication, I
proceed to the consideration of the Qualities and Adjuncts of it, and begin
with this Text, which contains a gracious promise from God never to bring
such an universal deluge, or any other general judgment upon the world for
man's sake any more.

This promise is made a consequent of Gods Reconciliation with Noah, upon whose
Sacrifice it is said, God smelled a sweet savor, speaking after the manner of
men, not that God did regard the material Sacrifice, for the smell of that must
needs be distasteful and unsavory, but because Noah did it with a pure and
holy heart, and withal chiefly, because this Sacrifice of Noah was typical of
Christ's sacrificing himself in time, by whom alone God becomes propitious; For
Christ's offering up of himself is said to be Ephesians. 5. 2. A Sacrifice to God
for a sweet smelling savor, which was chiefly in the Eucharistical Sacrifices,
not that Christ's death is compared to them only, as the Socinians would have
it, but principally and chiefly to the Expiatory Sacrifices, as appears in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, only in Christ's death, there was that which was in
Eucharistical Offerings, a sweet savor unto God, whereby he became propitious
unto mankind; God being thus graciously pleased, we have this promise of God
declared in the Text, wherein is considerable,

First, The Cause of it, and that is Gods Deceree, The Lord said in his heart,
that is an expression after the manner of men; For you must not conceive of God
as changing his mind, or altering his purposes upon better considerations, or
as if he took up a contrary resolution to that, when he intended to destroy the
world, but this is wholly spoken to our capacity; By this is meant no more then
Gods purpose and secret Decree, which yet he manifested to the comfort of Noah,
and therefore we have Moses recording of it.

Secondly, There is the object matter of this promise, and that is twofold, I
will not curse the ground, neither will I smite any more every living thing, as
I have done; God cursed the ground at first upon Adam's fall, but this is meant
of the Deluge, as appears by the other particular, for by that general flood
it is conceived the ground was made worse then before; The meaning then is,
That God will not bring any more universal judgment, not but that particular
Towns or Nations may be consumed by water or other punishments, but there shall
not be such a general one by water any more, no, nor any general punishment;
For what comfort would it have been to Noah, if that the world should be
preserved only from drowing, if it might have been destroyed any other way;
Therefore when at the Day of Judgment the whole world shall either be
destroyed or renewed by fire, that will not be so much by way of punishment to
the inhabitants, as to change its use, and to prepare for the great alteration,
that God is then to make.

Thirdly, There is the aggravation of this mercy; God will do this, Though the
imagination of man's heart be evil; This clause is to be considered, first as a
Reason, then Absolutely in it self. If as a reason, then here is the difficulty
taken notice of, how it can be made the ground why God will not destroy the
world, seeing formerly Chap. 6. 5. it is there made the only reason why he
would destroy it, can it be the motive for two contrary effects? Some therefore
do not make it a reason at all, but part only of the description of Gods
promise, he will not destroy the earth again for this sinful disposition, but
there must necessarily be some reason, either expressly or tacitly implied, for
God is here declaring his purpose to take a more gracious and merciful way,
now that he had given such a dreadful demonstration of his justice and anger
against sin already: Some then make the reason to be ab incommdo, that if God
should destroy the world, because of man's original corruption breaking forth
daily, there would never be an end, we should have floods upon floods;
Therefore as the Psalmist says, He remembers that we are but dust, he knows
our frame (Psalm. 103. 14.) therefore he will not always pour cut his wrath.
Thus (say they) it is here, and this is probable: Others make it an Argument ab
aeqno, to which Pererius inclines, as if God did hereby declare, That being
man is thus originally polluted, and incurably sinful, as to his own power,
therefore God would pity him; so that though formerly God looked upon it, as
the matter of his wrath; now as the matter of pity being sin makes us
miserable, so some think David, Psalm. 51. urges his natural corruption, as an
Argument to move God to pity him, but this is not so probable, because this
does directly contradict Gods former proceedings, when his wrath was poured out
on the world, because of this sin breaking forth into actual rebellions; I
rather therefore go with those that take the particle Ci adversatively,
Although, God would not again destroy the world, although mankind was of such a
corrupt frame; and thus it is to be taken in many places, the neglect whereof
has caused many Disputes about some Texts of Scripture, whereas the rendering
of this particle adversatively, would easily have cleared it, as might be
showed, if it were to my purpose. ( Vide Tarn. Exerc.)

In the next place we are to consider the words absolutely, and they are very
emphatical, the Heart, the Imagination, and is evil. In the former place, Chap.
6. 5. there is a greater aggravation, Every Imagination, and only evil, and all
the day long; but one supposes the other; here in this Text, in stead of
continually, or every day, as in the Original, we have From the youth, and
therefore does more palpably demonstrate the original filth or all men by
nature; Neither can the Adversaries to this Doctrine of original sin put in
the exception to this place, as they did to the former, for there they would
evade, by saying, it was spoken of those evil and wicked men, who had in a more
notorious manner corrupted all their doings; But how can they open their mouth
against this place, for God speaks this as true at that present of all
mankind by nature, when yet the great profane ones were destroyed, and Noah
with his family was preserved? So that this is a perpetual and inseparable
qualification from the nature of man, more than actual death; For Enoch and
Elijah did not actually die, yet they were born with original sin: As for
some Expositors who would limit to the time of youth, when a man is past his
Infantia and Pueritia, his infancy and childhood, arrived at his Adolescentia,
his youth, that is not to be admitted, for the word is to be applied to his
whole time since he was born; The word Nagnar does signify one cast or shut
out, and properly belongs to a new born Infant, and so does signify the
tender Infancy of a child, although we grant that it is sometimes extended to
the youth, as Genes. 37. Joseph is called Nagnar a youth, when he was seventeen
years old feeding the flock. So 1 Kings 3. sometimes it is applied to a Disciple
or Servant, because they were ordinarily young, 2 King. 9. Isa. 37. which the
Septuagint render (...), and it is applied to Christ; and therefore whereas
Acts 4. 27. it is rendered Thy holy child Jesus; Some think it better according
to the use of the word, by the Septuagint, Thy holy servant, for so Christ is
sometimes in respect of his Mediatory Office, called the servant of God. But it
is plain, that children are capable of sin before their youth, and therefore
we are not to limit it, but to expound if of their very first being in original
sin, which does vent it self actually in after years. Some make the Plural
number to be observable, they render it a pueritiis, as containing the whole
age of a man from his tender years, till he be grown up. Hence Grotius will
extend it to the very time from the womb, but then runs to his Socinian
Hyperbole, which has been sufficiently confuted. To determine the time indeed,
when Infants begin to be capable of actual sins, is very difficult, but that
is not my work here.

Now though it is said to be evil from the youth, yet that is some limitation:
It is not evil from Gods first creation of man's heart, not from its original
being, and therefore the essence of a man is not evil: So that it is an
horrible calumny of Tirinus the Jesuit upon this place, to say, That from this
Text Luther and Calvin do infer, That the heart of a man is essentially evil;
Illyricus his dotage is sufficiently disowned by them. As then the Leprosy got
into the walls of the house, and that could not be scraped off, there was no way
to get it out but by demolishing the wall, yet was not to be attributed to the
Artificer that made the wall, but to some other supervenient cause; So likewise
neither is original sin, though now so closely adhering to man's nature to be
attributed to God, who first created mankind, but to Adam's voluntary Apostasy
from God.

The Text thus explained, there are two Doctrines contained in it.

First, Original sin is an heavy and grievous sin.

Secondly, That there is a particular original sin in every one, which
breaks out into its actings betimes. From which we shall take occasion to
discourse of the equality and inequality of original sin in every man. Let us
begin with the first,

Original sin is a most grievous and heavy sin. In the Text is put an
Although upon it, God will not destroy the world, although this sin be in
man, implying, the infinite mercy of God, that is not provoked by this utterly
to cut of mankind, Hic est insiguis locus de peccato originali, etc. says
Luther on the place. This is a famous place concerning original sin, which
whosoever extenuateth (says he) like blind men in the Sun they do truly
err, and do not see what they daily do, and may have experience of. It is
from our senslesnesse and stupidity, or rather from our self-love and
pharisaical disposition that we do not more afflict our selves under the
apprehension of it, for this is the highest offense, the like whereof (said
Luther) unless in the Devils cannot be found.

SECT. II.
The Aggravaiions of Original Sin.
. 1.
Of Adam's Actual Transgression.
NOw for the aggravation of original sin, we may speak either of Adams actual
iransgression, which is our original imputed sin, or of that inherent
corruption which we have from our birth, and both do admit of great
aggravations, It is true, some Orthodox Writers do deny the imputation of
Adam's actual disobedience unto us, as Josua Placeus, who brings many
Arguments ( These. Salm. Dis. de statu hominis lapsi ante gratiam.) but my work
is not to answer them, I suppose it for granted, as a necessary truth.
Concerning Adam's sin, which is thus ours by imputation; Bellarmine makes
the Question, An sit gravissimum? Whether it was the greatest of all sins?
And he concludes, following the Schoolmen, that absolutely it is not, only
respectively, Secundum quid, in some considerations, which he mentions.
Bonaventure says, It is the greatest sin extensive not intensive. But we are
to judge of the hainousness of sin, as we see God does, who esteems of
sin without any error: Now it is certain, there was never any sin that God
punishes, as he does this; The sin indeed against the holy Ghost, in respect
of the object matter of it, and the inseparable concomitant of
unpardonablenesse is greater, as to a particular person, but this being the
sin of the common nature of mankind, does bring all under the curse of God;
So that we may on the contrary to Bellarmine say, That it is absolutely the
highest sin against God, but in some respects it is not. I shall be brief in
aggravating of that (not at all touching upon the other Question) which has
more curiosity in it, (Whether Adam's sin, or Eve's was the greatest?) then
edification: Because our proper work is to speak of original inherent sin,
yet it is good to affect our souls with the great guilt thereof, for some have
been ready to expostulate with God, Why for such a small sin (as they call
it) no more then eating the forbidden fruit, so many millions of persons, even
all the posterity of mankind should thereby be made children of wrath, and
obnoxious to eternal damnation? Does not the Pelagian opinion, that holds, it
hurts none but Adam himself, and his posterity, only if they willingly
imitate him, agree more with the goodness of God? But if we do seriously
consider, how much evil was in this one sin, which Tertullian makes to be a
breach of the whole Law of God, we will then humble our selves, and acknowledge
the just hand of God. For

First, This is hainously to be aggravated from the internal qualification of
the subject. Adam who did thus offend was made upright, created in the Image of
God; In his understanding he had a large measure of light and knowledge; For
though the Socinians would have him a mere I deot and innocent, yet it may
easily be evidenced to the contrary: The Image of God consists in the
perfection of the mind, as well as in holiness of the other parts of the soul:
Neither did El^phaz in his discourse with Job, apprehend such ignorance in
Adam, when he says, Art thou the first man was born? Wast thou made before the
hills? -- Do thou restrain wisdom to thy self? Job 15. 7 8. implying, that the
first man was made full of knowledge; If then Adam had such pure light in his
mind, this made his sin the greater, yea because of this light some have
proceeded so far as to make. Adam's sin the sin against the holy Ghost; but
I shall not affirm that; Certainly in that Adam had so great knowledge, this
made his offense the more evil; hence because there was no ignorance in his
mind, nor no passions in the sensitive part at that time to disturb him, his
sin was merely and totally voluntary, and the more the will is in a sin the
greater it is: Hence Romans 5. It is called expressly disobedience, By one man's
disobedience; Yea learned men say, That this was the proper specifical sin of
Adam, eve^ disobedience; For although disobedience be in a large sense in every
sin, yet this sin of Adams was specifically disobedience, for God gave him
a positive command merely, that thereby Adam should testify his obedience to
him. The thing in it self, was not intrinsecally evil to eat of the forbidden
fruit, it was sinful, only because it was forbidden; and by this God would
have Adam demonstrate his homage to him, but in offending, he became guilty in
a particular way of disobedience.

Secondly, If you consider Adam in his external condition; His fin is very
great, God placed him in Paradise, put him into a most happy condition, gave
him the whole world for his portion; Every thing was made for his use and
delight; now how intolerable was Adams ingratitude for so small a matter, to
rebel against God? Therefore the smalness of the matter of the sin does not
diminish but aggravate; he might the more easily have refused the temptation,
so that this unthankfulness to God must highly provoke him.

Thirdly, The sin was an aggregate sin, It had many grievous sins
ingredient into it; It was a Beelzebub sin, a big-bellied sin, full of many
sins in the womb of it; his sin was not alone in the external eating of the
forbidden fruit, but in the internal causes that made him do so; There was
unbelief, which was the foundation of all the other sinfulness, he believes
the Devil rather then God; There was pride and ambition, He desired to be like
God; There was apostasy from God, and communion with him; There was the love
of the creature more than of God, and thereby there was the hatred of God: Thus
it was unum malum in quo omnia mala, as God is unumbonum in quo omnia bona.

Lastly, (Not to insist on this, because formerly spoken to) There was the
unspeakable hurt and damage, which hereby he brought to his posterity. (Not to
mention the curse upon the ground, and every creature) The damning of all his
posterity in soul and body, it the grace of God did not interpose; It cannot be
rationally conceived, but that Adam knew he was a public person, that he was
acquainted upon what terms he stood in reference to his posterity; That the
threatening did belong to all his as well as himself, if he did eat of the
forbidden fruit. Now for Adam to be a murderer of so many souls and bodies, to
be the cause of temporal, spiritual and eternal death to all mankind, who can
acknowledge but that this sin is out of measure sinful.

. 2.
The Aggravation of Original Sin inherent in us.
OUr next work is, to consider the aggravation of original sin inherent in
us; and this is our duty to do, that so being sensible of our own contagion, we
may not flatter our selves in the power of our free will, but fly alone to
Christ, who is a Physician and Savior even to Infants, as well as grown men;
and the rather we are to be serious and diligent in this, because of all those
profane opinions which do either wholly deny it, or in a great measure
extenuate it. Some Papists make it less then a venial sin, and many of them
plead hard, that it does not deserve hell, and eternal damnation: But no wonder
this is done in Babylon, seeing in Jerusalem there are such oppugnators and
extenuators of it; us if the Welsh Pelagius had not been enough, there is now a
new English one started up, who, what with some absurd opinions from the
Socinians, some from the most Heterodox of the Papists, as Durand, Pigbius
Catharinus, etc. and many things from the old Pelagian, has stuffed his late
writings with much glory and pomp of words, especially against this original
sin; what with his Hyperbolyes and Metonymyes it is made no sin, but an
original curse, rather then original sin, (Answ. to the Letter of Rom.) so
pleasing it is to be Pigmilions, and to fall in love with our own purity,
unwilling to be shut up under sin, that the gracious mercy of God may be
alone exalted: And as the Socinians plead their reverence and zeal of honor to
the Father, while they deny the Deity of the Son; so here is pleaded much
reverence and tender regard to the Justice, Mercy and Goodness of God, much
zeal to holiness and piety, as if the Doctrine of original sin did undermine
all these; But of these cavills in time; for the present, let us not judge of
sin and the guilt thereof by humane principles, and phylosophical Arguments,
but by the Word of God. And

First, The hainousness of it does appear (as heretofore has been hinted) In
that it is not like any actual sin, that has its proper specifical guilt,
and so is opposite to one virtue only, and thereby does contaminate but one
power of the soul; but it is the universal dissolution and deordination of all
the parts of the soul. Uncleanness has the guilt of that sin only, and is
opposed to that particular grace of chastity, and so of every sin else; but
now this hereditary defilement is contrary to that original righteousness God
created man in, and as that was not one single habit of grace. but the systeme
of all; Thus original sin is not one particular sin, but the comprehension
of all; It is the sin of the mind, of the will, of the affection, of the
body, of the whole man; so that as when we would aggravate the goodness of God,
we say, all the particular respective goodnesses in the creatures are eminently
contained in God, so we may say, all the particular pollutions, and guilt which
is in respective sins is eminently contained in this; so that if there could
be a summum malum in man, (though that is impossible, because malum moris
fundatur in bono naturae) this original sin would be it: Look upon this
original sin then, as the deordination of the whole man, as that which makes
every part of thee sinful and cursed, as that which makes thee to bear the
image of a Devil, who once had the glorious and holy Image of God.

Secondly, This sin is greatly to be aggravated, Because it is the root and
cause of all actual sins. Some question, Whether all our actual sins
proceed from this fountain or no? And certainly we may conclude, that all kind
of actual sin, whether internal or external, soul sins, or body-sinnes, do
either mediately, or immediately flow from it. This is the evil treasure of the
heart, Mat. 12. 35. Hence one of the Names that original sin has, is Fomes
peccati, because that is the womb in which all sins are conceived: The
Apostle James fully confirms this, Chap. 1. 14. Every man is tempted and
drawn aside by his own lust; neither is it any wonder that many sins being in
their particular nature opposite to one another, that yet they should all come
from one common principle, seeing they all have the same generical nature of
filthiness; and the particularization of them is according to several
temptations: Even as out of the same dunghill several kinds of vermin which
are produced out of putrid matter may be brought forth; so that all the
streams of iniquity do meet in this ocean, they all come from this root, even
as all men do from Adam; Not that the most flagitious crimes are instantly
committed, but by degrees they do at last biggen into such enormities; if then
that Rule be true, That there is more in the cause then in the effect, and what
is causa causae, is, causa causati, then certainly may all our iniquities be
reduced to this as the fountain; hence David, Psalm. 51. in his humiliation for
his murder, does go up to the cause of all, even that he was born in iniquity.

Thirdly, It is to be aggravated, In the incurableness of it; for though Adam
had power to cast himself into this defiled condition, yet he had no power to
recover himself out of it; as Austin expresses it, A living man may kill
himself, but when dead he cannot recover himself to life; This (you heard) is
made part of the reason why God would not proceed to destroy the world again,
although man's corrupt heart is so corrupt, even because there was no hope that
any judgments would cure them; They would proceed still further in impieties,
all that water did not wash the Blackmore nature of man: hence it is that the
grace of God whereby we are quickened out of this death, is wholly
supernatural; It Is no wonder that they who are doting to set up the Idol of
free will, do begin to lay their foundation in this, that there is no such
thing, as this natural pravity in man; But there was no more in man to recover
him out of this original filth, then is in the Devils to restore them to their
pristine felicity: So that thy actual sins are not alone to be humbled, for
were it possible for thee to live with this sin alone, thou did need the
grace of Christ to redeem thee from this bondage.

Fourthly, Herein also it is unspeakably to be aggravated, That it takes away
all spiritual sense and feeling. It Is the spiritual death of the soul; we are
dead men by nature in respect of spiritual things, and therefore though exposed
to all the curses in the Law, yet we feel nothing, we do not tremble and cry
out for help; The Physician seeks us, not we him; grace finds us out, not we
grace; and hence it is, that we think we have no such thing as original sin
in us: Oh it is an heavy temptation to be given up unto, to think there is no
such thing as original sin, that we have no such enmity against God naturally
in our hearts! Woe be to that man, who begineth to think this thing little or
none at all! What can we pray for such a man, but that which the Prophet did
for the Syrians when they were brought into the midst of their enemies, Lord
open their eyes (says he?) which when done, they saw themselves in the midst
of their adversaries, and so looked upon themselvet but as so many dead men;
Thus if the Spirit of God by the Word make thee see the dunghill in thy heart,
the general pollution of thy soul, thou will cry out, Oh how blind was I till
now! how senseless till this time! Oh I am a damned man, an undone man, if God
do not recover by his grace! Therefore that of Austin (though formerly
mentioned can never enough be inculcated) That in their controversy with
Pelagians there is more need of prayer then syllogismes; The truth of this
Doctrine, as it is primarily discovered by the Scripture, so secondarily by the
experience of the regenerated, who (as Paul said) were alive once secure and
blessed, according to their own thoughts in the state they were in, but when
once convinced of the spirituality of the Law, and their own carnality and
contrariety thereunto, then sin becomes out of measure sinful, and they die
and are undone in their own thoughts: Therefore concerning the Writers in this
Controversy, we are not only to enquire, what acquired learning they have, but
what inspired grace; what experimental workings of Gods Spirit in the humbling
of them, and to make them renounce all their own righteousness and fullness
that Christ may be all in all: Thus Austin, who of all the Fathers has most
orthodoxly propugned this truth, so none of them discover such an experimental
conversion to God, and a gracious change upon their hearts, as he does in his
Books of Confessions; I do not detract from the piety of the other Ancients;
only it is plain, Austin discovers a more peculiar and higher degree of an
experimental knowledge of his own unworthiness, and Gods gracious power in
bringing him out of darkness into light; and no question, but the efficacy and
power of this experience made him so orthodox, and courageous in maintaining
that truth, which political and phylosophical principles did much gainsay; but
this is the woeful effect of original sin, that it takes away all power to
discover it self; and as those deseases are most dangerous which take away the
sense of them, so is original sin to be aggravated in this respect, that it
makes a man insensible of it.

Fifthly, The aggravation of this sin is seen, That it is the habitual
aversion of the soul from God, and conversion to the creature. It is true,
original sin is not an habitual acquired sin, but yet it is per modum
habitus, (as Aquinas expresses it) That is, the soul of every Infant born into
the world comes with an innate and habitual averseness to God, and what is
holy; as also a concupiscential conversion to the creature; so that the two
parts expressed in an actual sin of commission, mentioned by the Prophet
Jermiah, Chap. 2. 13. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me
the fountain of life (there is the aversio, a Creatore,) and have hewed to
themselves broken cisterns, there is the ( conversio ad creaturam) the same
has some representation in original sin; for every man by this hereditary
pollution stands with his back upon God, and his face to the creature; Even as
the child comes bodily into the world, with his face downwards and his back
upon the heavens; so it is with the soul of a man, and this makes our sin of
native pollution to be out of measure sinful, in that a man standing thus at a
distance, yea at enmity against God, can never turn his face again toward God,
but by a supervenient grace from above.

Sixthly, The great heightening of this sin is, In the deep radication of it;
It is so intimately and deeply rooted in all the powers of the soul, that while
a man is in this life, he can never be freed from it; hence it is that the
ordinary determination of the Protestant Writers, concerning original sin,
even in regenerate persons is, That it is taken away, Quoad reatum, though not
Quoad actum; There is original sin in every man living, yea in the most holy,
only it is removed from them, Quoad reatum, the guilt shall not be imputed, and
Quoad Dominum, though it be in them, yet it does not reign in them, only it is
in some degree present there, and therefore called by the same Divines,
Reliquiae peccati, which expression, though scorned by Corvinus, yet both
Scripture and some experience does justly confirm such a phrase; And although
the late Adversary against original sin ( Tail. a further Explication of the
Doct. of Orig. page 501.) does positively and magisterially according to his
custom dogmatize, that it is a contradiction to say sin remains, and the
guilt is taken away, and that in the justified no sin can be inherent; yet
herein he betrayeth his symbolizing with Papists, for all our learned
Protestants have maintained this Position against Papists, Bishops and others
distinguishing between reatus simplex, that is inseparable from sin, or the
merit of damnation, and Reatus redundans in personam, which is, when this is
imputed; There is therefore always abiding in every man, though justified,
original sin in some measure, it is the (...), The sin dwelling in us (as
the Apostle calls it, Rom 7.) and therefore in regard of the immobility and
inseperability of it from man's nature, while here on the earth, it is more to
be aggravated then all actual and habitual sins; For though in Regeneration,
there is an infusion of gracious habits, whereby the habits of sin are
expelled, yet this original depravation is not totally conquered by it. And
thus much may suffice for the aggravating of it, because something has already
been spoken to this Point.

. 3.
An Objection Answered.
THere remains one great Objection against the hainousness of this sin,

That it is wholly involuntary, and therefore we are traduced in this
particular, that we charge our sins hereby upon Adam, or God himself, freeing
our selves; Thus we accuse others, and excuse our selves, Is not this to do as
Adam, who put off all to the woman whom God had given him, so we to clear our
selves put all upon Adam's score? Therefore many Papists and others complain of
us, as aggravating it too much, whereas one of them says (Rundus Tappor, Disp.
de peccato origin.) that it is minus minimo peccato veniali, less then the
most least venial sin. But to answer this:

First, As this Doctrine about original sin is wholly by revelation, so we
are to judge of the hainousness of it according to Scripture-principles. It is
true, (as has been said formerly) the Heathens did complain of the effects of
this original sin, but they did not know the cause; so that as by the Word we
come to know that from our descendency from Adam we do contract this original
pollution, thus also by the Word we are to pass sentence about the greatness
of the sin: If the Scripture says, We are by nature the children of wrath;
If God in destroying of the world, does not simply look to actual sins, but as
they flow from such a polluted principle; If by this we are in bondage to
Satan, and are under his power, though there were no actual sins committed by
us, then let us not matter the speculations of Philosophers, nor the Political
sentences of Civil Magistrates, for by these nothing is accounted culpable, but
what is voluntary by our own personal will: Hence Austin explained that
assertion of his, when dealing against the Manichees, Vsque adeo peccatum est
voluntarium, etc. Voluntariness is so necessary to the being of a sin that it
cannot be any sin; if this be wanting in this (says he) all Laws, all
Nations, all Governors, etc. do agree: The Pelagians commended this of Austin,
and improved it against him; but in his explication of himself, he calls it
Politica sententia; This is true according to the political Laws of Governors,
and withal agrees to actual sins: But the truth about original sin merely
by revelation, we need not then regard, what Aristotle and other Philosophers
say in this matter, who as they knew nothing of the creation of Adam, so
neither of his fall; and this caution is necessary to every one that would not
be deceived in this point.

Secondly, Although in one particular respect this sin may not be so heinous
as others, yet in many other respects it does far exceed, and they are
abundantly compensative for that one consideration: It is true, This sin has
nothing of our own personal voluntariness; yea if a man should now consent to
this birth-defilement, and even rejoice, because he was born thus estranged
from God, this subsequent will would not make original sin to be a voluntary
sin unto him, for this is an actual sin committed a new by the personal will
of a sinner: But though this be granted, yet there are many other respect which
do exceedingly aggravate it, even those we have mentioned before. Hence a
learned Schoolman ( Dela Rua contra Theolog. cont. 2.) speaking of the
comparisons made by Aquinas and others of original sin with venial ones,
excuses them, saying, They must not be understood in that respect, as original
sin is a mortal one, for so it does infinitely exceed any venial one, but in
that respect, as original sin is not contracted by our own proper action, but
by Adam in whose will our wills were contained: What then, though in one
particular this sin may not be so heinous as others, yet look upon the many
other respects, wherein it does exceed all other heinous sins, and then you
will be compelled to acknowledge the weightinesse thereof.

Thirdly, The chiefest and highest aggravation of a sin, is from the
contrariety of it to the Law of God; for seeing the Apostle does define sin,
1 John 3. 4. to be (...), The transgression of the Law, then the more
irregularity there is in sin, the greater is that sin: Now this (...), it
is either habitual or actual, and if habitual sins are greater then actual,
because of the greater dissonancy to Gods Law, then must original be more then
habitual, and so greater then all sins; if then we compare original sin with
the Law we shall find it contrary to it in the highest manner that can be; For
Gods Law does not require only actual obedience, but such obedience flowing
from a pure and holy heart; and holiness in the heart is more answerable to the
Law then holiness in actions: Thus on the contrary, sin in the habitual
inclination of a man is more opposite to Gods holy Law, then the expression of
it in several actings; If then the Apostle define a sin by the contrariety of
it to Gods Law, not by knowledge or voluntariness, then where there is the
greatest obliquity and declension from this rule, though there be not so much
voluntariness, there is the greater evil; So that this respect may silence all
those cavils and disputes which are usually brought in to diminish the guilt of
this sin, still have recourse to the Law of God, and there thou will find,
that whereas actual sins are respectively against respective commands, this is
against every Law; It is against the whole Law, and therefore has as much evil
in it, in some sense, as the Law has good.

So that the Use is, To exhort every one who would have his heart deeply
affected in this point, who would be humbled greatly, because his sin is
great, to take off his thoughts from all those Philosophical or humane
arguments which are apt to lessen it; Because a Magistrate will not put a man
to death, unless where he is guilty by some voluntary personal act of his own;
do not thou therefore think it cruel and unjust with God, if he condemn for
that sin, wherein though we have not own proper will ingredient, yet by
imputation it is voluntary: But of this more when we are to justify God in
these proceedings against cavilling Sophisters.

SECT. III.
That every one by Nature has his peculiar proper Original Sin.
THe second Doctrine offers it self in the next place to be considered of,
which is,

That every one by nature has his peculiar proper original sin, which does
betimes vent it self into actual evil. For the Text speaks universally, there
is not any to be exempted. It is made a Question in the Schools, Whether there
be many, or one original sin only? Aquinas brings two Arguments for more
original sins than one; The one is from the Text according to the Vulgar
Translation, Psalm. 51. 5. where it is rendered, In sins did my mother conceive
me, in the Plural number; And then the second from Reason, because there being
many actual sins, it cannot seem rational, that one original sin should
incline to them all, seeing many times these sins flow from contrary
principle; How may it be thought this one sin should carry a man out
concupiscentially to so many contrary lusts? Therefore that this truth may be
fully demonstrated, let us consider these Propositions:

First, That such who deny any original inherent corruption, and make Adam 's
actual sin to be ours only by imputation, as Pighius and Catharinus, they
will say, That there is but one original sin, which is by imputation made
every man's; Even as by the light of one Sun, every man sees, or (as some
Philosophers say) there is one common Intelleotus agens, by which all men are
enabled to understand; So that by this opinion every man has not his peculiar
inherent defilement, but that one actual transgression by imputation, is made
the one common sin of mankind. Now although this is to be granted, That
Adam's actual sin is made ours (which Chamier, and some French Protestants
following him do dangerously deny) yet the Texts heretofore brought in this
point, do evidently convince, That every one has his peculiar native
defilement that he is born in: So that original sin, though it may be called
one in specie and proportione, yet when we come to every particular man, he
has his numerical and individual original sin in him: Although therefore
there be as many original sins in the world, as there are men and women, yet
in one man or one woman, there is but one original sin: Thus David, Psalm. 51.
5. confessed his particular birth-sinne, not that it was his case alone, not
that any other ought not say so, as well as David, but because this
consideration does most humble and affect a man, for what is it to hear that in
the general there is such a thing as original sin, unless a man make
particular application to himself, unless he bring it home to his own heart,
unless he cry out, Ah wretched and undone sinner, I, even I am the man that am
thus born in sin, even though there were no other men in the world, yet I
should be by nature the child of wrath! And truly this is one reason of our
large discoursing upon this point, that you might at last bring this coal of
fire (as it were) into your bosom to kindle there, not only to think of the
undone estate of mankind in the general, but to think this is true of thee, I
am the man of whom all this evil is spoken; Believe thy self to be such a Toad,
such a Devil; Hearken to the Word more then to these flattering and soothing
suggestions which thy own deluded heart, or corrupt teachers may obtrude upon
thee.

Secondly, That although this original sin be commonly called the sin of
the nature, yet that is not to be so understood, as if it were not also
existent in the person, and so a personal sin. Catharinus (Opusc. casu
hominis.) confesses he does not understand how original sin can be called
the sin of the nature, for the nature is an abstract, and it is a Chymerical
sigment, to say, an universal nature is capable of sin, because Actiones sunt
suppositorum; and the late known Enemy to this truth, does (as it were) triumph
in his Arguments against this expression, when it is called, The sin of our
Nature (Further Explicat. of the Doctrine of Orig. page 493.) For while he is
wresting and wrecking the miserable 9th Article of the Church of England,
adding and detracting ( Procrustus-like) to make it commensurate to his
prepossessed imagination (although he should remember, that according to the
Civil Law, no credit is to be given to confessions extorted upon the rack) he
positively dictates, that sin is an affection of persons, not of natures; The
humane nature cannot be said to be drunk or commit adultery, Actiones sunt
suppositorum, and sin is a breach of the Law, to which persons not natures are
obliged. This Argument I remember is urged also by some against Christ's
obedience, that the Law did not bind his humane nature, because it was not a
person, and therefore the command did not reach to him as he was man, to do
this or that. But the answer is very obvious, That although the Law does
immediately bind the persons, yet mediately it does also the nature, Who can
deny, but that the Law to love God, though immediately it be commanding the
person, Thou shall love the Lord, etc? yet thereby the soul of a man is also
reached unto, so that hatred of God in the soul, as it is there inherent is
forbidden mediately; Otherwise there could be no habitual sins or graces,
because the command or threatening did no ways reach to them.

In the next place (to our purpose in hand concerning original sin) it is
ignorantly objected, That Actiones sunt suppositorum; For we do not say,
Original sin is an action, it is in the nature of habits; So that this
arises from a gross mistake, That a child does actually sin in partaking of
this nature-defilement; We say it does contrahere peccatum, or receive this
pollution with its nature, not that it does actually sin in the reception of
it. But then

3. When it is called the sin of our nature, it is not meant, as if this
nature did universally exist any where, that indeed would be a mere Chimera, or
as if man's nature were any where but in a person, But that wheresoever the
nature of a man is any where subsistent in individuums, there is also this
corruption; Even visibility and mortality are the universal properties of the
nature of man: There is no man but has these affections; So also is original
sin thus inseparably annexed to the nature of man, wheresoever it does
particularly subsist. To this purpose Julius Sirenius a Scholastical Writer (
Promptu, Theolog. lib. 20. and 22.) When we say, Original sin is a siane of
the humane nature, Non ita velim intelligas quasi naturae per se considerata
actio aliqua convenire possit, etc. do not understand it as if any action could
agree to nature, considered in it self; for not the action (which is of the
suppositum) but the modus agendi belongs the nature existent in the
suppositum, for sin is not an action, but the mode, or rather the defect of the
mode in an action. The Sum is this, A man is born thus in sin, not because he
is this or that person, but because he is a man descending from lapsed Adam; So
that by this we see, that it is the sin of our nature, and yet so as it is the
sin of every person new born, but we are necessitated to call it, the sin of
our corrupt nature, to distinguish it from all actual and habitual sins,
which are the sins of one person, that they are not necessarily the sins of
others; Every man is not necessarily a proud man, an unclean man, but every one
is thus a defiled man, destite of the Image of God; only this must always be
remembered, That it is not our nature-sinne, as we had it from Creation, but as
vitiated by Adam's voluntary transgression, and if he would put it in the
definition of man, that he was animal rationale mortale, we may add ad peccata
prenum, prone and inclming to sin; for we must consider man otherwise in
Divinity, and by Scripture Light, then we do in Philosphy; Hence to be a man,
or to walk as a man in Scripture Phrase sometimes, is to be sinful, and to do
a thin sinfully: You see then that upon good grounds original sin is called
the sin of our natures, and that as in actual sins the person does defile
the nature: So on the contrary in original sin the nature defiles the
person; for the humane species was in Adam, as we say, the whole species of the
Sun is in the Sun, though with some dissimilitude. Hence it is that
according to the Exposition of some learned men, it is called, The sin of the
world, not my sin or thy sin, but the sin of the world, John 1. 29. For
this Rule is given, that wheresoever (...) is used with the emphatical Article
in the Singular number, as in this place, there we must always understand
original sin; but perhaps that is no more true then another Rule, ( viz.)
where the word (...) has the Article (...) there always it signifies the
holy Ghost, I rather therefore think, that by the sin of the world is meant
all sin, any sin committed and repented of; for Christ did not only come to
take away original sin, as some would have it, but all actual sin as well;
So that the expression is here used in the Singular number for the greater
emphasis: Hence Divines have two Rules, first, Nomen terminatione singular
saepe significatione est plurale, a word that has a singular termination, may
have a Plural signification, as sin in the Text signifies all sin. The
other Rule is, Quando Scriptura sacra singulari numere utitur pro plurali, tum
saepe plus singularitate significat quam pluralitate when the holy Scripture
uses a singular number for the plural, then it often signifies more in the
singular number then if it had used the plural, as Exodus 15. 22. He has cast
the horse and rider into the sea, that is the great company of Pharaoh's host;
we do not then exclude original sin from this place, only we say, actual sin is
also comprehended in this propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ.

Propos. 3. By this then it appears, That seeing every one has his proper
peculiar original sin, that the Infants sin is distinct from the parents
original defilement, and so our inherent pollution does differ from Adam 's
sinfulness inherent in him; For you must know, that the sin, which is
original in us, was personal in him, he did by his own voluntary transgression
offend God, and so deprived himself of all that spiritual honor and glory God
had crowned him with; Immediately upon the deprivation of Gods Image, there was
an habitual inclination unto all manner of evil, and this pollution is
transfused from Adam to all his posterity, not that the same sin numerically
in Adam is communicated to every one descending from him, but the same in kind;
Therefore that Argument which the Pelagians gloried in, in their conflict with
Austin, fetched out of Aristotle, That accidens non migrat de subjecto in
subjectem, is foolish and absurd; For we grant that the same numerical sin
which was in Adam is not propagated to us no more then the same personal humane
subsistency, but as we have an humane being distinct from his; so also an
original pollution is in every man distinct from that sinfulness in Adam. It Is
true, some learned men have doubted, whether we are to conceive original sin
inherent in us, as having a distinct guilt from Adam's transgression, they
think it more consonant to truth, if we say that his sin and our native
pollution, do make up the formal guilt of it; But as we have heretofore showed,
that cannot be, therefore though we are always to judge of this original
pollution with this respect to Adam's sin, that being the original efficient
sin, and this the original formal one, yet in it self considered there is a
damnable guilt, and therefore by it alone we are said to be children of wrath.

Lastly, Although original sin be but one in every man, yet we may call it
many in respect of the efficacy of it, and the innumerable issue that comes
from it: So that we may say it is one and many in several respects, for all the
sins of the world have their rise mediately and immediately from it, all
these springs come from that Ocean; Thus Aquinas and the Schoolmen answer that
place, Psalm. 51. 5. Although the proper answer to that place is, that in the
Hebrew it is in the singular number, the plural is only according to the Vulgar
Translation; and if you say, How can all these actual sins which are of a
contrary nature come from this one spring? How can one sin dispose to many
contrary sins? We answered this before, and shall add one thing more to
clear it, ( viz.) That though one sin may not dispose directly, and per se to
all sin, yet per accidens, it may by removing that which did keep off all
sin; for original righteousness did incline to all duties, and thereby
preserved from all sin; now original sin excluding this, thereby all sins
are committed, as temptations and occasions do intervene; Even as if a musical
instrument be marred, every string makes a different jarre according to the
nature of it, or as when a mixed body is dissolved, every element goes to his
proper place, which is Aquinas his similitude, of which when we shall show how
original sin is equal and inequal in all.

SECT. IV.
That Original Sin which is in every man does vent it self betimes.
WE proceed to the second part in the Doctrine, which is, That this original
sin which is in every man does vent it self betimes, his Imagination is evil
from his childhood. We told you, the Papists offer violence to the Text, when
they limit it to a man's youth, excluding his childhood, as if that were
innocent; The Rabbis they say (as Mercer relates) this evil figment is in a
man's heart, till he be thirteen year old, and afterward a good figment comes
into a man. It is greatly disputed with the Schoolmen, When is the time that a
child comes to discern between good and evil, for till then (they say) the Law
of God does not bind, and so he is not capable of actual sins? Some limit the
time of actual sins to four or six years of age; But certainly here cannot be
any fixed or uniform Rule given; neither may we deny children to be guilty of
actual sins, before they come to years of discretion: Certainly Austin speaks
of his observation of the envy which one child has, while another sucketh the
same breast; and therefore although we cannot say with the Lutherans, That
Infants have either actual sins, or actual graces, yet no doubt but actual
sins do very early proceed from them; neither is the time of their sinning to
be limited to the time of their use of reason in a formal and deliberate
manner. It is true, our Savior took a little child, setting him in the midst
of the company, saying, Unless a man become like this child, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18. 4. not that such a little child had not
both original and actual sins in him, but because comparatively to grown
persons they are innocent, having not the pride and other sins as men of age
have, therefore it is, that we are to be converted, and become like little
children; yea there is no parent that desires the salvation of his children,
but he may observe, that from the very childhood there is a great aversness to
what is holy and a natural inclination to evil; Insomuch that all do betimes
give a discovery of that imbred and sinful pollution that is in them. Solomon
says, That folly is bound up in the heart of a child, prove. 22. 15. And in Job
11. 12, Man is said to be born like a wild Asses-Colt, because of the stupidity
and unteachableness that is in every one by nature to what is good. To consider
this more thoroughly, we are to take notice, that original sin does not lie in
a man asleep, or like a sluggish and muddy pool that does not send forth its
noisome streams, but by the Apostle, Romans 7. is described as a sin that is
always acting and rebelling against the Law of God; and therefore as soon as
ever a child is capable of such sinful actings, this original sin does put
forth it self, it is not to be limited to years of discretion, but even in the
childhood of man much folly and vanity, many actual motions of sin, do put
forth themselves: It Is often said by Divines, that original sin is peccatum
actuosum, though not actuale, an active sin though not an actual; and this
should make us look back to our very childhood, and to mourn for all that folly
and vanity we then committed; How quickly did thy enmity to holy things begin
to appear? What a wild Asses Colt? or what a young Serpent wast thou, plainly
manifesting, that as thy parts of mind and strength of body should increase, so
also would thy corruption break forth more powerfully: But of this
childhood-sinfulness more is to be spoken.

SECT. V.
How soon a Child may commit actual Sin.
WE are treating upon the second part of the Doctrine, which is, That the
proper original sin that is in every man, does break forth into actual evil
betimes, [From the youth] The word is observed by learned men, to be used in
the Plural number for Emphasis sake, and therefore is not to be limited to such
a time, as when one comes to years of discretion, but even to our childhood,
therefore the Hebrew word is used of Infants, as Moses, Exodus 2. 6. and
Sampson, Jud. 13. 5. although we deny not but that it is also in Scripture
applied to those that are grown up; Hence Divines have a Rule, Secundum
Hebraorum idioma, Infans vocatur emnis filius ad comparationem parentum,
according to the Hebrew custom, every son is called an Infant comparatively to
his parents, and happily we may add a Disciple and servant respectly to their
Superiors. This word Obadiah applies to himself, 1 Kings 18. 12. Thy servant
fears God from his youth; This time then of sinning is to be extended
further, then usually it is imagined, for commonly we look not upon the actions
of young ones as sins, till they come to some discretion, or if we do, we
count them very little, and venial, they are matter of delight more then of
humiliation; so few are there who do rightly affect themselves with the vanity
and folly, as also enmity to holy things that they were guilty of even while
little children. But because this truth has some difficulty in the doctrinal
part thereof, let us more exactly enquire into the nature of it, which will be
seen in several Propositions. And

First, The Lutherans have a peculiar opinion, that even Infants, whether in
the mothers womb or new born, are guilty of actual sins: for whereas they
make the word (...), ( Steg. Photin. dis. de peccato Orig. Fewrborn. disput.
1a.) to be applied sometimes to the Infant in the womb, Luke 1. 41. sometimes
to Infants new born, 1 Pet. 2. 2. They conclude, that even such as these,
before they have any use of reason, are guilty of actual sins, only
concerning actual sins they distinguish, that such are either taken strictly
and precisely for those that came from deliberation, and the will, or largely
for any motions or stirrings of the soul against Gods Law, though without the
act of will and reason, and in this latter sense (they say) Infants partake of
actual sins. But although original sin is an active quality in a man, and
does begin to work very early, yet it cannot be thought to produce actual
sin, till the soul by its powers and faculties is able to produce operatins.
It is true, we read of Timothy, that he is said to know the Scriptures from
(...), but that does signify Timothy something grown up, and attaining to some
understanding (for the Lutherans are too peremptory, who think, a place cannot
be brought; where (...), does signify a child something grown up; Timothy
therefore is said, 2 Timothy 35. To know the Scriptures from a child, because his
godly Mother and Grandmother did as soon as he was able to receive, instruct
him in the faith, which could not be, while a mere Infant. Therefore

In the next place, A second Proposition is, That even in the state of
integrity, had not Adam fallen, children new born would have been without
actual knowledge, as well as in corrupted nature, they would not have been born
with perfect use of their reason, no more then they would have been born with
perfect and complete bodies, for such could not have been contained in the
womb. We take it for granted, (though some have been for the negative) that in
the state of innocence there would have been multiplication of children by
generation, which appears in the Creation of a woman for a man, and if so,
then that the children at that time born, though they would have been free from
original sin, and all the general effects thereof, yet would not have been
born in a perfect ability actually to use their reason. Indeed the Scripture is
wholly silent, what would have been done, if man had not fallen, and therefore
nothing can be certainly determined, unless we had some divine revelation about
it, yet there is a good Rule given, that we must think God would then keep to
that ordinary way of nature, which we now find, except where sin and the
effects thereof have made a difference; we are not to make miracles and
extraordinary workings of God, unless some necessity of reason compel
thereunto, and thus it would be here, if children new born should have had
perfect actual knowledge. It is true, Austin does seem to incline ( Vide
Augustine. de peccator. Mer. and Rmeist. lib. 1. cap. 35, 36. especially cap.
37. that as soon as ever the children were come forth from the womb, God would
have made them great and perfect bodies, as he did Eve of Adam's rib
immediately, or at least made them fit for all motions of the body; but this is
so improbable, that Austin cannot be excused, unless we think he spoke it
doubtingly, and by way of inquisition, yea not only concerning the body, but
even the soul also, that a child is so long without the use of reason, he
seems to make it not from mere nature, but vitiated and polluted; This (we
say) has no probability, for we must not think that God would have always in
the state of innocence, wrought miraculously in the constant propagation of
mankind. It is true, the blindness that is habitually upon the mind of every
Infant, whereby it is indisposed to receive the Truths of God when grown up,
would not then have been in Infants; There would not have been any privation of
such light as was necessary, but it would have been mere nesciency and so no
sin, and therefore such a nesciency was in Christ's humane nature, while and
Infant, Luke 2. 52. He increased in wisdom and stature, as also, Isa. 7. 15.
Butter and honey shall be eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, that is, he should eat on childrens usual food, till he did increase
in knowledge, but all this was without sin. This Proposition may satisfy
that Infants cannot have any actual sin, while merely so, because the want of
use of reason in them is no sinful imperfection; neither are they under the
commands of God to believe and know him, as also to love him with all their
soul: Therefore it is absurd in the Lutherans to say, that these commands of
actual knowledge, fear, or love do bind them, while thus under a natural
nesciency that flows from their very nature, as nature not as vitiated and
defiled.

Prop. 3. The reason why Infants have not the actual use of reason, as soon as
they are born arises not from their soult, but the constitution of their
bodies; As in natural fools, mad men, or men in sleep, there is no defect in
their souls, but in the body, which is the organical instrument of the soul;
Therefore when Infants die, as soon as ever their souls are separated from the
body, they have perfect knowledge and reason; but the want of the use of reason
arises from the abundance and overflowing of humors, whereby the sensitive
powers of the soul are make indisposed for their operations.

Prop. 4. Seeing therefore that the soul comes to work rationally by the
successive alteration of the complexion of the body, as the organs are
disposed, which in some is sooner, in some later, it is impossible to give not
only the metaphysical indivisible instant, but even the moral time wherein a
child does first begin to have an actual sin. As we cannot observe it in our
selves when we first had any use of reason, so neither can we in another; and
therefore the limiting of the works of understanding, to the fourth, sixth or
seven years, is altogether uncertain, only we are to conclude, That children
sin long before they know what sin is, or can understand what it is to
offend God, for those peevish (...) vexations which are in little ones, even
while sucking, are not to be freed (...) some kind of guilt, for such things
would not have been in the state of innocent^: And if you say, Why should we
think those are sins, seeing they do not flew from the use of reason and
free will? Therefore.

The fifth Proposition is, That contrariety to the Law of God is of the essence
of a sin, not voluntariness in actu secundo ( as they say) as if immediately
elicited by the will; For habitual sins are not voluntary in that, but because
they are the effect produced by voluntary acts of sinning that did precede,
therefore they have as much voluntariness, as is required to make an habitual
sin, and thus original sin with the immediate effects that flow thence,
have as much voluntarness as is required to make them sins, for as habitual
sins are therefore sins, because contracted by our own personal will, so
original sin is voluntary, because descending upon as by his will, who was
our Head, both quoad esse natural, and morale, as it is in time more to be
explained: Therefore that Position of Socinians and others, That nothing can be
a sin which is not committed by the voluntary consent of our own personal
will, is to be rejected as that false foundation upon which they build so many
erroneous Doctrines.

The sixth Proposition is, That even young children very early have imperfect
workings of understanding and will; So that those obscure actings of a rational
soul begin far sooner to put themselves forth, then many do think; Hence it
is that they know and love those that give them suck, we must then consider,
that there are imperfect workings of reason and perfect formed ones; These
later indeed are not so soon, but the former are very early; Lapide in Psalm.
25. speaks out of Gregory, of a child but five year old guilty of blasphemy;
And certainly Austin in his Confessions, does much bewail his sins, while he
was a child, he was but tantillus puer, yet tantus peccator, a little boy, but
a great sinner. This truth is very useful, not only to confute Pelagiant and
Socinians, who make in a child an indifferency to good or evil; or with
Aristotle a blank table to receive any impression, but especially to quicken up
Parents to their duty in diligent admonition and institution of them; For
Solamon, wiser than any Pelagian, says, Prove. 22. 15. Folly is bound up in the
heart of a child; The word signifies, is close bound to his soul, as if it
were with ropes: Now if besides this natural folly, there be wicked education
and evil example, this will be such a threefold cord that will not easily be
broken: Oh then do not think it is no matter what children do, their sins are
but sports and jests, you will not have them displeased or corrected, for this
is contrary also to Solomon's counsel, Prove. 22. 5. Train up a child in the way
he should go, etc. Some render it dedicate, some instruct, it comes all to one
sense, but who must be thus trained? Even a child, in the Hebrew it is Gnal
pene, super es viae, which causes diverse Interpretations; Some understand it
of the very first beginnings of a child's course, when he in bivio, whether he
shall take to virtue or vice; Some for the very time that any entrance can be
made upon them; for children are to learn many things by mere memory before
they have understanding, neither is that, though in holy things, a taking of
Gods name in vain, but a serving of God according to their capacity; Some
understand it according to the capacity of the child, as a vessel with a narrow
mouth must have liquour poured into it by degrees; all these senses tend to the
same purpose, ( viz.) that Parents should not put off the instruction of their
children, or to think, because they are children, therefore their sins are not
to be much regarded, for you have Job sharply bewailing these, Job 13. 23. What
were those iniquities for which God did so severely chastise Job? Why did God
write such bitter things against him, it was because of the sins of his youth,
the same word in the Text: And Psalm. 25. 7. David in great affection prays
God would not remember the sins of his youth, the same word also in the
original, as is in my Text: And certainly, we have a dreadful example of Gods
anger, even against the sins of little children, 2 King. 2. 23. for such came
out of the City, and mocked the Prophet, saying, Go up thou bald head, and
there presently came two she-bears that did tare in pieces two and forty of
them: They were but little children, and you would think none would regard what
they said, but behold the heavy judgment of God upon them: Therefore let
Parents be more deeply affected with the lies and sinfulness of their children,
then commonly they are. The wicked man is said, Job 20. 11. to have his bones
full of his puerilities, or as we translate it, the sin of his youth, because
sin acted in the youth, does cleave more inseperably then other sins, even as
he who had been possessed with a Devil from his youth, was more difficultly
cured, therefore the Text adds, Those sins lie down in the dust with him; Thy
youth-sins will go to the grave with thee, if grace make not a powerful change.

SECT. VI.
Whether Original Sin be alike in All.
THe last thing to be treated on, is to answer that Question, Whether original
sin be alike in all? Do we not see some even from the very womb more propense
to iniquities then others? And if it be equal in all, Why should not all be
carried out to the same sins alike? Why is not every one a Cain, a Judas?

To this we answer these things, 1. If we take original sin for the privative
part of it ( viz.) the want of Gods Image, so all are alike; Every one has
equally lost this glorious Image of God, none has any more left of it in them
then another: Even as it is concerning those that are damned in hell; They are
all equal in their punishment in respect of the poena damni, they lose the
presence of the same God, and are all alike cast out from his presence, but
there is a difference in respect of the poena sensus, some have greater
torments then others.

2. Original sin is alike in all in the positive part, if you do respect the
remote power of sin, that is, there is in all equally an habitual conversion
to the creature: Even as all have the same remote power of dying alike, though
for the proxim power some die sooner, and some later; The seed then of all evil
is alike in all, all are equal in respect of the remote power of sinning.

3. By original depravation, all are alike in respect of the necessity of
sinning; There is no man in this lost estate, but he does necessarily sin
quoad specificationem (as they say) whatsoever he does, he sins, though not
quoad exercitium, this sin or that sin one is more engaged unto then
another: Neither is this necessity of sinning like the necessity of hunger and
thirst; for these are mere natural and not culpable, but this necessity of
sinning is voluntarily brought upon us, and though it be necessary, yet is
voluntary and with delight also: As Bernard expresses it, The voluntariness
takes not off from the necessity, nor the necessity from the voluntariness and
delight.

Lastly, Original sin is equal in all, in respect of the merit and desert; it
deserves death, it deserves hell; There is none comes into the world thus
polluted, but he is obnoxious to death, and an heir of Gods wrath; For although
some are freed from hell, yea and one or two have been preserved from death,
yet is wholly by the grace of God; The desert of original sin is equal in all.

But then you will say, How comes it about that some are more viciously given
then others, some more propense to one sin then another?

I answer, 1. From the different complexions and constitutions of the body,
with their different temptations and external occasions of sin as they meet
with; Though the remote power be equal in all, yet the immediate and proxim
disposition is the bodies complexion, and other concurring circumstances; For
original righteousness being removed, then a man is carried out to sin
violently, according as his particular torrent may drive him; Even as if the
pillars or supporters of an house should fall to the ground, every piece of
wood would fall to the ground more heavily or lightly, as the weight is, or as
you heard Aquinas his similitude, when the mixed body is dissolved every element
has his proper motion, the air ascends upward, the earth downwards; and this
is the cause of the diverse sins in the world, and some men's particular
inclinations to one sin more than another. And then

2. The grace of God either sanctifying or restraining does also make a great
difference; It is God that says to the sea of that corruption within thee,
Hitherto thou shall go and no further. Think not that thou had a better
nature, or less original sin than Judas or Cain, but God does either change
thy nature, or else he does several ways restrain thee, that thou can not
accomplish all that actual wickedness thy heart would carry thee unto.

CHAP. X.
A Justification of Gods shutting up all under Sin for the Sin of Adam, in
the sense of all the Reformed Churches, against the Exceptions of Dr J. T. and
others.
SECT. I.
GAL. 3. 24. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise
by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.
THe Apostle having made an Objection against himself, verse. 21. Is the Law
then against the promises of God? He answers it,

1. With a detestation ( God forbid.)

2. He shows wherein the Law is so far from being contrary, that it is
subservient to the Gospel. Only we must distinguish of the use of the Law,
which is per se, and which is per accidens; The use of the Law per se is to
give eternal life to such who have a perfect conformity thereunto; but per
accidens, when it meets with lapsed man, who must needs be cursed by it,
because he is so far from continuing in all the duties thereof, that he is
not able to fulfill perfectly one iota or tittle thereof, therefore it
provokes us to seek out for a Savior, as a man arrested for debt, enquireth
for some friend, or surety to deliver him.

Now this subservient use of the Law is expressed in the Text mentioned,
wherein you have the condition of mankind declared ( viz.) That they are shut
up under sin.

2. The Universality, All.

3. The Cause appointing and declaring of this, The Scripture.

4. The final Cause, That the promise, etc.

Let us briefly open the particulars. And

First, The Condition of man is said to be shut up under sin, or concluded,
it is a Metaphor from those malefactors that are shut up in a prison, and
cannot come forth; So that the word implies partly the condemnation that is
upon all mankind, and partly the impossibility to escape it; and then whereas
it is said, under sin, that denotes both the guilt of it, and the dominion
of it, and that both original sin and actual, for both are comprehended
herein, else Infants would be excluded from having an interest in Christ, for
whosoever are brought to Christ are necessarily supposed to be in a state of
sin. Hence

In the second place, there is the Universality (...), which is more emphatical
then (...), All things, not all men; This expression is used, to show, that not
only all men, but all their actions, studies, endeavors, every thing belonging
to them (as it were) is thus sinful and damnable, although Grotius makes the
Substantive understood to be (...).

In the third place, we have the Cause appointing and declaring of this, and
that is the Scripture. It is usual to attribute those things which belong to
God unto the Scripture, because that is the sentence of God that declares the
will of God; Thus Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify
the Heathen, etc. that is, God by his Word foretelling what he would do: Thus
Romans 9. 17. The Scripture says unto Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I
raised thee up, etc. that is, God by the Scripture manifested his will and
purpose concerning Pharaoh; So that in this place, we are to conceive of God
wisely and righteously ordering this way, that all mankind shall fall into a
stat of sin and condemnation, that so a way may be made open for the
advancement of the grace of the Gospel, Not that God did necessitate Adam to
sin, or did infuse any evil into him, but be falling by his own voluntary
transgression, and thereby plunging all his posterity into this wretched
estate, God who could have prevented this fall of Adam, did not, because not
bound to it, give him that grace, which would actually have confirmed him,
although he bestowed on him grace sufficient enough, to enable him to stand;
God (I say) did righteously and wisely permit this fall of his, thereby to work
out a greater good, then the sin of Adam could be an evil* Thus God may be
called the cause appointing and ordering of all this evil of mankind, partly
permissive by leaving Adam to his own will, and partly directive, and
ordinative, being not a bare spectator or sufferer of this apostasy, but also
a righteous director and ordainer of it to blessed and heavenly ends. Though
therefore God is here said to shut up all mankind into this prison, yet he is
no more cause of the evil, which brought this desolation, then a Magistrate is
of the wickedness of such a Malefactor, whom he throws into prison; Yea Gods
ordering of this fall of Adam unto such righteous ends, does therein
demonstrate his Mercy and his Justice: So that although sin be evil, yet the
punishing of this is good, as also the working of a better good, then the evil
is evil, is a demonstration of the infinite wisdom of God. As God does it thus,
as the chief cause, so the Scripture is said to shut us up under sin
instrumentally, because that declares the curse of God due unto us: And that
upon a twofold account, both because of the actual impieties all do commit, as
also because of that original filthiness and pollution we are born in.

Now it is my purpose to treat of Gods righteous dispensation toward mankind
in this particular only, because some do rise up with great zeal, for the
righteousness, honor and glory of God in this point, as if the Doctrine
delivered by the Orthodox herein, were altogether injurious and derogatory to
him: Hence the late known Adversary to this fundamental Truth about original
sin, delivers himself thus ( Answer to a Letter, page 23, 24) To say that for
Adam's sin it is just in God to condemn Infants to the eternal flames of
hell; and to say, that concupiscence or natural inclinations, before they pass
unto act could bring eternal condemnation, etc. are two such horrid
propositions, that if any Church in the world would expressly affirm them, I
for my part should think it unlawful to communicate with her in the defense,
or profession of either, and think it would be the greatest temptation in the
world to make men not to love God, of whom they speak such horrid things. Thus
he most horribly. Now although these two Propositions are set down by him
odiously and captiously, not fully expressing the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, yet it is plain, that he strikes at those Positions, which are for
the substance of them maintained by all Protestant Churches, and does thereby
publicly profess his separation from, and non-communion with all Protestant
Churches, and particularly with the Church of England, in that 9th Article,
which he does so cruelly tear and mangle, that it may not appear to be what
indeed it is.

Our work therefore shall be from this Text, to declare from Scripture-ground
the holiness, wisdom and righteousness of God in his proceedings thus with
mankind for Adam's sin: For although all grown persons are shut up under
actual sins, as well as original, yet here is comprehended both, seeing it does
extend to all that may have salvation by Christ, out of which number Infants
are not to be excluded. Therefore Bellarmine brings this Text amongst others,
to prove that there is an original sin that all are born in. And so we
observe,

That God for righteous and wise ends manifested in the Scripture, has shut up
all mankind in a state of sin and damnation: That God who could have
preserved Adam in the state of happiness, and continued it to all his
posterity, so that thereby no sin or condemnation, would have come upon any
one man (for there would then none have done evil, no not one) has ordered the
contrary way, suffering man to fall, and thereby all mankind to be in a state
of condemnation, whereby also sin is so predominant, that now there is none
that does good, no not one. The Scripture does in other places with much
exactness and diligence take notice of the proceeding of God in this way, as
Romans 3. 9. The Apostle dividing all mankind into Jews and Gentiles, shows,
that though there may be many differences in several respects, yet as to a
state of sin by nature and so a necessity of justification by Christ all were
alike; Therefore says he, We have before proved, (...), The word is very
emphatical, some make it to charge, complain, and in an heavy manner to accuse;
So that to be by nature of our selves in a state of wrath, not being able
without the grace of Christ, to avoid this condemnation, is the greatest guilt
that we can be charged with: It ought not to seem a light and contemptible
thing that we come thus cursed in the world; But because men may be accused
falsely, and the Pelagians charge us with laying a false curse upon mankind;
hence the Greek word signifies more ( viz.) so to charge a thing upon a man,
as by strong reasons to prove it, to show clearly the causes and grounds of it.
therefore our Translators render it. We have before proved; So that the
Apostles meaning is, We have not only said thus, but we have proved; A Metaphor
(say some) from those who have cast up their accounts, and upon exact
consideration do conclude, this is the sum: But what is that he has proved,
even that all are under sin, not only actual, for many were not guilty of
those actual sins he enumerateth, but under a state of sin, they could not
avoid it, because of the corrupt nature they bring with them into the world.
Therefore Contzer the Jesuit ( Comment in Romans cap. 3. Quaest. 3.) making this
Question, How the Apostle could affirm those following sins reckoned by the
Apostle of all men, after he had given several interpretations, concludes,
that that is the best exposition, and most consonant to the Text, as also the
scope of the Apostle, and most apt to resell heresies, which understands it
of all men, in respect of their nature and originals, and by their works are
made more sinful; for seeing all are under original sin, and by nature
children of wrath, when by age they can actually sin, they stir up this
hereditary evil in them, That there is none righteous: neither the Jew by the
Mosaical Law, nor the Gentile by the Heathen Law. Thus even a Jesuit, which
may exceedingly shame our Britannus Coluber, as Pelagius of old was called, and
may be transmitted to such who are guilty of Pelagius his error by imitation.
Now that this Exposition given is most consonant to the Apostles scope, is
plain, because if he did not so conclude by his Disputation, That every one
naturally, not one excepted was thus under sin, then such exempted ones would
not need justification by Christ: Therefore observe at verse. 19. how
universally he expresses himself, That every mouth might be stopped; It is
taken from a guilty malefactor, whose faults are so evidently proved, that he
cannot tell what to say, he is condemned in his own conscience; and thus ought
every one to be, partly by Scripture, and partly by experience so fully
convinced of his native-pollution and sinfulness, that he cannot in the least
manner boast of himself, attribute any thing to his own power, or complain of
God; The Metaphor is either from a beast that has a muzzle or bridle put in
his mouth; or as Chrysostom from the torrent and streams of water, which
running violently are damned up; And this denotes how readily and impetuously
a man is carried out to justify himself, to deny any such original pollution,
to quarrel and expostulate with God: So that this being Gods end in suffering
mankind to fall into this condemned estate, even to stop men's mouths, to
convince them to humble them; How inexcusable are those, who from this very
dispensation do take occasion to open their mouths, and to plead the more
pertinaciously for themselves? The other general expression is no less
observable, That all the world may become guilty before God: Oh the impudence
of those foreheads that dare plead, not guilty, as to a considerable part of
the world! But this of the Apostle is a very thunderbolt; for the expression is
taken from the malefactor who is found guilty, and so lies at the mercy of the
Judge; If he looks upon his own demerits, he can expect nothing but
condemnation; How happy were it, if such who abound in Disputations for man's
innocence by nature, would at last turn it into holy accusations, confess
themselves guilty, justify God, and go out of themselves, for if they be any
of this world, they must acknowledge themselves in this guilt, which is not
only actual, but original also? Hence at verse. 23. All are said to come short
of the glory of God; By the glory of God some mean Eternal life, the glory God
will bestow upon us; The word (...) is taken from those who run in a race,
and fall short of the victory, being left behind by those who out-runne them,
and this word signifies how that men, while by their natural strength they
labor, and run, and weary themselves, expecting to obtain happiness, all is
but in vain, for they fall short of glory. Others understand it of grace, which
is glory begun; every man by nature is destitute of grace: Some understand it
of glorying, No man has occasion to glory before God, because he is wholly
corrupt: Others of God himself, for with the Jews God is called Haccaved, the
glory. Lastly, Some of that Image of God, in which man was created: All these
Interpretations do necessarily suppose one another, and therefore by it is
plainly demonstrated the sinful, wretched and impotent condition that every
man is born in.

Another passage taking notice of this proceeding of God, to suffer all men to
become in a guilty estate, that way thereby may be made for the advancement of
his grace, is Romans 11. 32. where the Apostle treating of that sublime and high
mystery, why God did break off the natural branches for their unbelief, and
graft in others, he says, God has shut up all under unbelief, that be might
have mercy on all; This indeed does directly and chiefly speak of actual sin,
therefore it is called (...), unbelief, or disobedience, yet indirectly and by
consequence, there is supposed the bitter root of this rebellion, which is both
in Jew and Gentile; now the Apostle says, God shut up all in this, or into
this, for it is (...), the Greek word implies, That God has shut them up all
together; As if a Judge should shut up many malefactors together in a dark
dungeon; and because the Apostle is speaking of a very great mystery herein,
why God should by his free grace deliver some out of this prison, and leave
others therein, we see how pathetically and powerfully he breaks out into a
divine acclamation, concerning the incomprehensible judgments and ways of God,
as being that only which may silence all our humane reasonings in these cases;
There being no more certain way to become foolish and corrupt in our
imaginations, then when we do presumptuously adventure to judge of Gods
proceedings according to our limited capacities; for as it is with a man that
shall fix his eyes too much upon the dazeling Sun, he is so far from
beholding the nature of it, that he does rather lose that ability to see which
he had before: Thus when men will too arrogantly dive into the reasons of Gods
dispensations toward mankind, he is so far from getting a full knowledge
thereof, that many times for his pride he is left by God, and those abilities
which he had before are blasted. Let us therefore with the Apostle in matters
of this nature, say, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? (...), a Metaphor from those subtle beasts that leave (...), no
footsteps if possibly they can, that so they may not be found out. In this
point therefore concerning original sin content thy self with the revelation
of the Doctrine, that it is so, and conclude, there is no iniquity or injustice
with God, though this transcend thy investigation of it; For as it is
impossible for a man to catch hold of his own shadow, but the more he
stretchedth out to take it, the farther it flies from him; So it is concerning
the Nature, Attributes and ways of God, the more we think to apprehend them,
the higher they soar from our reach; But of this more in the prosecution of the
point.

SECT. II.
Propositions to direct us about this great Point of Gods proceedings, as to
the matter of Original Sin.
WE are to treat on Gods righteous proceedings, as to the matter of original
sin, and that we may be the better directed herein, Let us lay down these
Propositions:

First, He that would not dangerously err about this fundamental truth, must
take heed of yielding himself up to humane and philosophical arguments. A man
that would rightly know the magnitude of the Sun, must not judge by his
sense, but by an artificial instrument, for the principles of art will correct
sense; So he that will fully understand the wisdom and righteousness of God in
involving all mankind in Adam's sin must not judge by humane reasons, but
Scripture demonstrations, for the principles of faith, will rectify those of
reason; So that if you ask, What is the bitter root of all that bitter fruit (I
mean corrupt doctrinal opinions about original sin?) We may readily answer,
The inordinate attending to humane reasonings; As the Pelagians of old did
first urge Reason, and then Authority of Scripture, whereas that Emblem of
Nazianzene is always to be remembered, Theologia nostra est Pythagorica, our
Divinity is Pythagorical, (...), Thus says the Lord, is in stead of all
scientifical demonstrations. The Pelagians and their followers are much alike
in the point of original sin, as the Arians and Socinians in the matter of
the Deity of Christ; As the Socinians call the Deity of Christ, Somnium
Athanasii Athanasius his dream, so do these original sin, Augustine's
figment; As they say, The Fathers before Athanasius his time, and the Council
of Nice spoke more temperately about the Trinity, so do these also of the
Ancients before Austin's time concerning original sin. And as there are one
or two philosophical principles, which plunged them into those damnable
heresies about the Trinity, and Christ's Deity ( viz.) That, Qua sunt eadem uni
tertio sunt eadem inter se, and, Vna subsistentia non potest terminare duas
naturas, one subsistency cannot terminate two natures; So that Rule, Omne
peccatum est voluntarium, Every sin must be voluntary is the very foundation,
upon which all errors about original sin are superstructed. If then we would
be guided into the truth, let us become humble Disciples of Christ, harkening
to what the Word says of our condition by nature, and there be established,
though reason like Job's wife tempt thee to charge God foolishly: It is true,
we may by reason defend the justice of God in these proceedings, but it must be
reason built upon faith, not faith upon reason; let faith lay the foundation,
then reason may confirm and adorn. It is Stella his comparison, Takes the
mould of the earth from the root of the tree, that is decaying, and put your
compost and dung to it, and after that throw in your would again, and then that
will be exceedingly advantageous to help the fruitfulness of the tree, which
was an impediment before: Thus reason superadded will illustrate faith, whereas
if laid as a foundationstone, it will endanger all. But that which does for the
most part corrupt us, is, We first receive opinions according to humane
persuasions, and then going to the Scripture, we think that speaks according
to our prepossessed imaginations. Philosophers were the Patriarchs of
Heretics; Placonical Philosophy in the Fathers, and Aristotelical in the
Schoolmen has wonderfully debased the pure gold of divine truths.

2. He that would not dangerously err in this necessary point, he must
mortify selflove, he must above all things take breed of a self-righteousness
and self-admiration: For our corruption herein, is, that which makes us to
judge every thing unjust in God that is not pleasing to us; we will rather
naturally accuse God a thousand times over, then accuse or condemn our selves;
As the love of God had supreme dominion in Adam's heart while in the state of
integrity, so in man fallen on the contrary, self-love is that which keeps
the principality in our souls; so that whatsoever we now love, it is because we
love our selves; Why does the covetous man love wealth, but because he loves
himself? Why does the ambitious man honors, the voluptuous man pleasures, but
because he loves himself? yea this extends to God also, we love nothing of
God, but for our selves, as if God were for us, not we for God; Hence it is
that we would have a god like us; we make an Idol-god in our hearts instead of
the true God; That which God charge upon some sinners, Psalm. 50. 21. is true
of all by nature, Thou thoughtest I was such an one as thy self; now this is
the rotten core in every man's heart; we think God to be like our selves, to do
as we would have him do, and therefore we make that injustice in him, which we
would not have him do; No wonder then, if men be generally so averse to this
Truth about original sin, for how can a man be naturally willing that this
should be true, I am born in a state of sin, I am by nature a child of wrath?
Can such a bitter pill as this be easily swallowed down? how stiffely will men
dispute and cavil ere they will be convinced of this? Deformed faces are not
willing to look in this glass: Therefore it is a good similitude which
Cortesius the Schooleman (2. Sentent. distinc. 7. page 48. who affects to
turn all School-language into a polite flile,) uses concerning Pelagians
denying original sin, he compares them to Dogs that cannot endure the halter
they are tied by, and therefore all their endeavor is to gnaw the cord in
pieces, that they may run loose, Thus (says he) do these corrupt Doctors,
they are unwilling to be bound in this chain: No man can endure this cord,
whereby folly is bound up in his heart, and therefore they strive to tear it
in pieces; They would gladly believe there is no such thing, but the
Scripture-truth will abide firm, whether thou believe it or not; Thou art by
nature in an undone and a damnable estate, whether thou will be persuaded of it
or no. Therefore

In the third place, Seeing this Doctrine of original sin and Gods
proceedings therein are principally made known to us by Scripture-revelation;
It is our wisdom to keep close to what is written, and not to give way to such
curious Disputations that will never have an end: If so be the disciples of
Plato would silence themselves with this, (...), here Plato does command us to
stay, to rest and dispute no further; if (I say) this would immediately stop
their mouths, how much more should the command of God and Christ, when we can
say, here Christ has commanded us to enquire no further? It is not therefore
with divine truths, as it is with philosophical, for with the latter, though we
know Aristotle says so, yet we may enquire into the truth of it, but in
Theological things, if it appear God has said this, then we must not judge but
believe; so that it is a learned ignorance, when we affect not to know above
what is written. It is a good resolution of Luthers, (In cup. Genes. 6.) I
follow (says he) always this rule, that I may avoid those Questions which may
draw me up to the throne of Gods supreme Majesty; Melius and tutius est ad
praesepe Christ hominis consistere; It is better and safer to stand at the
manager of Christ as man; For this end we have Elihu and God himself at last
humbling Job, who had disputed the righteous proceedings of God too
presumptuously, by the consideration of Gods transcendent greatness to man's
capacity, yea by these natural things, convincing him of his infirmity which we
see very day as the rain and thunder, etc. Now certainly if we cannot behold a
star much less the Sun; if we cannot find out the reason of Gods
proceedings in natural things, how much more in supernatural. Therefore

Fourthly, This is always to be laid down as a foundation, there is no
unrighteousness with God, whatsoever he does is very just, though many times
this is secret and hidden to us: Even as David, while estuating in his soul,
and perplexed about Gods dispensations in this world, thinking that equality of
administrations to those that were not equal was inequallity; yet least this
sour leaven should imbitter him too much, he lays down as a sure principle
and foundation, and that in the very beginning; Truly God is good to Israel,
even to such as are of a clean heart. Psalm 73. 1. And the Apostle in those
sublime mysteries about Election and Reprobation, does check the presumptuous
Disputations of men: Who will contend with God in such cases? Rom 9. And Elihu
argues against Job, Chap 34. 18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked,
and to Princes, ye are ungodly? he means of such whose righteousness and
integrity is universally approved of; for the Prophets did many times rereprove
ungodly Kings, and inform them of their impieties, (though we are to do our
duties even to such with acknowlengement of their eminent place) Then how much
more unsufferable is it concerning God, of whom all men have this inbred
notion, that he is optimus as well as maximus, for any (if God do thus and
thus, when yet the Scripture declares that he does so) to accuse it for
unrighteousness? Our work then is to show, that such Truths are revealed in
Scripture, That God takes such and such ways in his dealings with mankind,
and when this is established, then let us say, God is true, and every man is a
liar; Then let us proclaim the righteousness of God, though we cannot satisfy
every curious Objection; yea our duty were to pass them by with contempt and
silence, did not the importunity of the Adversaries provokens; so that we are
to answer a fool in his solly, lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 5.
And indeed (excepting one particular) there is not any thing scarce of any
moment, that may make a man so much as doubt about the righteousness of God in
this Doctrine of original sin, as it is delivered by Protestant Writers, who
follow the pattern in the Mount, which that it may appear in its harmony, and
not judge of a piece by it self, but in its complete proportion. I shall
proceed to add further Propositions. Hence

In the fourth place observe, God made made man at first perfect both in soul
and body, as his body was not subject to diseases and death, so neither his
soul to ignorance and passions: God made him right, Eccles. 7. yea in his own
image, righteousness and true holiness, not as the Socinians say, that he was
created in a mere innocence, that is indifferency to good or evil, not being
made righteous, till man should make himself: Man with simplicity in his
understanding, and childishness, as if he differed but a little from an Idiot;
it is wonder they do not also say, he was created blind, as Suarez reports (
Disput. de statu innocentiae.) of some who held so, because it is said, after
his fall, That their eyes were opened: Certainly, the Image of God he was
created in, and with such a peculiar expression, which the Scripture takes
notice of, Let us make man after our own Image, Genesis 1. 26. does denote nothing
but excellency and perfection in him, both for natural and spiritual things,
and shall we think that God who made his body perfect and in full stature,
would not do the like for his soul; The end also for which God made him
necessarily presupposes him endued with all wisdom and holiness, for he was
made the head of mankind, he was made to be the Governor and Lord of the
world, he imposed names on the beasts, which argued both his knowledge and
superiority, he was made to glorify and praise God, to have constant communion
with him and enjoyment of him, and who can think God created him for such a
sublime end without proportionable ability thereunto, and the rather
considering, how God created every thing in its kind, as good, yea very good;
Every creature was made perfect by its natural operations to attain its natural
end, and shall man only be made imperfect? So that we are fully to believe this
good and glorious estate that God made Adam in; for Pelagian and Socinians
begin to err here. This is the first step to all their future abominations.

Prop. 5. God did not only create man thus with an internal sufficiency of
ability to persevere in this holy and blessed estate, but did also vouchsafe
all other auxiliaries of grace, that might enable him to hold out: Even Adam in
the state of integrity could do no good thing without the help of God, and
therefore though whole, yet he needed the Physician, not indeed to heal him, or
recover him, but to preserve him from falling, and no wonder Adam needed this
grace of God, seeing the very Angels likewise did; So that the very difference
why some did fall, and the others stand, was the grace of God, insomuch that
that of Paul may be applied, even to Angels as well as men, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who
made thee to differ from another, and what have thou that thou have not
received? Hence the Scripture makes their election the cause of their
standing, being therefore called the elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Adam then was
created thus sufficient within, and wanting nothing without, either of
directing or preserving grace to continue him in this blessed estate, and which
is the greater aggravation of that full and sufficient estate God created him
in, he had nothing within him that might concupiscentially draw away his heart
from God. It was not with Adam as with us, who though we have grace by Christ
to help us, yet there is within us a repugnant principle thereunto; There is a
root of rebellion within us to this grace of God, but all things in Adam were
quiet and harmonious when the Devil did cast in his fiery darts, there was not
so much as the least prepared materials to receive them, as it is with us, when
the Devil does tempt without we have something within that is treacherous, that
is ready like a little thief, to let in the great one, but in Adam every thing
was right, all lay in the mere determination of his will, if he would stand, he
might, there was nothing within or without, that was an impediment to him,
whereas the great misery that is brought upon man, by this original corruption
is, that though grace does many times excise and stir up the will, yet we
cannot do what we would, as Paul does most sadly complain, Romans 7. Adam while
in the state of integrity did resemble God, though with infinite disproportion,
in whom potestas and voluntas are all one: Thus in Adam his posse was his
velle, let him will what was good, and he did it, there was no innate
corruption to make the execution of it difficult, but (alas) man in his lapsed
estate does need that grace, which does not only give the posse, but the velle
also; Hence he is said to work in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. and
that of his good pleasure, not of our good will and pleasure, as some would
pervert that Text.

SECT. III.
Objections Answered.
WE are vindicating the righteousness of God in his proceedings with mankind
about original sin, being presumptuously accused by those who harden
themselves against this truth. I proceed therefore to lay down one Proposition
only more, thereby answering their particular Objections, which will help us to
much light in this point, that it may seem no new or strange thing, that Radix
damnata should proferre ramos damnatos, a condemned root should bring forth
condemned branches, or a poisoned fountain invenomed streams.

The Proposition is this, God who made man thus perfect and exactly qualified
every way to attain that glorious and for which he was made, did not appoint
him as a mere single person to stand and fall for himself, but as a public
person, in whom we were all represented, and whose will should be as the will
of all mankind; and therefore Romans 5. we are not only said to be made sinners
by him, which denotes our inherent corruption, but also to sin in him, which
supposes, that our persons were represented in him, not in this sense, as if
we had appointed Adam our delegate (as it were) and so had passed over our wills
to him, for how could that be, when we had no existency or being at all;
Therefore this was wholly by the appointment of God, that it should be so, who
is the supreme Lord over all mankind; Even as Christ was Surety for all those
who were given him of the Father, not as if believers did delegate him (as some
have absurdly and odiously stated the Question) but he was designed to that
office by the appointment of God. Adam then was made the common Trustee and
Treasurer for all mankind, though he did prove (as it were) the Phaeton,
involving all his posterity in utter destruction; so that Adam was the head of
mankind two ways,

1. He was the caput natural, the natural head from which his off spring was
to descend, and so original sin is communicated unto us, because of our
natural propagation from him; This makes Austin call it therefore so great a
sin, that we are never able to judge enough of the hainousness of it, because
hereby the whole mass and lump of mankind is soured with it; but this is not
all, Therefore

In the second place, He was made caput morale, God did appoint him to be our
moral head, covenanting with him, that if he perservered, the good promised
should redound to him and to all his posterity, but if he did apostatize then
he and all his offspring shall be plunged into the evil threatened, and this
Covenant was made known to Adam, that so he might be the more careful to look
to his duty; Neither was it requisite that God should expect Adam's consent, or
ours to this agreement, seeing God is the absolute Sovereign and Lord of all,
and herein did consult for our good, better then if he had taken any other way,
as is more to be insisted on. But against this Covenant many rise up with open
mouth; Soto the Papist he derides it, the late Writer, so often mentioned,
says, he knows of no such thing, and which is the greater pity; Jausenius
more orthodox, though a Papist, then many who call themselves Protestants, in
the Pelagian Controversies, he following Austin too rigidly calls it, Novum
pacti mysterium, etc. the new mystery of a Covenant founded upon no Scripture,
Tradition, or solid Reason, but exeogitated by mere humane Authority ( De Stat.
Not. lap. lib. 1. cap. 16.) But though this Covenant with Adam be not
expressed, yet evident and inseparable consequences from the Scripture will
compel us to believe it, For was the commination of death only to him as a
singular person, was he only interessed in the punishment of death, if he did
disobey; The event demonstrateth the clean contrary, for do not all die upon
his voluntary transgression? Is not this then plainly to say, that God made a
Covenant with him as a public person? And if Austin were not of that mind,
how could he say, Omnes homines fuernnt ille unus homo? We were not all that
one man physically and naturally, therefore morally and by Covenant in Gods
estimation, per jurisfictionem (as they say) though we must not think this was
a mere fiction or imaginary thing, as the Remonstrants call it, only a
dispensative Covenant, not as if God were really angry with mankind for this
transgression. Again, If there were not this Covenant, the Apostle could not
lay it still upon one man, Romans 5. and 1 Cor. 15. but if it were only because
the root is defiled, then our parents sins would be accounted to us as well as
Adam's, which compelled Austin to incline to that opinion also.

Lastly, (For I have proved this before) Adam is called, Romans 5. 14. The figure
of his who was to come, that is, Christ; The (...), the Type, that is by way of
contrariety, that as Christ was the head of all believers to justification and
eternal life; so Adam was the head of all his posterity to sin and eternal
death; Therefore Christ is called the second Adam, whereby it is plain, That
God did appoint these two as two contrary heads, and public persons for two
contrary ends, which does necessarily imply a Covenant; and indeed who can
deny, but that as all the Angels did stand upon their own personal account; The
other Angels did not sin in Lucifer as a common head, though happily by
imitation, but they all stood upon their own bottom, and so were condemned for
their own personal iniquity; so God also might have ordered about man, that
Adam's sin should not have hurt his posterity, what he did should be imputed
to his own person only, as it is now with parents in respect of their children:
Thus men might not have been subordinate to him, but collateral in respect of a
moral consideration, though naturally they descended from him, for the denying
of original righteousness, which is the consequent of Adam's sin, was wholly
at his free pleasure, only supposing the Covenant, it does become necessary to
us to be deprived of it, and it cannot be rationally thought, how original
righteousness upon Adam's standing could have been propagated to his posterity
without this Covenant of God, that it should be so.

So then if this foundation be surely laid, this will abundantly quell all
those calumnies, whereby Gods proceedings are traduced in this point; for
whereas it is thought to be unheard of injustice, and intolerable, that we
should not only be made miserable, both temporally and eternally by another
man's sin, but also sinful by his sin, which is thought to be the greatest
cruelty that can be imagined: We are made sinners whether we will or no, that
we may be damned whether we will or no. This Proposition may serve to compose
such distempered apprehensions, not indeed but that we must admire in some
respects at Gods holy and righteous proceedings, which we are not fully to
comprehend. Austin is affected with the miris modis, and occultis judiciis of
God in these dispensations; And he that will not leave to faith, to apprehend
where reason cannot comprehend, does deserve both ex congruo and condigno, to
be accounted a Philosopher, rather than a Christain, and his Religion Reason,
rather than Faith; For what point is there in those mysteries of faith, which
we believe, wherein we are not to cry out (...), Oh the depths! Our oystershell
cannot empty that Ocean; as Austin is reported to have a vision of a young man
attempting to do so, while he was writing his book of the Trinity, thereby
informing him of humane incapacity to reach comprehensively to such things.
Again, There is none says, that this sinful condition, and so by consequence
miserable is brought upon Infants necessarily; for although as to them it is
inevitable, yet in Adam, it was free and voluntary, God had abundantly
furnished him withal abilities to make mankind happy, and none may presume of
Adam's posterity, that he would have done otherwise. Who can say, he would have
done otherwise then Adam did, seeing God did on purpose create man at first in
such a furnished and qualified manner, that as Austin observes, the world
might see what the free will of man could do, that now we may see what the
grace of Christ can do.

Furthermore, (Which consideration alone is able to overthrow the foundation of
all the calumnies cast upon this Doctrine) God when he made Adam thus the
common trustee for mankind, did herein consult our good; It was for man's
advantage that all this was done for him, he intended original righteousness,
immortality and happiness should descend from him to his posterity, upon his
perseverance, so that no more evil is now inflicted upon Adam's offspring then
good was designed and provided for him, if he had continued in obedience. If
sin and misery come upon Infants now before actual knowledge, so would
original righteousness and happiness have descended upon them before their
consent; and whereas happily many of Adam's posterity, yea all, if left to
themselves, would have revolted from God; upon Adam's confirmation, all would
have been confirmed: So that we see God does not inflict more evil then he had
provided good for us.

Again, The known Enemy to the Doctrine of original sin does falsely and
odiously represent this Doctrine, as if Infants were innocents, and yet we hold
them guilty of eternal damnation, and therefore having mustered many reasons
together, concludes upon the account of them, That it is safe to affirm, that
God does not damn any one to hell for the sin of another. ( Vnum Necess. cap.
6. Sect. 1.) Now this is to make Chimera's of his own head, for no Divine
says, That an Infant deserves hell, merely because Adam sinned, nor is he
obnoxious to the wrath of God merely for that, but because this corruption of
Adams is also propagated to the child, and so it is obnoxious to the wrath of
God, for that inherent derived pollution, and the Scripture being as plain and
clear in describing of such a natural estate of man by his descent from Adam,
as may possibly be desired; We must not leave such evident Texts, because we
may subtly dispute in a cavilling manner about Gods proceedings herein. It is
good Rule among the Schoolmen, That in Philosophicis argumentum facit fidem,
but in Theologicis-fides facit argumentum, In Philosophy the Argument works
says or assent, but in Divinity, says works the argument; So that we are to
believe that one place, if there were no more, of David's confession, Psalm. 51.
5. Behold I was shopen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me,
then all the curious, presumptuous speculations of men, who from reason would
demolish this truth, and as for their evasions, and wrestings of that place,
they are so forced and irrational, that a man may justly tremble to see men no
more reverentially submit their thoughts to the Scripture; Certainly the
Psalmist intended, that every one should have a special regard to this truth
delivered there, because of the ( Behold) prefixed, which is, as I may so say,
the Asterisce of the holy Ghost, or the Bibles nota been (as was formerly said
in this Text.)

If further it be objected, That it was not voluntary to Adam's posterity,
their consents were to be expected.

To this it is easily answered, That seeing God had provided such a way for
mankind, as was for their good, seeing the contrary good, and more also to that
evil we are now fallen into, was intended for us in case of Adam's obedience,
how silly is it to say, man's consent should be expected? Not to add further,
that the holy wisdom of God ordering it thus, is enough to make us never to
open our mouths more against this way; and as for the involuntarinesse of this
sin, we have several times spoken to that, It was voluntary as far as the
nature of such a sin did require, even as habitual sins are not voluntary,
as actual are, but are as far as habitual ones do require. It was voluntary
effective; This sin did not arise from the nature or matter of man
necessarily, as the Materiarii and other Heretics taught, but by the
voluntary transgression of Adam; It is also voluntary subjective, for this
corruption is chiefly seated in the will, which rules the whole man; and it is
voluntary consecntive by consequent, for man naturally delights in this evil
estate, and till grace make a change we are not weary of this condition. It is
true, this subsequent will whereby we delight in our original pollution, does
not properly make original sin to be ours, for this is an actual sin, and
flows from that better root, only it shows that this evil estate is so
far from being contrary to man's will naturally, that it delights in it, and
does contumaciously rebel against the grace of Christ that would deliver.

Lastly, Whereas the 18th Chapter of Ezekiel is commonly objected against this
truth, where God by the Prophet at large declares, That the Son shall not
die for the fathers sin (an innocent for a nocent) but every one shall die in
his own iniquity; I have spoken something to this already, neither am I to
consider, how that place is to be reconciled with the second Commandment,
wherein God is said, To visit the iniquity of fathers upon their children to
several generations, Exodus 20. 3. and several instances of Scripture make it
good. To be sure the Proverb which gave occasion to this passage, was a
profane one, redounding to Gods dishonor; Sanctius (in locum) the Papist
thinks that the Jews of old had used it, and that because of Adam's fall
imputed to his posterity, but it seems rather at that time to be taken up,
while under the judgments of God, especially for Manassehs his sins, as
appears Jer. 15. 4. where is observable, that though Manasses had repented,
and his sins pardoned to him, yet God visited them upon the Nation afterward;
So that it may not seem strange: If it be affirmed, That notwithstanding Adam
repented, and his sin pardoned, yet it may be visited upon all his posterity.
There are various thoughts about the interpretation of the place: Some making
it a promise under the Covenant of grace only, as it seems probable, if you
compare it with Jer. 31. 29. where the same profane Proverb is mentioned, and
this promise to the contrary, whereas Adam was under the Covenant of works.
Others very probably say, This is not to be extended to all times and places,
only God promises, That in their particular condition at present, they shall
have no occasion to use it; for such who did, might be brought back from their
captivity. Thus Sanctius and Maldenate, because (say they) it is plain, That
the Jews now are under their grievous calamity for their fathers sake, who
crucified Christ, saying, Let his blood be upon us and our children, Mat. 27.
25. But however the Exposition be, it does not gainsay this Doctrine of
original sin, for there it speaks of children free from their parents sins;
we speak of children filled with inherent corruption themselves, though derived
from Adam, and chiefly, because there the Prophet speaks of particular,
private parents, whereas we say, Adam was a public appointed person by God
himself, so that that of Adam's is extraordinary, even as Christ, though
innocent, yet died for our sins, which yet seems to contradict this place of
Ezekiel, and the Socinians bring it to prove it could not stand with Gods
justice to punish Christ, being innocent, for our sins.

But in the close of all we may justly retort on those who oppose this truth,
that they attribute much injustice and cruelty to God, which Austin does
frequently urge the Pelagians with, for they make all the misery that many
times falls upon young Infants, yea and that repugnancy and temptation that
is within us against good to be from our primitive constitution, that God made
us so. Those that will not acknowledge original sin to be the cause of this
misery, must make God to be so, and therefore, as appears by Baronius (Annal.
Anno 418.) The Emperors Edict made to banish Pelagians, contains this, as one
reason, Proprer trucem inclementiam etc. for the horrid and cruel inclemency
they attribute to God, passing a sentence upon man to die before he lives; But
I shall hereafter, when I come to speak of the Effects of original sin make it
appear, That the opposers of original sin do more unjustly, yea and
blasphemously attribute many things to God in a far more transcendent way
then their adversaries are by them supposed to do; How can it stand with the
goodness, mercy and love of God, that so much evil, and death it self should be
upon mankind from man's Creation, and not rather that it was introduced by
Adam's sin?

Let the Use of all this be to humble our selves under Gods righteous
proceedings, to say with Job chap. 40. 3 Behold I am vile, I will lay my hand
upon my mouth; Yea may thou not admire at the wise ends of God revealed in
Scripture, why this should be? This is to stop every man's mouth; This is to
make it appear, That all the world is guilty before God; This is to make it
appear, that Christ is necessary, this is the way to make Christ more glorious
and precious to those that do believe.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin.

The Fourth Part.

Setting forth The immediate Effects of ORIGINAL SIN

By Anthony Burgess.

ANCHORA SPEI.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1658.

A TREATISE OF Original Sin. PART. IV.
CHAP. I.
Of that Propensity that is in every one by nature to Sin.
SECT. I.
This Text explained and vindicated from Socinian Exceptions.
JOB 15. 16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks
iniquity like water?
THe last particular to be treated upon concerning original sin, is the
immediate effects thereof, which we now come to discover; and whereas they are
many, some general and some particular, as the pains inflicted upon women* in
childbearing; the general are the curses that are brought upon the whole
world, and every part thereof. I shall limit my self only to those that belong
to mankind, and are inseparably annexed to every individium herein: Now these
effects they are either spiritual or temporal.

I shall begin with the spiritual, and first pitch upon that propensity and
vehement inclination which is in every one by nature to sin: This plainly
demonstrateth there is a sinful and corrupted principle within, else all
mankind would not be so prone and inclining to evil as they are, and this Text
will abundantly confirm us of the ready and delightful propensity that is in
every man (none exempted) to that which is evil; They are the words of Eliphaz
one of Job's friends, who takes an Argument from this proneness in man's nature
to sin to humble Job, and to make him more patiently silent under Gods heavy
hand upon him. Job indeed acknowledges this very truth, Chap 14. 4. and does
from thence debase himself under Gods dealings with him, but Eliphaz repeateth
this again, either because the most holy that are, though they sometimes affect
their hearts with divine truths, and do make a blessed improvement of them, yet
at other times when the temptation is violent, they need to have the same
truths suggested to them again by others, or else though Job was convinced,
that man being thus unclean, he might well be moral, and subject to diseases,
yet happily he did not see the righteousness of God, in inflicting
extraordinary judgments such as his were upon a godly man, delivered from the
dominion of this original pollution, and walking with all integrity of heart,
as Job was persuaded he did. Eliphaz therefore makes use of this Truth about
man's sinfulness, still to bring Job lower in his own eyes, and to make him
exalt God, and indeed there is no truth so greatly accommodated to bring a man
off, yea though godly in an high degree from all self-confidence, as also all
repinings and murmuring under the severity of God, as this about original
sin. Now Eliphaz to aggravate this the more, does at the 14. Verse speak
interrogatively: What is man that he should be clean? and then exegetically
explaining this he adds, and he that is born of a woman that he should be
righteous: So that by cleanness is meant righteousness, and there is also the
reason given why none is righteous, even because born of a woman; So that it is
plain all this sinfulness comes by natural descendency from our parents. The
first Hebrew word signifies, that a man has no innocence, so that he has not
any cause to complain or murmr under Gods judgments be they never so heavy,
and the other denotes that he has no righteousness whereby he is able to
answer God, if called to his Tribunal; and the word for man signifies him a
miserable wretched man incurably wretched. This proposition is aggravated a
majori, Behold he puts no trust in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean
in his sight. By Saints some have understood the godly Patriarchs of old, but
if we compare this with Job 4. 18. It is plain he means Angels, and if we
understand it of evil Angels, it is plain they proved Apostates, there was no
trust in them, they forsook their habitation as if they did contemn it and
were weary of it; or if of good Angels, then it is plain that God neither did
put any trust in them as of themselves, for it was the power and grace of God
which did confirm them, so that of themselves they would have apostatized as
well as the rest; Eliphaz adds for amplification sake, The heavens are not
clean in his sight. By heavens we are to understand metonymically the Angels
who dwell therein, and these are said to be not clean in his sight,
comparatively to the purity and holiness of God, for as the being of the most
noble creature is even nothing at all to his infinite Essence, so also is their
righteousness; some understand the heavens without any Trope, as if they were
said to be not clean, because they are subject to vanish away, because they
shall wax old as a garment, Psa. 102. 27. and there shall be made new heavens.
2 Pet. 3. 7. Cajetan as Pineda (in loc.) observes from this place, and many
others, always takes occasion to broach his opinion, That the heavens are
animated and subject to sin, but that opinion is rejected as absurd, though
it seems to be Aristotle's opinion that caelum est animatum. If then it be
thus with Angels, who are such glorious spirits, and and have not the least
blemish in their natures comparatively to God; no wonder that my Text is
brought in with an how much more abominable is man, etc. wherein we have man
described from his property and ^^ition be is in by nature. And secondly the
effect, as a sign demonstrating of this: The property is twofold, abominable,
even as a carcass is abominable that has lost the soul which did animate it,
so is man being made carnal and natural, having lost the Spirit of God and his
image; Abominable, that denotes such loathsomeness that we cannot endure to
behold or come near the object loathed, that we cannot endure the sight of it;
such a thing is man naturally in the eyes of God, the Hebrew word for man is
the strongest man, or the most famous and best of men naturally; and indeed
this is to be applied even to regenerate men also, so far as original
corruption has still any vigorous actings in them, (for so some think,) Job
was not sensible enough, though otherwise godly, of the contaminating power of
original sin in him, whereby his best duties had some impurity, and so God
might justly bring all that evil upon him he did; Thus man is abominable and
loathsome in the eyes of God, and he ought to be so in his own eyes, to his own
self, a natural man should not be able to bear or endure himself, because of
that loathsome sinfulness that does adhere to him: how much are
Pelagian-Doctrines that cry up a purity in man's nature, contrary to this Text?
Oh that God would mercifully do that to such corrupt Doctors, which God
threatens in anger to the profane secure sinner, Psalm 50. 21. I will reprove
thee, and set in order before thy eyes, the original does not name what, the
translator adds his sins, some add thy own self, which comes all to one,
I will set thy self before thy self, and all thy sins, in the several kinds
and grievous aggravations of then; The Hebrew word is military and taken from
setting a battle in array against another; Thus God said he would do, and what
a mercy is it to a man, when all our self-love, self-flattery, and
self-fullness shall be removed, and God shall set our selves in all our
loathsomeness and deformity before our selves; What burdens would we be to our
own selves? but this is Gods work, humane speculations and moral instructions
have no efficacy herein. The second propercy attributed to man is filthy: The
Hebrew word is only used here, and Psalm. 14. 3. and Psalm. 53. 3. concerning the
root of it, there is no certainty, only it is generally translated that which
is putrid rotten and stinking, and because rotten and putrefying things are
unusefull and unprofitable: Hence it is that, Romans 3. 12. the word out of the
Psalmist is rendered unprofitable; Thus man having lost the Image of God is
become like unsavory salt as he is noisome in Gods eyes, so he is unfit for
any good thing, he is in a state of sin, and so has no ability to what is
good, neither can he by any power abiding in him ever recover out of this lost
estate, so that man is now become like Ezekiel's Vine, Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3, 4. It
will not serve for any work, not so much as to make a pin of it to hang a
vessel upon it, but is only suel for fire. Thus unusefull and unserviceable a
man is become in respect of the least good, whereby the glory of God may be
exalted. Thus we have the properties describing man by his natural principles.

In the next place he is described, by the immediate effect from this cursed
cause being thus abominable and filthy, what does necessarily flow from hence?
even to drink iniquity like water. This expression shows the vehement
inclination in man to sin, and that with delight; as a man who is greatly
thirsty does earnestly desire to drink, that the heat within may be
refrigerated; Of this expression more in the Doctrine; This is enough to show,
how it is with man relatively to sin, even as with a feavourish, or
hydropical person that is continually calling for some drink to cool the heat
within.

Thus this Text shows us, what is one immediate and inseparable effect of
man's nature through original corruption, that it does propend and incline with
all greediness to evil, and only evil continually; Yet although this be so
pregnant and clear a place, Socinians have labored to obscure it. And

1. (They say) It is an Hyperbole; This is their constant refuge, whenever
the Scripture says any thing to exalt Christ, or deba^e man, they make it an
Hyperbole, but how can that be accounted an Hyperbole, which experience does
confirm? And the Adversaries to original sin grant, that mankind is very
prone to sin, and all are very ready to offend, though they attribute this to
other causes rather then original sin. This Answer of theirs has been fully
consuted, when we treated on Psalm. 51.

2. (They say) Such an impurity is noted to be in man, as is in the Angels and
the Heavens, but they have no original sin: The Answer is, That there is more
attributed to man, how much more abominable is man? So that the Argument is
taken from the less to the greater.

3. (They say) These words are not to be taken universally, or understood of
every man; but the expression is universal, it excludes or exempteth no man:
man, and born of a woman, are universals not particulars.

4. (They say) These are the words of Eliphaz, one of Jobs friends, and they
did not always speak right. It is true, they did not always rightly apply the
Doctrine they spoke, they mistook about Job, but the Doctrine it self in the
general was true, and therefore we see that quoted in the new Testament, as the
word of God which Eliphaz spoke, as that passage, 1 Cor. 3. 13. He takes the
wise in their own craftiness, is Eliphaz his speech, Job. 5. 13. but for this
particular truth; you have heard Job also as well as Eliphaz confirming of it,
Job. 14. 3. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one; Which is
not to be understood of bodily filthiness, as the Pelagians of old, but
spiritual uncleanness, as appears by the opposite to it in other places,
which is unrighteousness, for it is worth our observing that this natural
pollution and sinfulness of man is mentioned four times in this Book of Job,
with the aggravation of it.

The first is, Chap. 4. 18, 19. Behold he put no trust in his servants, etc.
how much less on them that dwell in houses of clay? whose foundation is in the
dust, etc. This special truth Eliphaz says he had in a Vision, and by special
revelation from God, and therefore it was the more to be attended unto; if
Angels are not able to stand in the presence of God, but cover even their very
faces, the noblest part as conscious of their imperfection comparatively to
God, then no wonder if sinful mortal man be affected with his distance from,
yea and contrariety to God.

In the next place, We have this truth witnessed unto by Job, and that on
purpose to debase himself under God, that if God do search into him, he cannot
find any thing but what is filthy and unclean, Chap. 14. 4. of which we have
largely treated.

The third time we meet with, is here in my Text, where Eliphaz repeateth it
again, making use thereof to Job, that he should acknowledge impurity and
uncleanness adhering unto every thing he does, though never so holy. And

The fourth or last time, is Chap 25* 45, 6. Where Bildad agrees both with Job
and Eliphaz in this truth, How can h^ be clean that is born of a woman? -- The
stars are not pure in his sight -- how much less man that is a worm, etc.

Thus you see in the mouth of three witnesses we have this Doctrine assured to
us, that man of himself is very abominable and filthy: we might think such
clear Texts might for ever convince men, that they should not speak of such a
thing, as natural is quaedem sanctitas, and probitas, a natural kind of
holiness and probity, no though it were among deaf men, the matter is so
abominable, and grossly repugnant to Scripture Light.

The last exception put in against this place by the pure Naturalists is, That
this Text speaks of actual sin, and therefore it makes nothing for
original To drink down iniquity like water, is (say they) nothing but the (...)
exercising of impiety. But this is readily granted, for we bring this Text to
declare the immediate issue of original sin, because man is thus abominable
by nature, therefore he drinks down iniquity like water; he does not speak
here of men, who by custom have habituated themselves in an evil way, which is
become like a second nature to them, but of man originally and nakedly in
himself, till the grace of God make a change upon him; So that as to drink,
though an action, does denote thirst, a natural appetite within; Thus the
acting of iniquity with delight and content, does necessarily suppose a
corrupted and perverted principle within, from whence all actual evil does flow.

Thus the Text being fully explained and vindicated from all exceptions, we may
observe.

That man being originally corrupted, is therefore prone to all sin with
delight; Because he is abominable and filthy, therefore he swalloweth down
iniquity like water; As in every man's body there is a mortal and corruptible
principle within, which exposes to diseases, and at last death it self; So in
the soul there is a vehement inclination unto every thing that is evil, it is
most suitable and connatural to him; As the feavourish man with greediness and
delight does swallow down cold liquour, thinking he never has enough: Thus it
is with man by nature. That there is in all mankind a propensity to sin, not
only the Adversaries to original sin, but even Heathens have acknowledged
and bewailed, and we have the Scripture, Romans 3. at large describing of it. Now
if it were not by original sin, How and whence should a sinful inclination
be in all men, if there were an innocence and neutrality merely in man to good
or evil, yea an inclination rather to good, because (as they say) the seeds of
virtue are naturally in all? How comes it about that the greater part of
mankind is not good rather than evil? Why should it not be, that to sin is
difficult, but to do good is easy? But besides experience, and many Texts of
Scripture, that may confound this presumptuous opinion, I may insist upon one
for all, Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord locked down from Heaven upon the children of
men, to see if there were any that did understand. And verse. 3. There is none
that does good, no not one; Think not that this is spoken of the Jews only, it
is spoken of all mankind, God looked down upon the children of men, and not on
Judea only; So that this sext is too true, and all ages can give in their
witness to it.

The Doctrinal Truth we are treating of, is, That man being by nature filthy
and sinful, is thereby carried out with all inclination and delight to sin.
Sin is as sweet and as pleasant to a man by nature, as water to a man
scorched with thirst. This expression is very emphatical, it is usual with the
Scripture to apply the Metaphor from corporeal hunger and thirst to the soul;
Hence Christ is compared both to bread, and water, and wine, and says in the
workings thereof is compared to eating and drinking of him, yea the graces of
the soul, whereby we are carried out intensively to holy things, is compared to
hunger and thirst, Matthew. 5. 6 Hence our Savior to express his delight in
doing of Gods will, says, It is his meat to do the will of him that sent him,
John 4. 34. Thus then as the godly have a principle of grace within them,
whereby they hunger and thirst after more enjoyment of God, so there is in a
natural man a constant, vehement appetite to sin, never being satisfied, but
in obeying the lusts thereof. This propensity to sin is here expressed by
thirst, provoking a man to drink with delight; and abundantly you have the like
expression used, Job 34. 7. What man is like Job, who drinks scorning like
water? that is, he delights in it, he does it easily, he finds no
reluctance, nor remorse upon his co^^^^ence.

SECT. II.
How much is implied in this Metaphor, Man drinks iniquity like water.
TO illustrate this, Let us consider, first, how much is implied in the
Metaphor that the Text here uses, Man drinks iniquity like water. And

First, Here is denoted a vehement and violent appetite to sin; Thirst if
extreme is intolerable some say, worse then hunger; Hence Samson cried out of
his thirst, though so strong a man, he was not able to bear it; and Christ
himself, while upon the Cross, complained of no pain, only said, I thirst,
which denotes the impetuousness of this appetite; It is usually defined to be
appetitus humidi and frigidi, an appetite of that which is moist and cold, as
hunger is calidi and sicci, of that which is hot and dry. But the learned
Vossius (De Theol. Genili lib. 3. page 104.) thinks this definition, though
given by Aristrotle, ought to be corrected, because hungry men sometimes desire
cold things to eat, and thirstly sometimes hot things to drink; Therefore he
thinks it more exact to define hunger an appetite, humidi pinguis, of that
which is moist, but nourishing, and thirst humids aquei, of that which is
moist, but merely so. For by satisfying of our thirst, we are not properly
nourished, only thereby the meat we eat, is disposed better to nourishment, so
that thereby the parts of the body, which were dried, are watered, and the food
more easily conveyed to its proper places: yea he will not have hunger or
thirst to be an appetite, but a grief or dolor, arising from the sense of
feeling, which is in the stomach, though he grants an appetite to follow this
grief. Howsoever this be in Philosophy, yet we see thirst is an appetite, or
has it necessarily following it; There is also a kind of pain and grief,
whereby every part that is needy calls for relief, and thus it is in man by
nature, he being destitute of the Image of God, and finding no happiness in
him, does earnestly crave for some relief from the creatures: he thirsts
after the pleasures and profits which are for bidden by Gods Words, and
thereupon his whole endeavor and study is to fulfill the lusts of this sinful
inclination within him; That which is said of some particular sinners, as to
some lusts only, Ephesians. 4. 19. They have given themselves to work at
uncleanesse with greediness; As also Jer. 8. 6. Every one turns to his
course (viz. of wickedness) as the horse rusheth into the battle, is true of
all men naturally, in respect of some sin or other. It is true, those
mentioned in these Texts, had besides their natural inclination, superadded
inveterate and habituated customs in impiety, and so they had their first and
second nature also hurrying them away: but yet the pollution of our nature
alone, is enough thus to precipitate us headlong into every evil way; Do thou
then consider thy self more, and be acquainted with this pollution upon thee;
Oh what a drought is upon thy soul! What vehement provocations from within to
be continually doing that which is evil?

Secodly, From this vehement inclination thus to sin, there is a restlesnesse
and disquietnesse in us, till we be satisfied, we rage and oppose all those who
will not give us to drink of this water; How discontented are men at those
means and ways which God has appointed to prevent sin; They love not the
Law of God, they love not the Word of God, because it is holy and threatens
sin; They love not a faithful and powerful Ministry, because (...) work is
against sin; They cannot endure the holy Orders and Discipl^^ (...) has
appointed in his Church, because against sin; And why is all this? but
because there is a thirst within, a scorching heat after it, and therefore
cannot endure to be hinred from the satisfying of it: Thus by this means a man
is put into a miserable perplexity, if he does not sin he is mad and rages,
and if he does sin he is miserable and undone; As one in a Dropsy, if he
does not drink, he cannot bear it, and if he does, he thereby increases his
danger: Thus every man is a miserable, restless creature by nature, wretched
if he does not sin, and wretched much more if he does sin; what misery it
is to have a scorching heat within a man, and to have nothing to cool, is
parabolically represented by our Savior in Divies while in hell, Luke 16. 24.
who desired Abraham to send Lazarus, that he might dip his finger in water, and
cool his tongue, though it were but a drop of water, he was glad of it: Thus it
is proportionably with every man by nature, having a vehement appetite to
sin, and therefore much disquieted, till they do accomplish it; We read of a
terrible judgment God brought upon the Isralites, while in the wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 8. 15 which was by fiery Serpents, that did sling them; The Hebrew word
for a Serpent signifies thirst, to which also the Greek name (...) does
answer, they are called so, because upon the stinging of a man, he has
immediately such an inflammation and heat upon him, that he does thirst
inordinately, and yet if he do drink, he dies irrecoverably; so that a man
then bitten was in a miserable condition; for if he did not drink the heat
within him did burn him up, and if he did drink, he was sure to die; Original
sin is like this fiery Serpent, it has poisoned mankind with its sting, so
that a man has an inordinate thirst to sin; if he do not sin, he finds no
rest, no comfort; if he do sin, he damneth himself, and there is no way to
cure this, till spiritual thirst put out this natural thirst, till our hearts
be carried out with delight and complacency in heavenly things, then this
sinful tormenting drought that is upon the soul, will quickly be abated; As
the disease called Bulimy, or Dogshunger does bring with it tormenting pains in
the inward parts, so does this impetuous propensity unto evil, till it be
accomplished; It is like the wolf in the breast that consumes continually. The
Wiseman does fully express this disquietnesse of soul, till the lusts of sin
be fullfilled, Prove. 4. 16. They sleep not, except they have done mischief, and
their sleep is taken away, unless they have caused some to fall.

Thirdly, This similitude of drinking down iniquity like water, does suppose
the sweetness and delight that is in sinning; For although water, as such has
no savournesse, and therefore is not like wine or beer, yet because it is
cooling, it does with much delight refresh and refrigerate the hot thirsty
appetite within: Hence Solomen expresses desirable news by this similitude, As
cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far Country, Prove. 25.
25. So that by this expression is denoted, the great delight and content that
naturally is found in any evil way, when a man is sinning it is as he would
have it: This is suitable and agreeable with that corrupt inclination that is
within; David cannot express greater joy, and delight in the Law of God, and
in fulfilling of his will, then they do in obeying the lusts of the flesh, and
this is that which makes conversion so difficult; This is that which does so
strongly hold men in their sinful ways; Neither the words of God or the works
of God are able to separate a man and his sins, till God put forth his
conquering, and all subduing grace, because sin is thus sweet to a man;
Zophar the Naamathite, does excellently inform us, how sweet sin is to an
evil man, and how much he delighte in the sweetness of it, Job 20. 12, 13.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue,
though he spirit, and for sake not, but keep it still within ^^outh, etc. By
this we see, that sine to a natural man, is like some (...) the mouth, which we
roll up and down, being unwilling to swallow (...), that so we may the longer
enjoy the sweetness thereof. Certainly it would be an high degree of blasphemy
to say, God made man with such a corrupt inclination at first, that sin
should be so connatural and suitable to him: It was therefore by Adam's
apostasy, when we lost the Image of God; then no wonder if every part and
power of the soul were carried out inordinately and violently to what is evil.
By this also we see, that a necessity in sinning, and a delight and
voluntariness in sinning may very well consist together, one does not destroy
another: A corrupt man like a corrupt tree, cannot but bring forth corrupt
fruit, yet all this is done with inward delight and content, as he cannot, so
he will not do otherwise: This is much to be observed, because many do
tragically exclaim against this Doctrine of original sin, as that whereby we
are necessitated and captivated unto evil, not at all remembering, that this is
a delightsome captivity, a pleasant necessity, insomuch that when converting
grace does make a change upon a man, it does not only subdue the power of
sin, but takes away the sweetness of it, putting a contrary delight and
sweetness in the soul: Now they delight in God, in holy Ordinances; now their
souls break with longing after those heavenly object, which once they did so
much abhor; That which was honey to them is now gall; The very thoughts of
their former lusts are bitter, and full of wormwood to them. Thus David being
made heavenly, professes often, His soul thirsts after God, Psalm 46. 2.
Psalm 63. 1. Psalm 143. 6

Fourthly, This expression of drinking iniquity like water, does suppose, as
the delight, so the easiness and facility thereof. Pineda observes he
compares it not to eating of pleasant meet, though that be sweet, because
there is some labor in the chewing of it, but that is too argute only the
easiness and facility in sinning may be declared herein; and truly if we apply
it to the manner of a natural man's sinning, it will be very well accommodated;
For does a man by nature find any difficulty in sinning? Does he find checks
and gripes within him? Does he find it an hard thing to obey the losts of
sin, yea they swallow down a Camel as easily as water? It is true, when a
natural man's conscience is awakened and enlightened, when under conviction by
Gods Word, then fear and guilt possesses his soul, then he sins indeed, but
horrible pangs and throbs of conscience do many times accompany their
iniquities, they bring forth in sorrow and pain; but we are now speaking of a
natural man merely as so, left in that estate he was born in, and such a man
follows the lusts of his soul without any pain or trouble at all; There are
no conflict and combats within, crying out, How can I do this and sin against
God? Do we not see this peaceable secure disposition upon most men? Though they
have the Word of God to awaken their conscience, and so thoroughly to convince
them, that you would think they should be as much afraid of sin, as of hell
it self. But as the Rule is, Elementa non gravitant in suo loca, the elements
are not heavy in their proper place; So a man in sinning being in his proper
way finds no molestation, no grief at all, but such are to be more pitied, by
how much they cannot pity themselves.

Fifthly, This similitude does inform us of the frequency and plenty also
insinning. It is not one vain thought, one evil action that will satisfy this
corrupt principle within, but it emptieth it self into abundance; To drink
iniquity like water, denotes, abundance and plenty, be does not sip of it, or
taste of it, as some are said to taste of the good Word of God, Heb. 6. or as
Jonathan tasted of honey, but they drink it down fully and plentifully, never
satisfying themselves therein: Hence if they were to live always upon the
ear^^ (...) would never be weary thereof; Original sin like the horsleech,
Prod^^ 15. has two daughters crying, Give, give which are never satisfied,
these are ignorantis and concupiscentia, Ignorance and Concupiscence;
Ignorance, by that we know not God the true and chiefest good, but every
creature, yea every lust is represented as good and lovely; as in the dark
night a white rotten post, or a glowworm will shine and appear something: It
is the not knowing of God, as revealed in the Scripture, which makes us set up
so many Idols in our hearts. The other daughter is Concupiscence, and this may
be called Sheol, because it is always asking and craving, insomuch that a man
is insatibly carried out all his life long to one sin or other, he still
cries Give, give; Now what a miserable creature is man, that is thus greedy of
that which is destructive of him? If you should hear a man calling
importunately for poison, he will eat nothing but poison, Is not such an one
desperate set to ruin himself? Thus is with every natural man, he can never
sin enough, as if he thought he could never damn himself enough; How happy
are the creatures comparatively herein to man? Their appetites are moderated,
and they desire nothing that is hurtful, but man never stays himself in his
lusts, and withal he is wholly carried out to such things as will inevitably
damn him.

Sixthly, A thirsty man drinking down water, does it to refresh himself, never
attending whether it be wholesome or destructive to him. How many have got their
mortal bane by drinking to quench their raging heat within? The Hydropical man
will call for his drink, though thereby he is ruined, and this does fitly
resemble that cursed appetite in us to sin, though it damnus: We look only
to the bait, not to the hook, to the pleasures of sin, the sweetness of
sin, not at all considering what buterness thus will bring at the later end:
Is not this the miserable estate of man by nature? Does he look any further
then to satisfy this corrupt thirst within him? Does he think, will thus be
for my good, will this be in stead of God and Heaven to me? Hence also it is,
that he is carried out to sin from a voluntary principle within; Even as a
thirstly man needs not to be hired or compelled to drink, he has that within
him which will instigate him: Thus it is in every man by nature, though there
should be no Devil to tempt him, yet that corrupt frame within would provoke
him to all evil. It is from this, that though hell and damnation be threatened,
though this sword of Gods anger hang over his head, yet he will drink of this
water.

Lastly, There is denoted in this similitude, That a man by committing of
sin, is thereby inclined to sin the more. It does not satisfy, but
increase the lust more; As a man in distempered heat does not allay it by
drinking, but enstameth it the more; as a little water thrown on the fire
intends the heat thereof: Thus by drinking in of the water of sin, a man
becomes more thirstly after it, and so to his corrupt inclination there is
added also a corrupt custom, and these two cords are not easily broken, it must
be the grace of God alone, that can set us at liberty; Hence we have that
expression concerning a stubborn, obstinate man in his way of sinning, Deuteronomy.
29. 19. That he adds drunkenness to thirst; And so again, Thirst to
drunkenness; thus he is always in vehement motions after sin, and the more
he swalloweth it down, and is inebriated with it, the thirstier still he
grows, according to that known Rule, Quo plus suxt potae, plus si^iuntur
aquae.

It is true, that proverbial expression used, by Moses in the Text named, is
very obscure, and is greatly vexed. Delrio upon the place, gives fifteen
Interpretations, and Bonfrerius offers one of his own; Grotius goes along
with those that ^^^erstand the abstracts for concretes, and so apply it to two
different pers^^^ ut that of Calvin's seems most probable, which I have
mentioned, that it denotes a man by custom in sin, to be more vehemently
inclined thereunto; Even as drunkenness does not quench the thirst, but makes
a man more thirsty afterward, and this agrees wholly with my purpose.

SECT. III.
Some Demonstrations proving that there is such an impetuous inclination in man
to sin.
THat there is such an universal propensity in all manking, is confirmed by
experience, and acknowledged by the adversaris to original sin. Let us bring
some few demonstrations a posteriori, that they may fully prove the (...), That
there is such an impetuous inclination in man to sin. And

First, The testimony of the Scripture may be instar omnium in this point, that
does sufficiently attest the general pollution of all men by their evil doings.
Not to bring in that forementioned place, Psalm. 14. 2, 3. where God is said to
look from Heaven upon the children of men, and he could not behold one that did
good, no not one. It was not upon Judea only, but upon the children of men, and
he could not find one good. We may take in many other places to confirm this,
How quickly had all mankind corrupted it self? as appears, Genesis 6. 12. God
looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted
his way before God. Here we see, not long after the Creation, how all the world
was quickly become abominable in his eyes; All flesh had corrupted his way
every man had defiled himself; Yea so great it was, that verse. 5. Every
imagination of man, was only evil, and that continually. Now whence should all
this evil arise? Must not the fountain needs be bitter, from which so many
bitter streams flow? Could so many thorns grow from men if they were grapes? If
so be there were the seeds of virtue in men by nature (as they say) or at least
man is by nature indifferent either to good or evil, yea more inclining to
good; How comes it about that always evil should prevail? How is it that good
does not sometimes take place? Why is there not an age to be recorded, wherein
we may say, all flesh had made their ways holy, and that every imagination of
the thoughts of man's heart was only good continually? Why should not there be
some ages, wherein God might look from Heaven, and see none that did evil, no
not one? The pure Naturalists are never able to answer this satisfactorily; for
if man be by nature as well without vice or virtue, ready and capable to
receive either, as his will shall carry him; Why is it, that this will of man
does never prevail universally in some age, to make all good? Why should sin
always get the upper hand, and supplant virtue (as it were) so as to come out
first? Neither can that be a refuge in this Text, which sometimes they run
unto; That long custom in sinning for many ages together, and evil examples so
long confirmed from age to age, d^ cause such a torrent of impiety; For not to
speak at this time of the cause of such evil customs and examples; How came
they at first? Whence did they arise, but from polluted originals? This will
not answer the Text in hand, for that speaks of the first age before the
drowning of the world, which yet is called the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.
5. It was the world of ungodly in the first age, and still in the later ages it
is the world of ungodly: Yea this is still applied to that remnant of mankind
which escaped the deluge, when there were but eight persons, Genesis 8. It Is there
said, That the imagination of man's heart was (...) his youth, It is strange
therefore, that if good seed was naturally sown in (...) that nothing but tares
should come up every where in stead thereof. But let us take notice of another
place of Scripture confirming the universal overslowing of iniquity, and that
is David's complaint, which he so sadly pours forth, calling upon God to help
and to redress it, Psalm. 12. 1. Help Lord, for the godlyman cease, the
faithful fail from among the children of man; They speak vanity every one with
his neighbor; It is true, here are some supposed to be godly and faithful,
but they are few comparatively to the ungodly, as flowers to the weeds, as
jewels to the sand on the seashore, and those that were so, it was not from
nature, but the grace of God that sanctified and prepared them: But if you do
regard the general, the Psalmist is so affectionately moved with the
overflowing of evil, that he sees no help but in God himself, and this is the
more to be aggravated, because the people of Israel were the Church of God,
they had the Prophets of God, they had Gods wonderful presence amongst them,
and yet for all that, this garden so planted and dressed by God, did become a
wilderness; If then where there are many external and powerful means to
subdue and conquer that innate corruption, yet it break out so violently; What
if man were left to himself? How abominable and vile would he prove? And was
not this the perpetual complaint of all the Prophets successively, that every
one did turn aside to their evil ways, that they did preach in vain. that
there was no soundness amongst them; a sinful Nation, a seed of evildoers;
The more they were stricken, the more they revolted; The whole head was sick,
and the whole heart faint, as Isaiah most affectionately bewalleth it, Chap. 1.
4, 5. What a strong demonstration then is this of the imbred corruption of
mankind, that under all the means of grace does yet overflow in impicties? I
shall not mention any more Texts for this purpose; The whole scope of the
Scripture being to declare man's sinfulness, and extol Gods grace.

Secondly, This universal propensity to sin in all mankind, is likewise
attested unto, even by the very Heathens. It Is true, they knew nothing of Adams
tall, nor of the propagation of this hereditary pollution, yet the sinfulness
it self they perceived and groaned under it. Even Grotius himself, who would
elude the pregnant Texts of Scripture for original sin, by the Rhetoricians
trope of Hyperbole, yet does bring in many passages out of the Heathens,
acknowledging such a depravation of man's nature, out of Heriocles the
Philosopher and Jamblichus, that it is (...), and (...), it is implanted and
ingraffed in us to sin, ( Comment. in Luc. cap. 2. ver. 22. as also De Jure
botli as paci lib. 2. Yea out of Aristotle, who held this indifferency in man's
nature, he brings that expression, (...), it is imbred in a man to gainsay
reason. Thus the very Heathens, though they knew not the cause, yet could not
but confess, that vitium ingenita infirmitatis, the vicious imbred infirmity
that is in every man. Yea their Poets have acknowledged better Divinity, then
some later writers in the Church, witness those sayings, Quantuns mortalia
peceatora coecae noctis habent? and another, Vitiis neme sine nascitur; A
third, Terras Astraeae reliquit, fergning our originals to be of stones; Inde
genus duri sumus: Homines sua natura sunt malis, as Plato. We might be large
also in bringing the witnesses of others, Nihil homine miserius and superbius
(said Pliny) simul atque edi^i sumus; and Tully, In omni continuo pravitate
versamur, etc. And what is that saying, Humanum est errare, but according to
Divinity, Humanum est peccare? Thus the light of nature, though but like that
of the Owl to the Sun, could perceive something in this kind. Now this
testimony is the more to be regarded, because it is so imbred a desire in us,
to make our selves as lovely as may be, and to hide every thing that is
deformed.

Thirdly, (...) principle also in all Nations, to have Magistrates and Laws, to
have prison^ ^^gibbets, whereby punishment may be inflicted upon offenders,
does palpably demonstrate what a pronenesse there is in man to sin. For those
provisoes do suppose that man does restrain himself from evil, only for fear of
punishment; If so be that there were such a natural purity in man; Why should
there be such jealousies, such fears of man, Homo homini lupus? Why are there
provided such severe punishments to awe wicked men, but that man's nature is out
of credit, it is supposed to do all the evil it can, if it have any impunity?
Certainly it is not for good that Mastives are tied up, that Bears and Lions
are kept up in grates; This argues how cruel they would be if let loose; Thus
also it is with mankind all the severe Laws and punishments which are in all
estates established, do demonstrate how wild and outrageous man is, if left
alone to himself; In his younger years he has the rod, when grown up,
prisons and gallows, and in his old age, death and hell to awe him against
sin.

Fourthly, The necessary of Education and Chastisement to young children, does
also declare, that they are prone to vice. It cannot be denied, but supposing
Adam had continued in integrity and procreated children, they would have needed
instruction and information, but then withal it must be granted, that this was
a mere innocent nesciency in them, and therefore as the body had been prepared,
so the soul without any difficulty would with all aptness and readiness have
received all the good seed sown into it, whereas now in young ones there is a
difficulty to understand holy things, they are unteachable and untractable, yea
there is also a contrariety and an averseness to that which is good. Now if
they were in a mere purity of nature, as the Adversaries suggest it, they were
in such an equal indifferency and capacity of virtue or vice; Why should not
they need education and Masters to teach them evil, as well as good? Yea, why
should they not be more ready to good then evil, seeing they say there are
igniculi virtutum, sparks of virtue lying hid in the soul, which by education
and instruction are blown up into a flame? So that the Schools which are
generally provided for youth, do declare, That the nature of man of it self,
will bring forth weeds, but there must be much plowing and sowing, much cost
and labor ere any good seed will grow up. That known Text of Scripture will
for ever bear record against these patrons of nature, Folly is bound up in the
heart of a child, but the rod of correction will drive it away, Prove. 22. 15.
No less powerful is that counsel, Prove. 23. 13. Withold not correction from
the child, if thou beat him with the rod, he shall not die; if thou beat him,
etc. thou shall deliver his soul from hell. Does not this proclaim, that every
child is set to damn it self, if left alone? It is not more prone to run into
the fire, then it is to fall into hell, and this makes chastisement so
necessary. How necessary is it for parents to consider this, either education
or hell, either chastisement or damnation? And whence is all this, but because
of the impetuous nature in every child unto evil? As the horse and mule need
the bridle, being carried out only by sense; Thus does the child need
admonition, being unteachable and untamable of himself, even like the wild
Asses colt, Job 11. 12. Let parents then take heed of remisness, lest their
children roaring in hell do continually curse them for their negligence. It Is a
known example of a young man carried to the place of execution, that cried out,
Non Praetor, sed Matter, mea duxit ad furcam; It was not the Judge, but his
mother brought him to that shameful death. There was in the Tabernacle Aarons
Rod, and the Manna, which some would have allegorically to signify the
sweetness and benefit of Discipline, Iniquity then breeds within us, all the
wisest and severest education can no more free a child from its inherent
filthiness, then Paracelsus could make himself immortal, as he fondly boasted,
if he had had the first ordering and dieting of his body. Hence the duty of
parents is set down, Ephesians. 6. 4. To bring up their children in the nature and
admonition of the Lord. And Solomon, who was so tender, and only beloved in
the sight of his mother, yet his parents were continually distilling wholesome
precepts into him, as Prove. 4. 3, 4, 5, implying thereby, that none is without
ignorance, without a proneness to evil; therefore is godly instruction so
necessary. So that the Doctrine of original sin should greatly provoke
fathers and mothers to their duties; Every mother should be a Monica to her
Austin, that we may say, It is not possible, that Filius tot lachrymarum
pereat, a son of so many prayers and tears should perish.

Fifthy, The difficulty that is acknowledged by ali, to do that which is good
and holy, does also manifest our propensity to what is evil. We cannot apply
the Text to that which is good, and say, Man drinks down that like water. The
very Heathens could say, Facilis discensus averni, and Virtus in arduo sita
est. Virtue was placed upon an high mountain, it was hard climbing up unto it,
but it was easy to tumble down; it is easy to fall down the hill. Sin then
being so easily committed, and that which is good so hardly performed, Does not
this speak plainly, that we are corrupted by nature? For certainly, if the word
of God, neither in the threatenings or in the promises of it, can make us
decline from evil, and do good, when neither hell can terrify us, nor the
glorious joys of Heaven invite us; This argues we are immovably fixed in a
way of sinning. Is there any command for holy duties? Is there any Law
enjoining us to leave our lusts, of which we do not say, It is an hard saying,
who can bear it? Hence it is that the wisdom of the flesh is said to be enmity
in the very abstract against God, Romans 8. 7. the (...), whatsoever is either in
mind or affections, is wholly opposite to the pure Law of God. So that this is
an evident demonstration of man's vehement inclination to sin, that though God
has set so many fiery flaming swords in the way to stop us from sin; Though
Heaven in the glory of it be on one side discovered, and hell in all the
horrible and dreadful torments of it on the other side; Though many Ministers
of God meet thee at the Angel did Balaam, to stop thee in the way to sin; yet
for all this thou do despirately and obstinately proceed. This makes it
appear, that there is a more flagrant appetite to sin, then to any thing
else: like Rachel, crying, Give me children, else I die: so let me have my
lusts satisfied, else no life, no condition is comfortable.

Sixthly, The necessity of Gods grace both for the beginnings, progress and
consummation in every good work, does evidently prove our polluted nature. We
need grace to make us new creatures, of spiritually dead to quicken us and
enliven us; we need grace to breath in the very first desires, and groans after
any thing that is good. Now why is there such a necessity of a Physician? if we
be not sick, Christ is in vain, grace is in vain: if original sin with the
effects thereof be denied. And therefore Austia said, Pelagians were but nomine
tenus Christiani, Christians only in name: for they do in effect exclude
Christ, and evacuate grace. Indeed the pure Naturalist ( Vnam Necessarium, Chap
6. page 413.) affirms, That the necessity of grace does not suppose our
nature to be originally corrupted, for beyond Adam's mere nature, something
else was necessary: and so it is in us. This Position is bottomed upon that
false and absurd Doctrine invented at first by some Philosophers, brought into
the Church by Pelagions, much insisted upon by Papists; That there is a middle
state, a state of pure nature between sin and grace; That Adam was created in
such a condition, God superadding the glorious ornaments of grace, which upon
his fall, he was deprived of, and so fell into his state of pure nature again,
and in this middle estate, every Infant is now born; a state indeed (they say)
of imperfection, but not of sin; we need grace to carry us to those sublime
and high things which are above nature, but otherwise there is no sin is
(...) So that it is the Papists expression, That Adam standing, and Adam fallen,
(...) only as a man that was clothed and naked; or as the late Author, as
Moses face while the light did shine upon it, and when it was removed; As Moses
face did remain with its naturals, though it had not the super-added luster:
Thus (say they) man is in his state of nature not sinful, neither godly. But
this is a monstrous figment; and he that says, Those who dispute of original
sin, do dispute, De non ente; How much rather may we say, that all those
voluminous disputations of this state of pure nature is wholly De non ente,
there being not the least title in Scripture to establish any such opinion upon
it? It is true, the Author mentioned is often affirming and dictating
Magisterially, concerning such an estate, but never yet has any
Scripture Proof been brought for it; some philosophical arguments happily may
be. Now being this is the foundation, upon which many of the Adversaries to
original sin do build, I shall in its time and order (God assisting) raze up
this foundation, and lay the Axe against the root of the Tree, proving that it
is both against Scripture and solid reason.

Lastly, That there is such an inclination naturally in a man to sin, and
repugnant to what is good, a man's own experience may teach him; were there no
Bible, no Orthodox Teachers, a man's own heart may convince him of such a
perverseness within him, though by natural light he could never discover the
spring of it. Does not Paul, even while regenerated, complain of this Law of
sin within him? Romans 7. Nazianzen makes sad complaining verses, about this
constitution of his soul, Carmen quartum, page 69. The conflict with the flesh
and spirit, which in a most excellent and affectionate manner, he does there
bewail. And certainly if the Adversaries to this Doctrine, find not such a
pronenesse in them, it is because they are blinded, they are benumbed within,
as the Pelagians of old bragged, That a man might be without passions and
sinful commotions; That they did not pati, they felt none of these things, but
herein they were either horrible hypocrites, or stupidly hardened.

SECT. IV.
Of the Causes or Fountain of the vehement proneness and inclination to sin
that is in all men by nature, and of the false Causes assigned by the
Adversaries.
THus you see this Text has sufficiently informed us of this Truth, That there
is in all men by nature a vehement proneness and inclination to sin; To which
we have also added many other Demonstrations of this Truth, not so much that it
is doubtful, and needs to be proved; (For the Adversaries do confess it,) as
that thereby we might the more deeply humble our selves under the consideration
of it. If then there be such constant muddy streams, we are to enquire what is
the fountain of them; And although this Text and many others of the like
nature, do evidently proclaim it to be that corrupt and unclean heart of a man
within, that he has hereditarily and by natural propagation, yet because the
Adversaries to original sin will by no means assent to this; let us consider
what are the causes they assign, and herein we shall find they do not so much
speak falsehood, as blasphemy against God. But before we come to the particular
causes specified by them, let us in the general consider, How many ways this
propensity in mankind may be imagined to proceed, for some gave one head or
spring to it; Others, another; so that there is not more dispute in Philosophy
about the cause of the ebbing and flowing of the sea, or about the rise and
spring of Nilus that famous river in Egypt, then there is about the original of
this impetuousness in man to sin: The effect is acknowledged by all, but the
dispute is about the cause thereof.

In the first place therefore, Some do assign this inclination to sin, to the
souls operations before the body was made; For they conceit, that the soul had
a being before the body, and according to the evil, or good they had, they were
adjudged to proportionable bodies, and thereby it comes to pass that some have
better tempered bodies then others, according to that Rule, gaudeant b^^e nati,
They are to rejoice that have good and kindly constitutions. This was the
opinion of the Platonists, and Origin, who was justly called (...), (...); for
the monstrous opinions he brought into the Church did pro^^^ absurd fancy. Yea
it is thought that this opinion was amongst the Jews* as seems to be employed
in that Question propounded by the Disciples to our Savior concerning the man
born blind, Did this man sin, or his parents? Joh. 9. 2. as also a passage in
the Apocryphal Writer inclines thereunto; Wi^^ 8. 20. And being good I came
into a body undifiled; which Grotius understands of the pre-existency of the
soul, adding that Synesius, though made Bishop, yet did not retract this
error. But this being so gross a figment, it (...) not any confutation, and
the rather, because it is a wonder that no such pre-existent souls should
behave themselves well, for which they should have assigned to them undefiled
and immaculate bodies: for we believe not the (...) mentioned Author in that
boast he there makes.

A second opinion of the Manichees, who feigned two principles of good and
evil, and this evil principle they made the cause of man, whereupon they
condemned marriage as unlawful, and made man to be opus Diaboli, the work of
the Devil. This Manicheism the Pelagians have always endeavored to fasten
upon such as do affirm original sin, but it is done maliciously and
ignorantly; for we say, this evil came not into man at first by nature, but by
the free and voluntary consent of Adam, and since man is fallen, we do not say,
sin is his nature, or his substance, but that it is a vicious quality
adhering thereunto, as leprosy to the body.

3. There are others, who may be reduced to the Manichees, and they were
Heretics called Materiaris, who feigned an eternal matter, that was so evil,
that the wisdom and power of God could not subdue it, but that this malignancy
did adhere to it, whether God will or no. And this they make the cause of that
vicious inclination in man: It is (say they) from the evil matter man is made
off, which is inseparable from it; but this does grossly contradict the History
of the Creation, as recorded by Moses, Wherein it is said, God made every thing
exceeding good, Genesis 1. 31.

Fourthly, The Pelagian, many Papists, and the late Socinian Writers, all these
attribute it to man's Creation and constitution at first, at least in part: for
they tell us of a state of pure naturals, that man has, whereby the appetite
does rebel against the mind, for man confisting of a soul and a body; hereby
(say they) do necessarily arise contrary inclinations; The soul enclineth one
way, and the body another way; and this conflict they are not afraid to say was
in Adam himself, and therefore God gave him grace as a supernatural and
superadded ornament, yea and as a remedy to keep the inferior appetite in its
order: now man being fallen, he has lost those superadditionals, but
continues in his mere naturals, and these being weak and imperfect are easily
carried out to sin, wanting the grace of God to elevate them. This is the
mystery of their iniquity. This is the fountain of all their poisonous
impieties, and therefore (God assisting) is to be confuted most properly, when
we come to speak of that immediate effect of original sin, which is to make a
conflict and rebellion in man between the mind and sensitive appetite in
natural men, and between the flesh and spirit in regenerate men.

Fifthly, That which the Orthodox, following the light of the Scripture assign
as a cause of that deluge of impiety amongst mankind, is the original
depravation of every man's nature through Adam 's transgression. From this
unclean principle none can bring forth that which is clean; and truly the
Scripture is so evident, going always to this head, making the lust within a
man, a cause of all impiety flowing from us, that they seem to deny the Sun
at noonday, who will not acknowledge this.

But let us in the next place examine, What causes of this universal
propensity in mankind, to sin, are given by the late Heterodox Writer; for
the weight of this Objection presses him, and therefore he does industriously
set himself to answer it. ( Vnum Necessar. Chap. 6. Sect. 4. It is certain
(says he) that there are many common principles, from which sin deriveth it
self into the manners of all men.

The first mentioned is, That at first God made no promises of heaven, he had
propounded not glorious rewards, to be as an Argument to support the superior
faculty against the inferior, because there was no such thing in that period
of the world: therefore almost all flesh had corrupted themselves: for want of
this Adam fell, and all the world followed his example, and most upon this
account; till it pleased God, after he had tried the world with temporal
promises, and found them also insufficient to finish the work of his
graciousness, and to cause us to be born anew by the revelations and promises
of Jesus Christ. Thus he; but I had almost said, Oh monstrum horrendum, cui
lumen ademptum!

Now the Socinian appears in his own ugly and deformed colors, let us see
whether there be any validity in this reason or no. And

First, It is very frivolous, ridiculous and absurd; for we are asking for a
reason of the general inclination of all men in all ages to evil, and he would
assign one for that special age of the world before Christ. Is it not still
true, even since Christ's coming, that the heart of a man is desperately and
incurably set upon evil, till the grace of God does sanctify it? So that
though in the New Testament the glory of heaven, and the torments of hell, are
evidently and powerfully demonstrated, yet still there is the same torrent of
impiety in the manners of men.

Secondly, This reason cannot be acquitted from blasphemy (in some sense)
against God, for the cause of overflowing impiety in the Old Testament times,
is reduced hereby to God himself. May not all the profane ones in that age of
the world take up this man's Argument to defend themselves? O Lord it is from
thee we are thus universally wicked! Had the joys of heaven been promised to
us in well-doing: had the torments of hell been manifested unto us; we had then
been awakened; so that we are now wicked, because we wanted such efficacious
means to prevent our impiety, that afterward were vouchsafed to the world; so
that the Israelites might have replied to the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 13. 9. that
he spoke falsely: their destruction is not of themselves, but of God, who did
not give them sufficient encouragements. Had the Asserters of original sin
affirmed any such thing, that might so hainously have redounded to the
dishonor of Gods justice, his mercy and goodness, what tragical exclamations
would have been raised up immediately? But thus it falls out always, that
those who out of a preposterous fear sometimes to hold such things, that have
but an apparent tendency to dishonor God, do fall into such abominable
positions, that do really reproach God, and his ways, as may more be showed in
this point.

Lastly, The very inward part of this reason: is very wickedness and falsehood
it self, for this Proposition, That heaven and hell were not used as Arguments
in the Old Testament, but that temporal mercies and jugements were the only
spurs and curbes in their conversation, is being reserved as the peculiar and
proper glory of Christ, to reveal the promises of eternal life, is that
notorious pure impure Socinianisns which our learned Writers do so evidently
profligate. This says Smalcius (De Div Jes. Christi c. 7.) is so clear a
truth, that they want no little thing to the true knowledge of Christ and his
Office, who are ignorant of it, or doubt of it; yea he adds Vnde appareat,
etc. from whence it may appear, that our Congregations, though they are said to
blaspheme Christ, yet do more rightly acknowledge Christ in this particular,
Quam omnes alios Christiani nominis professores, then all other professors of
Christ's name. Thus they triumph in this enormious error, as their greatest
glory, because they make it peculiar to Christ to reveal and promise eternal
glory. It is not my intent to enlarge on this point, That eternal life was
promised to Adam, as also to those who lived in the Old Testamentary
dispensation. That the tree of life, was a Sacramental symbol of eternal life,
appears by that expression, Rev 2. 7. And certainly if the Jews did not
discover the resurrection of the dead, and eternal life, it was because they
did not (...), as our Savior tells them, Mat. 22. 29, 30. and that is
remarkable which is said, Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life; That same (...), ye think, is not spoken, as if it
were a false persuasion to look for eternal life out of those Scriptures, but
because they boasted in their own interpretation of them, excluding Christ
thereby: It is therefore a detestable position which Smalcius in the same place
has, That the promise of eternal life was wholly hidden from men for those
ages which were before Christ, neither did it clearly appear to any one that
such a thing would be bestowed upon mortal men; for does not Job proclaim the
clean contrary, Job. 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives, -- he shall stand
at the later day upon the earth, and. It is true, the learned Mercer would
apply this to that temporal and blessed restitution of his external happiness,
which God vouchsafed to him, but the Context does necessitate us to understand
it of a more glorious condition. We read also, Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15. That the
Patriarchs acknowledged themselves pilgrims in this earth, and did declare
plainly, they sought an heavenly country. It is not worth the while to examine
the suggestions of Schlitingius the Socinian on those Texts, who would so
miserably wrest them to his own purpose, and that the day of judgment was used
as an Argument to bridle men from sin, appears, Eccles. 11. 9. as also
Chap. 12. 14. The Book concludes with this, as a truth to stick in our mind
always, That God will bring every work unto judgment, and thus much for his
first reason.

His second reason is no less nocent, The cause of iniquity is not, because
nature is originally corrupted, but because Gods Laws command such things,
which are a restraint to the indifferent, and otherwise lawful inclinations of
nature ( Idem ibidem page 415) so that our unwillingness and averseness comes
by occasion of the law coming cross upon our nature, not because our nature is
contrary to God, but because God was pleased to superinduce some Commandments
contrary to our nature; if God had commanded as to eat the best meats, and
drink the richest wines, as long as they could please us, I suppose original
sin would not be thought to have hindered us from obedience. Thus he in a
most profane and unsavory manner. For

First, Here again God is made the occasion of all the universal impiety in
mankind: man may plead, my nature is good, my inclinations are lawful, but God
has superinduced austere commands, he makes those things sins, which would
not have been sins; Thus this man does directly teach the world to lay all
their wickedness upon God, he is an hard master, he is too severe, otherwise
our natures would do well enough. But

Secondly, He betrayeth much ignorance, or concealeth his knowledge, that he
will not distinguish between moral precepts, and mere positive ones; or as
Whitaker out of Hugo, Pracepta Naturae, and Praecepta Disciplinae (De pecato
orig. lib. 1. cap. 14.) commands of Natural Duties, and prohibitions of
Intrinsecal evils; or such as are merely Positive, and for Discipline-sake.
Some things we grant are indeed merely evil, because prohibited; some things
are evil, and therefore prohibited. Although this must be remembered, That a man
does never break a positive command, but thereby also he does a moral command
likewise. Now let this Patron of Nature answer to this Question, Why is there
in mankind such inclinations to those sins, that are morally and intrinsically
evil? Is he of that opinion, that nothing is good or evil internally? But as
Mayro the Schoolman says, God might have made a Law, that whosoever should
praise him should be damned, and whosoever should dishonor him, should be
saved. On monstrous Divinity, that makes virtue and vice nothing in it self!
If God had pleased, vices might have been virtues, and virtues vices; It is
from God that makes such things to be sins, that otherwise would be lawful.
This symbolizeth with Diagoras the Atheist, first called (...), and afterward
(...): for his opinion was, That a wise man might, as time served, give himself
to theft or adultery, (...) (Hesych. de viris illustribus Titulo (...).) for
none of such things, were in their nature filthy, if you take away popular
opinions. But I will not charge this opinion on the Author, only he should not
have spoken so confusedly. If this be true, it is not a vain wish with him, who
addicted to a sin, cried out, Vtinam hoc non esset peccare!

Lastly, Even those inclinations that are in men to lawful things, are
vitiated and corrupted. No man desires to eat, to drink; no man desires
health, or wealth naturally, as he ought to do: I doubt this Author, as all the
Pelagians formerly, do not attend to the exactness of a good work. They forget
Austin's old Rule grounded upon Scripture, That duties are to be esteemed not
by the acts, but by their ends. Is there any man eats or drinks, or
inclines to do these things for the glory of God? as we are commanded, 1 Cor.
9. 31.

Lastly, He runs to evil examples, the similitude of Adams transgression (as
if that moved those to sin, who happily never heard of him) error, false
principles, etc. And from the enumeration of many particulars, applies that of
Job, Chap. 14. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? which Text might
justly have affrighted him, in what he delivers; for there Job speaks of one
in his very first birth, and as is added, Ne infans unius diei, not an Infant a
day old is free from this uncleanness. What can evil examples and wicked
customs do to pollute a child new born? It is true, the Socinians grant, That
where parents are habituated in evil customs, the children may derive from them
an inclination also unto sin. But if so, then this very thing will puzzle
them as much as they endeavor to perplex the Orthodox, with difficulties about
the transmission of original sin: For, How do Parents accustomed to sin
convey this evil disposition? either by the soul, or by the body. And what they
would answer themselves in such an asserted propagation, the same we may for
all mankind in general. But

2. This is no sufficient answer, for still the Question is not satisfied; Men
(say they) are thus inclinded to evil, because of wicked customs and examples;
But how came these customs? Cain had no example before him of murder, yet he
commits it. These evil examples then, and wicked customs, seeing they must
have an original to come from it, cannot be any thing else but the depraved
nature of mankind. And certainly the Apostle James does attribute all evil
committed to that lust which is within a man, Jam. 1. 14. So that if there were
no other occasion or temptation, this is enough to set the whole course of the
soul on fire; And this is the next particular to be considered, which I shall
handle as a second Immediate Effect of original sin.

CHAP. II.
The second Immediate Effect of Original Sin, is the Causality, which it
has, in respect of all other Sins.
SECT. I.
The Text explained, setting forth the Generation of Sin.
JAM. 1. 14. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust
and enticed.
THe next Immediate Effect of Original sin, which comes under consideration,
is, The Causality that it has in respect of all other sins. This is the
dunghill in which the whole serpentine brood of all actual sins is conveived,
and brought forth: Insomuch that when you see all the abominable impieties that
fill the whole world with irreligion to God and injustice to man: If you ask,
whence arises this monster? How comes all this wickedness to be committed?
The Answer is easy: from that original concupiscence, that hot Aetna which is
in a man, that never cease from sending forth such continual flames of
iniquity. Now this truth will excellently be discovered from the Text in hand;
for it is the Apostles scope in this and the adjacent verses, to take off all
men from that wicked way, they are so prone unto ( viz.) to lay the blame of
their iniquities, and to ascribe the cause of them to any, yea to God, rather
than to themselves; They will rather make God then themselves the Author of all
that evil they do commit. We have this from Adam, who at the beginning
endeavored to clear himself, and to charge his sin upon God, The woman thou
gave me. And happily some even in the primitive times, by misunderstanding
some places of Scripture, wherein God is said to give men up to their lusts to
harden and blind men in their sins, might occasion such a detestable
Position, And although the Papists do ordinarily charge this damnable Doctrine
upon the Calvinists, yet there needs no more to justify Calvin in this
particular, then what he does most excellently and solidly deliver upon this
very Text. The truth is, our learned men show expressions from the Papists;
yea, from Bellarmine himself, more harsh and incommodious, then I believe can
be found in any Protestant Writer. But this by the way.

The Apostle being to inform us of the true cause of all the sin we do
commit, and that not God, no nor Devils, or wicked men are to be blamed
comparatively, but our own selves; shows, that all this evil comes from that
concupiscential frame of heart we have within us. And as for God, the Apostle
expressly instanceth concerning him, prohibiting any one to think or say, it is
from God that they do sin, Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God: and he gives two reasons, whereof one is the cause of the other.

If you ask, How is it that God is said to tempt no man, seeing he tempted
Abraham and the Israelites?

Austin's distinction is made use of, that there is a temptation probationis
and seductionis, of probation or trial; or of deceiving and enticing to sin.
God indeed does often tempt his people, the former way, not but that he knows
what is in the heart of every man; but that hereby a godly man's graces may be
the more quickened, as also a man have more experimental knowledge of himself.
As for the other temptation of seduction; God does not thus tempt, that is, he
does not incline or enrice to sin. It is true, we read the Prophet Jeremiah,
saying, O Lord, I am deceived, and thou have deceived me, Jer. 20. 7. But that
is spoken unadvisedly and rashly by the Prophet, who thought, because what he
had prophesied, was not as yet fulfilled, and therefore his adversaries derided
and scorned him, that therefore it would not at all be fulfilled, and so by
consequence, that God had deceived him.

Secondly, Divines distinguish temptation into external and internal. External
are afflictions and troubles, called often so in Scripture, and these
temptations are from God. 2. Internal, which do immediately incline to sin,
and with these God does not tempt. Now although the Apostle had in the former
part spoken of external temptations, yet now he speaks of internal ones; though
some think he continues his discourse of externals, because these many times
draw out hearts to sin; but this arises not from God.

The reason why God cannot tempt to sin, is from the infinite perfection of
holiness, which is in God: he is (...), He cannot be tempted by evil. It is
true, men are said to tempt God many times, and so ex part hominu, there is
done what man could do, even to make God deviate from his own holy nature and
Law: but the Apostle means ex part Dei, that God is of such absolute purity
and transcendent holiness, that there cannot arise any motion in his nature to
make him sin. For so we expound the Greek word in a passive sense, Estius
himself granting, that the use of it in an active signification, can hardly be
found, though Popish Interpreters plead for the active sense; but then there
would be no distinction of this from the following words, Neither tempts he
any man. The original word is used only here in the New Testament. The strength
then of the Argument lies in this, God does not tempt any man to sin, because
he has no inward temptation, or motion in his own nature to sin: for that is
the reason why the Devil is so impetuous and forward in tempting us to sin,
because his nature is first carried out to all evil and so there is no man that
does draw on another to sin, but because he in his own heart, is drawn aside
with it before. The Apostle having thus justified God, and removed all cause of
evil from him; In my Text he directs us to the true internal and proper cause
of all the sin that we do commit; and therein does most excellently show the
several steps and degrees of sin, whereby of an Embryo (as it were) at first,
it comes to be a completed and perfected sin. This Text is much vexed by
Bellarmine and Popish Authors to establish their distinction of a venial and
mortal sin, though they cannot find any true aid from the Text.

Let us consider the particulars of this noble Text: The Cause of a man's sin
is said to be lust (...), this is the same with original sin, the corruption
of all the powers of the soul, whereby it is inordinately carried out to all
things. Of which more in the Doctrine. This is described from the note of
propriety, (...), His own lust; This expression is used that we may not lay all
upon the Devil, or other men, for this is ordinarily brought by men to excuse
themselves. It is true, I was in such a fault, I have sinned, but the Devil
moved me, or such wicked companions they enticed me, or I did it, because men
compelled me, and terrified me: all this will not serve thy turn; It is thy own
lust within, not men without that has made thee thus to sin. And this
shows, That every man has his own proper original sin, by way of a lust
within him.

3. This is further amplified from the Universality of the Subject, wherein
this lust is seated, Every man; so that no man but Christ, who was God and man,
is freed from this incentive to evil.

4. There is the Manner How, this lust does tempt us to sin, and that is
expressed in, two words, (...), Drawn away, that is, as some, from God, from
heavenly objects; because in all sin there is an aversion from God, and a
conversion to the creature: or else (as others) Drawn aside form the
consideration of hell, of the wrath of God, of eternal death and damnation. For
we sin continually, as Eve did at first; The Devil persuaded her she should
not die, and then when this fear was removed, she presently falls into the
transgression, and thus before men fall into the pit of any sin, they are
drawn aside from those serious thoughts; This will offend God, this will damn
me. The other word is (...), a Metaphor either from birds or fishes, which have
baits to allure them, and thereby are destroyed: Thus lust appears with a
bait, but the hook does not appear.

In the next place, This original sin is illustrated in the issue of it: the
Apostle shows, how sin a primo ad ultimum comes to be accomplished. So
that as in other places, we read of the generations of men, the generations of
Adam, of the Israelites; so here is the generation of sin described. Now it
is good to observe, that in this whole discourse the Apostle does proceed
metaphorically, comparing original sin to a woman, like that whore in the
Proverbs, alluring and enticing man to sin; or as Adam was at first tempted
to sin by Eve; so still we are drawn aside to sin by this original
corruption, which is like an Eve, or like a Daeliah, and a Joseph's mistress,
importunately soliciting of us to what is evil: and as with the woman there is
pleasure in conception, but pangs and sorrows in bringing forth, so it is with
sin: while we do at first entertain it, there is pleasure and delight, but
afterward it leaves a terrible sting in a man, depriving him of all comfort
day and night; We may therefore observe the several steps and degrees of sin
before it comes to be consummated.

1. There is the mother, or root of all, and that is called lust, which must
not only be extended to the carnal sensual appetite of a man, but principally
to the rational part: for there original sin has its chiefest dominion; that
is the metropolis, as afterward is to be showed.

2. There are the motions to sin, and titillations or delectations about it:
this is implied in the word enticed, taken from the bird, who is allured by the
bait; the meat it leeth, but observes not the snare. Thus in man, there are
sudden motions and delights arising in the soul toward sinful objects, which
do antecede all deliberation and consultation; There are pleasing motions
toward sin, and secret titillations of the soul, before the will does give
its perfect and full consent. I say perfect consent; for it may be in all the
tickling motions to sin, though never so sudden, there may be some imperfect
consent.

The third step or degree to the completing of sin, is expressed verse. 15,
When lust has conceived, (...): This is applied to women conceiving, Luke 1.
24. Luke 1. 31. and by this is meant that consent and imbracement, which the
soul gives to sin. For as it was with Joseph, though his mistress did so
violently solicit him, yet he not consenting fled away from her: So it falls
out sometimes with the godly, that though original sin in the immediate
motions thereof, may tempt, may delight and secretly please; yet grace being
strong may refuse to consent, and then these Babylons brats are immediately
killed before they grow up. Thus many sins to the godly prove abortive;
original sin has a miscarrying womb, for by grace they are enabled to resist
those temptations, and so sin is killed as soon as ever it has any life. Not
but that these motions to sin, though not consented unto, are truly and
properly sins; but being withstood by grace, they are not imputed. And thus
far we admit that saying of Bernard, Non nocet sensus, ubi deest consensus.
These motions and stirrings of lust within us, if resisted and refused, shall
not be able to condemn us, but in all natural men for the most part, lust does
conceive; no sooner does it entice, but presently there is consent given to it;
No sooner does it knock at the door, but presently it is opened to receive this
lust in; and now when this consent is given, then as to the eyes of God, the
iniquity is fully committed; then a man is a murderer and an adulterer before
God, as appears Mat. 5. 28. Yet the Apostle adds,

The fourth step, and that is, Lust thus consented unto, brings forth sin,
(...), still continuing in the metaphor. By sin is meant actual sin,
expressed in words and actions, so that sin is first in the heart, in
motions, in secret consents and imbracements, before it comes to be expressed
actually. But why does not the Apostle give it the name of sin, till it be
completed in action? The Papists greedily lay hold on this, and would
therefore conclude from hence, that the motions of the heart to sin, if not
consented unto, that the lusts which rise up in us to our grief and trouble,
are not truly and properly sins. But

1. They themselves do acknowledge, that sin consented unto, lusts yielded
unto, though in the heart only, are truly and properly sins; that those are
damnable, though never actually committed; whereas this Text, if they rigidly
urge it, would prove as well, that such lusts are not sin.

Besides, Though the Apostle James does not here call such motions sins, yet
Paul, Romans 7. does very often give them that name, and accounts himself
miserable, in respect of his captivity to them, though he does utterly disallow
them. Therefore the Answer is, That the Apostle takes sin here strictly, for
only actual sin, because this is only visible to the eyes of the world: and
because though motions consented unto, yea and unconsented unto, are truly and
proper sins, yet because these are in a tendency to actual sins; actual
sin is the terminus ad quem, as it were; they are not fully completed in the
utmost of their iniquity, till actually committed. No wonder if that be called
only sin, not by way of exclusion to the motions within, but by way of
aggravation; to show that then sin when its actuated has gone to its utmost.

Lastly, Here is the last step, and utmost end of sin: and that is sin thus
finished, Brings forth death, (...). Now all the pleasure is turned into
bitterness in death: in the torments of hell, all the delights of sin will be
forgotten, as the whorish woman in her pangs and troubles, when she labors to
bring forth, and cannot, does then forget all her former wanton lusts. The
damned in hell will cry out then: Oh if they had remembered into what doom the
short pleasures of sin have brought them; how that all their honey is now
turned into bitter gall, they would never have given way to these evil lusts!
So that we may metaphorically apply that to such sinners at the day of
Judgment, which our Savior did to some, because of the day of Jerusalem's
destruction, Woe be to those that are with child, and give suck (that thus
conceive) and bring forth in those days.

And here again you may ask, Quest.
Why is it said, that sin thus finished brings forth death, if sin be
entertained in the heart, though it go no further? It is not mortal and
damnable?

The Papists therefore they would from hence also establish their distinction
of venial and mortal sin. Answ.
But this Text will not help them; for as was said, they acknowledge that
adultery in the heart is a mortal sin, though not outwardly committed; and if
these motions be truly and properly a sin, as we showed; then eternal death
must needs be the wages of them, Romans 6. 23. Therefore death is attributed to
sin finished, because therein the evil of sin does most palpably
demonstrate it self. It is true, Calvin does by sin finished, or perfected,
mean not so much the acting of any gross sin, as the customary continuance
and perseverance in it; and no doubt this sense is not to be excluded: but the
Text may very well be interpreted of any sin, though but once committed,
though it be not frequently iterated. And thus we have this full and excellent
Text largely explained. From which we observe,

That original sin is that lust within a man, from whence all actual sins
do flow. That is, as there is not a man or woman, but he does come from Adam:
(Hence the Canonists have a saying, That if Adam were alive, he could not have
a wise among all the women in the world, because of their descent from him) So
it is true of every vain thought, every idle word, every ungodly action: they
all come from this original lust within a man; and therefore the Devil with all
his fiery darts could do us no hurt, did not our lusts betray us, Nemo se
palpet de suo. Satanas est, said Austin, Let no man flatter himself, he is a
Devil to himself from his own lust, he is a tempter to himself. This truth is
of special use to humble us, this will make us debase our selves, crying out, O
Lord, I, even I alone am to be blamed; it is from my own vile self, that all
this corruption does thus overflow. This our Savior confirmed, when he said,
Matthew. 15. 19. One of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
etc. So that whosoever would be kept free and unspotted from sin, he must
watch over his heart more diligently, there is the nest, there is the spawn of
all those noisome sins, that may be seen in thy life.

SECT. II.
That Original Sin is the cause of all Actual Evil, cleared by several
Propositions, which are Antidotes against many Errors.
. 1.
WE proceed to clear this Truth in several Propositions, which also will be as
antidotes for the most part, against so many respective errors in this Point.
And

First, By lust here in the Text, we are not to understand that particular
libidinous disposition in men, whereby they are carried out in a wanton or
unclean manner, as we in our English phrase do for the most part limit it. For
the Apostle does comprehend far more, Romans 7. in that command, Thou shall not
lust, or covet; neither is this lust to be restrained only to the sensitive and
carnal part of a man; as if lust were not chiefly in the reason, and the will
of a man, according to Scripture Language. Lust does comprehend the
deordination of the sublime and rational part in a man. Therefore those Papists
who do limit lust only to the sensual part, are wholly ignorant of the
extension of original sin, and the diffusion of it self through the chiefest
parts of a man. Hence it is justly to be censured, that the late Annotator on
this Text, does in his paraphrase join with the most erroneous of the Popish
party: for by lust he understands our treacherous sensual appetite, which being
impatient of sufferings, suggests some sensitive carnal baits, and so by them
enticeth him. And in the verse following, he agin paraphraseth, When consent is
joined to the invitation of the sensual part, against the contrary dictates of
his reason, and the Spirit, then that, and not the affliction or temptation,
begets sin. -- Thus he. But we may meet with a more sound and orthodox
explication, I say not in Whitaker and other Protestant Authors, who conflict
with the Papists in this point; but even in Estius the Papist, who does
ingenuously acknowledge, That because the Apostle is here speaking of the
original of all sin, spiritual sins as well as carnal; it cannot be limited
to the sensitive appetite. Do not the sins of the mind arise from our lusts
within us? Do not the Devils sin from the lust within them, and yet they have
no sensitive appetite? And when the Apostle, Gal. 5. 17. speaks of that
remarkable lusting which is between the flesh and the Spirit; he cannot mean
the sensual inferior part of a man only, for the works of this flesh are some
of them said to be Idolatry, Heresies; which must needs proceed from the
rational part of a man. It is therefore too evident, that this lust which does
so greatly entice us, is not only in the inferior part of the soul, but most
predominantly in the superior, and hence the understanding has its peculiar
enmity to the holy truths of God, and the will its proper obstinacy to the good
duties, which God has commanded. Therefore we read of that expression, Col. 2.
18. Puffed up with a fleshly mind. So that heresy is a lust of the mind, envy a
lust of the mind; for the Devil is full of envy, (though Philosophers refer
envy to one of their mixed and compounded passions;) unbelief, ambition,
vainglory, these are lusts of the rational part. Think not then that thy
affections only do lust against the Spirit of God, but thy reason, thy will
also does; and these have the greatest evil in them, they are the greatest
enemies to the ways and truths of Christ. As the Publicans sins were from
the lust of the flesh, so the Pharisees sins were from the lusts of the mind.
And thus the more superstitious, erroneous and devout any are in false ways of
Religion, the more dangerous are their lusts, because the more spiritual and
immaterial. This kind of lusting follows us in our prayers, in our
preachings, in all spiritual performances; So that whereas carnal and bodily
lusts are easily discerned, and are accounted very loathsome in the eyes of the
world. These spiritual lusts are very difficulty discovered, and may then most
reign over a man, when he thinks himself most free from them.

Propos. 2. When we say, original sin is the cause of all the actual evil
that is committed, this is not to be understood, as if it did proximly and
immediately produce every actual impiety; only this is the mediate cause, and
the root of all. It is true, the learned Whitaker will not allow it to be
called the remote cause of death, and other miseries, which Infants are
obnoxious unto. As the root cannot be said to be the remote cause of fruit,
because it does nourish it, though under ground, and at a distance from it: Or
(as he instanceth) a fountain is a cause of that stream which is carried in a
long course distant from the spring ( De peccat. orig. l. 2. c. 9.) But we need
not strive about words. No doubt when men through custom have contracted habits
of sin upon them, habits are the immediate and proxim causes of the wicked
actions, such persons do commit; but original sin is the mediate: yet because
original sin is the causa causae, it may be called the causa causati, it
being the cause of the customs and habits of sins, it may be also the cause of
the sins themselves. But I see not why we may not call original sin the
remote cause only of some sins, because that is the seed and spawn only of all
evil; there are many temptations and suggestions, which do ripen and quicken
this monster to bring forth. So that although men have lust enough within them
to make them, so many Cains, so many Judasses; to be as abominable in wicked
ways, as the vilest of men are; yet Nemo repent fit turpissimus, as the Poet
said. There is time required to grow up into such foul abominations. This is
like the Prophets little cloud, which at first, though no bigger than an hand,
yet did afterward biggen, till it covered the whole sky. The Apostle (you
heard) compares the production of sin, to the child, that is first conceived
in the mothers womb; and so through the warmth and nourishment thereof, does
lust bring forth: As it is with the Acorn, that is at first but little in
quantity, yet being great in efficacy, does in time enlarge it self into a
great Tree. Conclude then all evil, even the most enormious impieties, which
for the present, it may be, thy heart does tremble at, yet they are seminally
and radically in thee; there are the sparks of fire, which if let alone will
quickly set all on a flame. Hence

The third Proposition is, That whosoever would by the grace of God be
delivered from any actual sins, the best remedy is, to endeavor to quench the
lust within. He that would dry up the streams, must look to the fountain, to
have that dried up. He that would destroy the bad fruit of a Tree, must lay the
axe to the root of it. And this is a very necessary Rule to be attended unto in
practical Divinity. Observe that the same way sin comes to live, the same way
thou must take to kill it. It begins at the heart first, before it is in the
eyes, or hands; and therefore thou must look to crucify it in the heart first.
Thus the Wiseman advises, Prove 4. 23. Keep thy heart, for out of it are the
issues of life. After this then he exhorts to look to our mouth and lips, to
our eyes and feet; but the foundation must be laid in the heart; if the heart
be good, all is good. And this shows the preposterous way of the Casuists and
Confessionists in Popery, from which the late Writer, so often mentioned, does
not much decline in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Penance; for with such
Writers, you have scarce one word to the penitent sinner about Regeneration,
whereas external duties of alms, or restitution (which in their way are
necessary by Gods command) must flow from a spiritual and supernatural life
within, as the foundation of all: much less have you one icta or tittle, about
faith, laying hold on Christ, by whom alone our persons are justified, and all
our duties are accepted. This (I say) is the great neglect and unskilfulness in
such writers, that they deal in externals, but for faith, by which the heart is
purified, and whereby we please God in Christ, that they make no mention of at
all. But the Scripture is herein different from moral Philosophy and
Aristotelical precepts, which those Casuists are wholly captivated unto: for
that requires, yea and promises first a tender and holy heart, a circumcised
heart, and then to walk in the ways of God: whereas moral Philosophers first
begin with actions, and then go to acquired habits, Just agendo sumus justs.
This then is a golden Rule, and of perpetual use in Christianity, for a
Christian to be mortifying lust within, to watch against the treacherous
adversary in thy own breast, and then when the foundation is destroyed, the
superstruction must needs fall to the ground.

Propos. 4. Because man is thus tempted, and enticed by lust within, therefore
it is that man fallen, does sin far otherwise, then Adam did in the state
of integrity. We do not sin now, as Adam at first; we have an internal cause
and principle within us, whereas Adam did sin, wholly from suggestion
without; neither was it lust within, but his mere will, that made him consent
to such suggestions. This Proposition is the more to be regarded, because
Pelagian and Socinian Writers, they all agree in this, That we at first sin
in the same manner, as Adam did at first; the sensitive part, being enticed by
sensible objects, and so rebelling against the rational part. But this is to be
wholly ignorant of that holy estate and glorious Image, wherein God created
Adam at first. Adam had all such external and internal helps, so freed from all
ignorance, passion or lust, that nothing could destroy him, but the liberty and
mutability of his will. Whereas alas in man destitute of Gods Image, there is a
lusting principle within him, carrying him out inordinately unto every object
proposed. It is therefore a false and an absurd Position, which Molina the
Jesuit, one of the mere Naturalists affirms ( Quaest. 14. Disput. 4. de
Concord. lib. Arb.) where he says, Adam had, Innatum appetitum excellentiae ac
laudis quo ad intellectum and voluntatem, etc. That he had this temptation
within him, viz. an innate appetite to his own excellency and praise. For how
could this consist with that holiness and righteousness God created him in?
Indeed he says in another place of the same book ( Quaest. 14. Disp. 45.) Ex
contemplation rei amabilis, etc) from the contemplation of any lovely object,
and which is of concernment to be obtained, there does naturally rise in the
will a certain motion, whereby the will is affected to it; which motion is not
a volition, but an affection of the will to that object, whose goodness it is
allured with. And this he makes to be in men, yea in the Angels before they
fell: But what is this but to say, that in men and Angels, even before their
fall, there was a concupiscential inclination to delightsome objects: and so
Adam and Angels must according to this Text be tempted away, and enticed by
their own lusts? An horrible Position, highly derogating from Gods honor, who
created them holy and righteous. Therefore Adam, and much more Christ, when
they were tempted by Satan, it was not in the same way with us. The temptation
was only external, not internal; there was no inward lust within; yea the very
external temptation of Adam and Christ was different from ours in a further
respect. For the Devil had not power by his suggestions to move or disturb
their fancy, as he does in us. Though the Devil cannot force our wills, yet he
can make bodily commotions of the fantasy, and so thereby man is the more
easily carried away to evil. But neither Christ or Adam had their imagination
so disturbed. For although they might understand by phantasmes, yet all was at
the command of deliberate judgment. A man's imagination was then in his own
power: so that those inferior faculties in their operation could not hinder
the superior. Whether Adam in the state of integrity would have had dreams,
is uncertain; but if he had, learned men conclude, they would always have been
good, and not without the present use of reason, as Rivet thinks ( in cap. 3.
Genes.) However this is enough for our purpose, to show, that we are tempted to
sin in a different way from Adam.

Hence the fifth Proposition is, That because there is such an internal Insting
principle within, a man is carried out to sin, though there be no external
temptations by Satan or wicked men. But even as the Devil, who sinned first,
had no tempter, but was carried out by his mere free will to evil: So much more
must man, who has this corrupt principle within him, be carried out to sin,
though there be no Devil to tempt us, or wicked men. Hence the Apostle does in
this Text name lust only, as the inward cause, not mentioning Devils or wicked
men. But yet it is disputed, That although the lust of a man within, be a
sufficient cause and principle to carry a man out to all evil, whether for all
that, the Devil also does not help to the committing of every sin, They
question: Whether original lust be the cause only, and that the Devil also does
not excite and stir this up? Some think, because wicked men are said to do,
what they see their father the Devil do, and because he is called the tempter,
1 Thessalonians. 3. 4. That therefore, though we sin always of our selves, yet it is
by the instigation of the Devil; but because the Scripture makes the
imagination of man's heart to be only evil, Genesis 8. 21. And because our
corruption within, is generally said to be the cause of a man's sin; therefore
we cannot say, that the Devil tempts to every evil action that we do commit,
although in some particular heinous sins, as in Judas, and Ananias, and
Sapphira, he entered into their hearts, and filled them with his temptations;
but at that very time, observe how Peter does reprove Ananias for letting Satan
have such admission into his heart, Acts 5 3. Why has Satan filled thy heart?
So that the Devil does not compel any man to sin; it will be no excuse to
say, Satan tempted me; for this could not be, if thy lust did not consent to
him, and entetain him; he throws his fiery darts, and thy heart is like
thatch or straw, that quickly is inflamed.

The last Proposition is, That the effects of this inhere^t lust within us, are
of two sorts, immediate and mediate. Immediate are those first motions and
workings of soul to any evil object, though not consented unto; yea it may be
abhorred and humbled for. The mediate effects are lusts consented unto in the
heart, and many times externally committed in our lives. For that original
sin has an influence into gross sins, appears by David's confession,
Psalm. 51 when he bewails his birth-pollution in his penitential humiliation,
for those foul sins committed by him. But I shall enlarge my self only
concerning those sinful motions and stirrings of the heart unto evil, which
though the ungodly man takes no notice of, yet the constant and perpetual work
of a godly man is to conflict with, as appears Romans 7. They are those
perpetual restless workings of his heart inordinately, one way or other, that
make his condition so bitter; and therefore it is good to consider what may be
said for our information herein.

. 2.
Of the Motions of the Heart to sin not consented unto, as an immediate
Effect of Original Sin.
THe last Proposition we mentioned, contained a division of the effects of
original sin within us, which were either immediate, such as the motions of
the heart to sin with the pleasures thereof, not consented unto. Or mediate,
which are lusts consented unto, and the external actings of sin thus
embraced. I shall only enlarge my self upon the former, and for your
information therein, take these considerations.

First, That these motions to sin may be divided according to the subject
they are in. Now the powers of the soul are usually divided into the
apprehensive and appetitive; the cognitive and affective; that is, either such
as know or understand, or such as are carried out by love and desire. These are
the Jachin and Beaz (as it were) the two pillars of the temple of the soul; and
respectively to these two, so are the stirrings of sin within us. In the
mind, or knowing part of the soul, the workings of sin are by apprehensions
and thoughts; In the affective part, by way of delight and love. And in both
these the heart of a godly man is many times sadly exercised. For thoughts, How
many vain, idle, foolish ones do arise in his soul, like the sand upon the
seashore? The flies and Locusts in Egypt did not more annoy then these do
molest and trouble a gracious heart. These thoughts come like so many swarms
upon thee before thou have time to recollect thy self. They are got into the
souls closet, before they were ever perceived knocking at the door. Nay these
thoughts are not only roving, wandering and restless, but sometimes horrid
black ones, blasphemous, atheistical, diabolical; which put the soul into an
holy trembling, and they know not what to do; they think none like them, no
such vile wretches in the world, as they are. Indeed there are blasphemous
injections of Satan, such as are suggested to the soul importunately by him, to
which the soul gives no consent, but like the maid in the judicial Law, that
was ready to be ravished, cries out against them; or as the people, when they
heard Rabshakeh rail and blaspheme the God of Israel so horribly, They answered
him not a word. Thus the people of God in such temptations give no consent or
approbation to them; now these are afflictions not sins; they are sad
exercises, but not our corruptions, because they are wholly external, and cast
in upon us; as if we were in a room, where we could not get out, hearing men
curse and blaspheme; this would torment our souls, but they do not make us
guilty. They are compared to the Cup in Benjamen's sack; it was found there,
but it was not his fault, it came there without his knowledge and consent. And
although they be foul and loathsome to a gracious heart, yet God usually keeps
his people hereby humble and lowly; yea he makes them more spiritual and
fruitful, as the black and noisome dung makes the field more fertile and
fruitful; but I speak not of these. The thoughts we are treating of, are such
as arise from our own hearts: for seeing original sin is the seed of all
evil, the most erroneous and flagitious that can be; therefore atheistical,
blasphemous, lascivious, and other evil thoughts may come out of our own
hearts. It is indeed a special part of heavenly skill and wisdom,
experimentally to make a difference between what thoughts are our own, and what
are merely of diabolical ^^jections, to discover when our own corrupt nature
works, and when the Devil does only assault and annoy us: But that is not my
business now. It is enough to know, That even from thy own unsanctified heart
may arise vain thoughts, blasphemous thoughts. So that thy soul seems unto
thee, to be not only like a dunghill, but an hell it self. To these evil
stirrings of sin, in the apprehensive part, we may refer our sinful
dreams: even for them God might damn us. Austin bewaileth and confesses his
dreams; and yet our understanding and will do not so properly work at that
time. The other sort of workings of soul, are such as are by way of love, and
desire, when there arise in the heart some motions, and affections to such an
object. Our hearts being now wholly destitute of the Image of God, and sin
having full dominion over us; no sooner does any sinful object present it self,
but immediately the heart makes toward it; there is a propensity to embrace
it.

Secondly, These motions that do thus stir in the heart, are either such as
they call motus primo primi, or secundo primi, the absolute mere first, or
first in a secondary order. There may be difference in the explaining of these;
but the sum is this, These motions are either such, which do rise up in our
hearts, antecedently to any actings of the reason, or will at all. It was not
in our power to repress them, or to prevent them: for original sin in a man
does not lie sluggish and bound up, it is always acting and moving; and the
immediate motions or first born of the soul are these first stirrings of heart,
preventing all deliberation and consultation. Such a state indeed Adam was not
created in; nothing did rise up in him before his will, and consent: and so it
was also with Christ. But since we are plunged into this corrupt condition,
sin has got the whole mastery over us, we are in a Babel and spiritual
confusion. Every sinful lust rises in us before we have time to withstand it;
although (if we had time) such is our impotency and corruption now, that we
neither can, or will gainsay the torrent of these motions: It is true, the
Papists, say, they are no sins, they are matter of exercise to us, but they
are not sins if not consented unto. But the Apostle, Romans 7. does often call
them so, and they are such as are contrary to the Law of God; they are such as
make a godly man groan under them, and judge himself miserable thereby; they
are such as are to be crucified and mortified, all which show they have the
true and proper nature of sin. So that it is a wonder those should deny these
indeliberate motions to be sin, who hold original sin to be properly and
not equivocally a sin. For, as it is enough to make original sin voluntary,
because it is voluntarium voluntate ejus a quo, not in quo est, with the will
of Adam, from whence it descends, though not with the will of him in which it
inhereth; Thus also it may be said of these involuntary motions, they are of
the same nature with original sin. For though they be actual, yet flowing
necessarily from the mother sin, and being withal a privation of that
righteousness, which ought to be in us, they must be called sins, as well as
original. And thus far Henricus the Schooleman proceeds, as Vasquez
alleges him, ( Tom. 10. disput. 106.) to say, That these first motions in
persons, not baptized are sins, and that they want not such a voluntariness,
as is requisite to the nature of sin; partly because of the will of the first
parents, and partly, because of the proper will of the man who has them; not
because he does not hinder these motions, because he cannot always do this;
but because he will not by baptism be expiated from original sin, and
consequently from the guilt of these sins. This later reason we matter not;
the former has good strength, and is the same in effect with what we say. Oh
then that we were rightly considering of these things! Those millions of
thoughts and stirrings of heart, which arise before reason and will are able to
do any thing, these are all sins: these are contrary to the holy Law of God:
Adam had them not, neither shall the glorified Saints in heaven be in the least
manner molested with them. How low and debased must thou be in thy own eyes?
For this it is that the godly go bowed down; for this they mourn and pray:
these afflict them more then gross loathsome sins do profane men; the mere
civil and formal man, the self-righteous and confident man, he knows none of
these things; he feels not this evil impure frame of his heart: this makes
the way of godliness to be such a mystery, such an unknown thing, but to those
that are believers indeed, as they have other joys, other comforts then the
world knows of; so they have other motives of sorrow and humiliation, then
the natural man can understand. But as for the first motions of the second
sort, they have some imperfect consent and complacency; and therefore
acknowledged by Gerson, (Compend. Theol.) to be sins; yea the former kind of
motions, though so sudden, are affirmed to be sins (by several Schoolemn
upon different reasons) but venial, as they call them. For Henricus held they
were mortal; now to us all sins in their own nature are mortal. Therefore all
these motions, which arise in the soul, whether first or second, being contrary
to the holy Law of God, which requires pure streams, and also a pure
fountain; and also being opposite to the Image of God we were created in, must
needs be truly sins: for which we are to humble our selves, and to pray
continually for the mortification of them.

Thirdly, These motions though they flow from original sin, as the universal
cause, yet there are particular causes that do excite and draw them forth. And
it is good to observe, how many ways original sin, being awakened does
produce these sinful motions thereof. And

1. Sometimes they arise from the present sensible object that does affect us.
Every object either of the eye, or ear, or touching, does presently work upon
the soul, not indeed efficiently (as some have thought) but only by way of
alluring and enticing: so that it is almost impossible for us, either to hear
or see any object, and not have the first motions of the soul, as sudden, so
sinful, about them. Oh the miserable depravation of mankind, who has sin and
hell entering into the soul by evey sense it has! there is not any sensible
object, but it is a snare to thee, it stirs up some sinful motion or other,
either love, or anger, joy, or fear, and all this before grace can work: Hence
the great work of Christianity is inward and spiritual; it is soul-work, to set
a watch before eyes, ears, tongue, and all the outward parts of the body, that
the soul be not sinfully disquieted. For every object is to our corrupt hearts
one way or other, as the forbidden fruit was to Eve: not that God does forbid
us to see or hear such things, but because the soul cannot be excited by those
objects and affected with them, but it is in a sinful manner. If then thy head
were a fountain of tears, it could not weep enough for the desolation that is
upon thee: Thy eye makes thee sin; thy ear makes thee sin. Thus thou art
compassed about with sin, from evening and morning.

2. These sudden motions of sin, sometimes arise from the imagination and
fancy of a man. And truly, how often do displeasing and sinful imaginations
disturb the peace and quiet of thy soul? Is it not thy fancy thou complainest
of? how volatique and roving is that? It stays no where, it is not fixed in
holy duties. It is like a market place, where there is a crowd of people, so
that the imagination does very often help this original lust and sin to bring
forth. What a quiet, srene and blessed life should a man live, if his
imagination could be kept in an holy fixed frame, if he could bid it go, and it
goes, do this, and it did it?

3. The perturbation of the body by distempers, that many times causes this
original sin to be working in us: Though the body be corporeal, and the soul
a spirit, and so cannot act physically upon it; yet because they are both the
essential parts of a man immediately united together, there is by sympathy an
acting and affecting of one another, especially the body being instrumental to
the soul in many operations: Hence it is when that is disturbed and indisposed,
the soul also is hindered in its operations, and therefore from the distemper of
the body we are easily moved to anger, to sorrow, to fear, to lusts: So that
the motions of the soul are many times according to the motions of the body, as
Gerson instanceth ( Compend. Theol.) in a simile, which he says some use
concerning the water, when the Sunne-beams are upon it, as the water moves or
danceth up and down, so do the Sunne-beams which are upon the water. Thus as
the body is in any commotion, so the soul which is more immediately united to
the body, then the beams of the Sun are to the water, does work according as
it finds this instrument disposed.

Fourthly, This original lust is often stirred up to entice us by the sensitive
appetite, by the passions and affections that are in us. This we told you some
did limit lust to in the Text, but very unsoundly, yet it cannot be denied, but
because the affectionate part of a man is so prevalent and operative, that very
often sin is committed here, even without the consent of the will. These
affections do suddenly transport us, and we can no more command them to be
quiet, then we are able to compose the waves of the Sea. Now though we would
withstand and gainsay them, yet they are our sins for all that, as we see
Paul sadly complaining herein, Romans 7. Austin delights ( De Trinit. lib. 13.)
to express our manner of sinning by allusion to the first sin, When any
object does present it self, to allure and affect us, then the Serpent (says
he) shows us the forbidden fruit: When the sensitive appetite of a man is
drawn out to consent unto it, then Eve does eat of this forbidden fruit; when
the rational part of the soul is enticed likewise to consent to this sin,
then Eve gives of this fruit to Adam, and he eats. Thus Reason is like Adam,
Eve like the sensitive part; and as Eve, when she did eat the forbidden fruit
alone, did thereby grow mortal, and would have died, though Adam had not
consented to eat: Thus the affectionate part of a man carrying us away to
sin, though the superior part of the soul will not agree thereunto, yet this
makes us to be in a state of damnation. This makes the action to be damnable.

Lastly, When none of these ways do stir up original sin, then the
thoughts and apprehensions of a man in the intellectual part they may. And
indeed the former provoking causes were most conspicuous in gross and carnal
sins; but this is influential in spiritual sins; from the mind come vain
thoughts, ambitious, proud, malicious thoughts; from the mind arise
blasphemous, atheistical, and unbelieving thoughts. Thus you see how poor and
wretched man is become in his soul, as Laezarus was in his body, all over with
ulcers and sores, no place is free from sin: Oh that God would deliver us
from our blindness of mind, from our self-fulnesse, whereby we are so apt to
fall in love with our selves, so as to think we want nothing, when we are
without God, without Christ, without the Image of God, without all holiness
and peace within, either of soul or body! How should it pity thee to see this
glorious building thus lying in its own ruins and rubbidge? Now from all these
particulars thus joined together, you may observe how sin carries us away in
a pleasing enticing manner. So that although we cannot but sin, yet this is
very delightsome and satisfactory; insomuch that man is drawn aside to sin,
as he said, -- Trahit sua quemque voluptas. And this is more to be observed,
because the adversaries do so tragically exclaim against us, in affirming, that
we lie under a necessity of sinning, we cannot but sin. Why then say they, Why
should God damn us for sinning, any more than for being thirsty or hungry,
which do necessarily affect us? But the Answer is twofold:

1. This necessity of sinning is voluntarily contracted, and brought upon us;
it is not as hunger or thirst, which were necessary properties of man at his
Creation, though without that grief and pain, which now we feel. And

2. This necessity is also voluntary and pleasing, it seizes upon the mind,
will, affections, and the whole man; and therefore as we cannot help it, so
neither will we help it. We love and delight to eat this poison.

Lastly, There are these three degrees, whereby it is said, Lust comes to be
accomplished: Though some differ in their expressions herein.

The first is Suggestion, and that is when any lust does begin to arise in the
soul: This is very imperceptible and undiscerned, but by those who are exact in
the spiritual exercises of their soul. It is true, some say this word
Suggestion is not proper, because that does properly come from without, the
Devil, or the world; but this is internal, arising of our selves. But we need
not strive about words.

The second is Delight, From this motion the soul presently finds some secret
pleasure, and accordingly thinks of it with delight, receives it with
delight.

Lastly, There is the consent unto these, to will them, to be joined to them.
And thus when sin has made this progress, a man is an adulterer, a murderer
before God, though not actually done in the eyes of men, as our Savior
witnesses, Matthew. 5. 28. for many do consent to sin within their heart,
which yet do not consent to the outward acting of it; sometimes because of the
shame that it will bring; sometimes because of the punishment that it does
deserve, or for some unworthy respect, or other not because they fear and love
God, not because they desire a pure, holy heart, as well as an unspotted life.
And truly this is a good discovery of uprightness of our hearts, when we dare
not own sin in our thoughts, when the we dare not respect iniquity in our
hearts, when we labor to keep a pure soul, as well as a pure body.

* 3.
More Propositions concerning evil Thoughts and Motions that arise continually
from the heart, as the Immediate Effect of Original Sin: Showing how many
ways the Soul may become guilty of sin about them.
WE are now to finish this Discourse about that Immediate Effect of original
sin, in causing evil thoughts and motions to arise continually from the
heart, as vapors do constantly from the earth; and as they in their first
ascension are imperceptible, till they come to be congealed into clouds, which
are plainly visible: Thus all sin, while it is but in these motions and
stirrings of the heart is difficulty discerned; but when it comes to be formed
by express consent, and accomplished in outward practice, then it is gross and
palpable. But to proceed in more Propositions.

First, These motions and stirrings of heart, they are either sudden and
transitory, (...) abiding and mansory in the soul. Sometimes these sinful
stirrings of the heart are like a sudden whirlwind in the soul that presently
vanishes, though they be very troublesome for the time; or they come like a
flash of lightning and thunder, which though terrible, yet is but of short
continuance; now although they make no longer abode in our soul, yet they
pollute and defile it. We are not to give place to them, no not for an hour, as
Paul would not to the false brethren, Gal. 2. 5. but we are with holy zeal and
indignation to thrust them out, and bolt the doors upon them, as they did to
Thamar. Thus in the very twinkling of an eye, if we do not watchfully attend
thereunto, we may destroy our own souls over and over again. That is a profane
speech to say, Thoughts are free; no, God has laid an holy command upon our
very thoughts, and the first motions and stirrings of our hearts, that nothing
should arise there, but what is agreeable to Gods holy Word. When water is in a
pure glass, though it be moved and shaken often, yet no noisome thing arises
thereby; but if in a soul one, then the more it is stirred, the more filthy are
the bubbles thereof. Thus in man, while enjoying the Image of God, whatsoever
did move or stir his heart, it was altogether holy and pure; but since man is
thus corrupted, there cannot be any motions of his soul, but they are wholly
defiled and sinful one way or other.

Secondly, These mansory thoughts, which the Schoolmen call morosae, because
they do morari abide some time in the soul, they are likewise divided, for they
are so continning in us, either mora temporis, or mora consensus, as they
express it. (Gerson Compend. Theol.) The continuance of time is, when they may
for a long while infect, solicit and annoy us, but yet we strive and gainsay;
We do by no means give our consent thereunto, as Joseph's Mistress did often
importune him, yet all that while, he kept up the fear of God, and would not
sin in that way against him. So that although the people of God may be
followed from week to week with loathsome and perplexing thoughts; yet because
they cry unto God, they go and pray to him, as Hezekiah did upon Rabshakeh's
railing and blaspheming of God, they are not to be discouraged: Thou have not
betrayed thy strength to these Dalilahs all the while: Yea, from these
spiritual exercises and conflicts, thou will increase thy glory. Hereby thou
have an opportunity to discover thy faith, thy self emptiness, and to get
heavenly skill and compassion, whereby thou art able to succor those that are
in the like manner tempted. But then

2. There are thoughts that are continuing mora consensus, and these are far
more dangerous and damnable then the former; for if sinful thoughts and
motions arise in thy soul, though they are but for a very short time; yet if
thou have yielded to them, then thy soul has committed fornication.
Consensisti, said Austin, concubuisti in cord tuo; so that the consent to them
is far more dangerous then the length of time, they may afflict thee in. Any
sinful motion consented unto, though it be but for a moment, is more
destructive, then such as follow thee from day to day, yea it may be from year
to year, but thou give no entertainment to them. This is good for the
practical Christian to observe, it is the long time that troubles them: Oh
(say they) ever since God has first wrought upon my soul, I have been
exercised with these thoughts, such dreadful suggestions, and to this day I am
not yet delivered from them! Be of good comfort, though it be grievous to thee
to feel such things in thy soul, yet because withstood, they shall not be
imputed to thee. Those that have the like temptations, but for an hour, and
embracing of them, have more offended God, and endangered their own souls.

Propos. 3. It is good to take notice, how many ways the soul may become
guilty of sin about these thoughts and motions within us. A truth ^^^deed it
is) that no natural man, no civil or formal man does understand, or can be
affected with: Can a blind man that does not behold the Sun, see the atoms in
the Sunbeams? They who are not affected or grieved about great and actual
sins, will they find these inward motions to be burden? If they can swallow a
Camel, will they not a mote?

1. Therefore we come to sin by these motions and thoughts of soul, by the
very being of them there. The very having of them there is contrary to the
Image of God we were first created in: As in Heaven there is no unclean thing
that can enter; so where the Image of God is full and complete, the least vain
thought, the least sinful stirring can no more consist with it, then darkness
with light: or as at the first creation we could not have found one weed or
thistle on the ground, but these came by the curse for sin; so at first in
man's soul there would not have appeared the least irregular and inordinate
motion of the heart, not one thought would have been out of its place: Adam was
Gods book coming immediately from him, wherein no errata could be found; but
now in stead of wheat come up cockles. Now what ever we think, we imagine, we
move to all, does become sin unto us. Oh then let the godly soul mourn and
humble it self, because such motions are there, as you see Paul does, Romans 7.
Let it not be thought that thou art freed from all sin, because thou do
withstand them, thou do not own them: For although this will keep them from
being imputed unto thee, yet in themselves they are sins, they are damnable;
God might throw thee into hell for the mere having of them; God might justly
say, I sowed good seed in thy soul, but how come these tares there? These
thoughts, these motions are none of my planting, I created them not: Therefore
the very having of them in thy soul, is a sin against God, though never
expressed in action; and the reason hereof is from the exact spirituality of
the Law of God: There is this great difference between God and all political
Lawgiver; these later forbid only the external action, they do not prohibit
the inward will or desire: What Lawgiver amongst men was ever so absurd as to
say, you shall not cover or desire such a thing? But if men do outwardly
offend, then they are obnoxious to punishment. But it is otherwise with God in
his Laws, who is the Father of Spirits, and searches our hearts, therefore his
Law does principally reach to the heart, to make that a good treasure, to have
the tree first good, and then to make the fruit answerable thereunto.

2. We offend against God not only by having of these motions stirring in us,
but much more when they delight us, when we find a complacency and sweetness in
the thinking of them, when they affect us so, that we roll them like honey
under the tongue. And truly in this respect the godly soul is even amazed and
astonished to see how vile it is, and how abominable: For what innumerable,
pleasing, delightsome motions do arise in thy soul all the day long, either
about unlawful objects, or if lawful in an inordinate and sinful manner? Are
not these more then the hairs of thy head in number? Now concerning these
delightful pleasing motions of the soul in a sinful way, observe these Rules,

1. That a man may be carried out in these delightful objects, either by a
mere affection of complacency and pleasure, or by an efficacious act, and
purpose of the will to accomplish such a sin, as in uncleanness. The corrupt
heart may delight it self in lascivious apprehensions, and defile it self
exceedingly in that way, but yet have no efficacious will to commit the sin;
yea (as we told you) would not for a world commit it, either for shame, or for
punishment, or some other respects: For sin has then got strong power over
us; and we are left by God, when we are boldly carried on to commit such
leudness. It is therefore necessary for the spiritual and heart-Christian, to
observe the former as well as the later. Do there not arise contemplative
delightsome thoughts about sinful objects? Are they not rolled up and down in
thy heart, though thou have no purpose to effect them? Oh be ashamed and blush
to have such an impure soul! Is this soul fit for communion with God? Is this
the temple of the holy Ghost?

Rule 2. The object of these delighting, pleasing motions, may either be the
sins themselves desired and inclined after; or, They may be the mere thoughts
and apprehensions of them. For the soul being a spiritual substance, has power
to reflect upon its own acts and operations, to know it knows, to think what
it thinks: And thereupon, because as Aquinas says, Delectatio sequitur
operationem, Delight follows operation; we may take great pleasure in our
thoughts, and even be drunken with delight therein. This is especially to be
seen in heretical and erroneous persons: Men who are proud of their opinions,
their notions, their own conceptions and inventions; What infinite pleasure and
content do such men take in the thoughts, about their, own thoughts, and
apprehensions? More sometimes then the greatest Monarchs can do in their
earthly greatness. It behooves therefore men of parts and gifts, men of
learning and extraordinary activity of wit to take heed of lust within,
carrying them out to pride and delight in their own selves.

Rule 3. These motions of delight and pleasure in the soul, are of a large
extent. We are not to limit them only to bodily lusts, or ambitious desires,
for as large as the command of God is, so large is this way of delightsome
motions in the soul by contrariety thereunto. As the Law of God is divided into
two Tables, and therein are required all the duties we own to God and man: So
likewise hereby are forbidden all the pleasing lusts and thoughts of the soul
which oppose these duties. And if a man be a searcher of his own heart, he
cannot but take notice, how often these sinful motions of his soul, sometimes
empty themselves in reference to God, and sometimes toward our neighbor.
Toward God, and thus we have delightful motions in our own self-trusting and
confidence in the creature; we love and rejoice in humane comforts to the
excluding and shutting out of God himself, especially in holy duties, in the
observance of his own day and Ordinances; How many pleasing distracting and
wandering motions do then seize upon us, so that commonly we never find our
selves more molested by them, then when we are in a most heavenly and holy
manner to approach unto him? And for the duties toward our Neighbor, there
arise many pleasing evil motions of soul, to envy at his good, to be glad at
the evil which befalls him, to have uncharitable and suspicious thoughts
toward him. Thus where ever any actual sin may be committed either against God
or man, there may and do pleasing and delightful thoughts arise before, and
prepare the way for them.

Lastly, Cajetan gives a good Rule ( Summula Tit. Delectatio.) concerning
these motions of delight within us, that in them we are to consider the
Occasion, the Liberty, and the Intention about them. The occasion: Thus if we
do put our selves into such companies, go to see such sights, read such books,
hear such unsavory discourse, as may stir up our hearts to these sinful
motions, then our sin is the greater, and we shall be found the more guilty
before God. Such is our corrupt nature, that we need not add oil to that fire
within us: Even in lawful and just duties, yea in our most holy and heavenly
performances, these sinful motions arise to disturb and distract our souls, as
if men's did come of (...), the Moon, as some affirm, because of the diverse
shapes and vicissitude it is often put into. We ought therefore to be far
from adding fuel to this fire, by going to unlawful sights, to wicked
companions, thereby to provoke that corruption within us.

Again, We are to consider what Liberty and power we have to subdue them and
repress them; some rise more suddenly then others, and some again appear so,
that we have time to consider of the danger of them, the damnable nature of
them. Now the more time we have to deliberate and to consider about the
sinfulness and wickedness of them, how much God is offended, how loathsome and
abominable they are in his eyes, and yet we suffer them to lodge there, the
greater is our condemnation.

Lastly, The Intention and end of such thoughts is to be considered; for
always cogitatio mali, is not mala cogitatio, the thought of evil is not an
evil thought. When men think of sin to repent of it, to detest it, to reform
it, sin is in their mind then; but because there are no delightful motions
to it, therefore it is not evil: So if a Minister preach against adultery, or
any other sin, he cannot but think of the nature of it, and what it is; yet
because his intention in thinking of it is to make men abhor and leave it,
therefore it is good and lawful: So that mere thoughts about sin are not
always sin, but when accompanied with some affections and inclinations
thereunto. Only it is good to inform you, That such is our deceitfulness of
heart, that many times we think it lawful to rejoice and delight in some
profit and emolument that may come by another man's sin, or some evil upon
him, when indeed we are glad of the sin, or evil it self. If a man by telling a
lie should save thy estate, or life, How hard is it not to delight in the
sin, because thou have profit by it? Thus unnatural children may rejoice in
the death of their parents, whereby they come to inherit their estates, and yet
please themselves that they not rejoice in their death, but the profit that
comes thereby to them. There are many practical instances in this case, and
therefore we must look our hearts do not deceive us therein. For it is very
difficult to have any advantage by another man's sin or evil, and not to have
a secret and tacit will thereof. And thus much for the Rules about delightful
motions to sin.

We proceed to a third particular, whereby we may sin against God by these
motions of sin within us, and that is, When we are careless and negligent
about them, they trouble us not, they grieve us not. How many are there that
regard the thoughts and motions of their soul, no more then the fowls that fly
over their heads? It argues an unregenerate heart, an heart not acquainted
with the power of godliness, that does not mourn and grieve under them. How
greatly was the Apostle Paul, Romans 7. afflicted by them? This made him long for
Christ and Heaven, where he should be annoyed with them no more. This
negligence about them, is that which makes thee also careless to repress and
conquer them. They may lodge whole days and nights in thy soul, and thou never
seek to expel them out. Thus thy heart is like the sluggards field full of
briars and thorns. Oh that God would give you seeing eyes and tender hearts!
then you would find that even an hair has its shadow, even the least motion to
sin has its sting and bitterness with it; and above all sinful motions,
look to those that arise in thee, because good things are urged and commanded
to thee. For this is the desperate incurable evil our souls, that good things
stir up sinful lusts within us, not indeed properly and directly, but
occasionally and by accident. Thus the Apostle bewaileth the motions of lusts
within him from this account, Romans 7. 8. Sin taking occasion by the
commandment wrought all manner of concupiscence within him. Thus the good and
spiritual Law made him more carnal and sinful. And what is more often then to
have powerful preaching, godly and wholesome reproofs stir up the evil
motions of men against them. Thus the more remedies are applied to us, the more
corrupt we grow. We might be voluminous in this soul-searching point, but we
must conclude.

Let the Use be, Seeing that a man is thus tempted from his own lust within
him, we cannot lay the cause on the Devil himself, though he be a Tempter; then
it is our duty to look to what is within: Those embers within us will quickly
set all on fire. Say not, this or that moved me, blame not this or that estate,
but thy corrupt lust within. This is as Luther said ( in Genes. Chap. 13.) to
be like the fool that stood in the Sun bowed down, and then complained his
shadow was crooked. It is not thy riches, nor thy poverty, not thy health or
sickness, no condition or temptation whatsoever; but the true proper cause is
this maternal lust, which lies in our bosoms. How little is this truth
attends unto? with the Pharisees, we more regard to cleanse the outside, than
the inside, Mat. 23. 25. The mistake herein brought those many rigid and
ausiere disciplinary ways in Popery, as if from the externals we must cure the
heart, and not by curing the heart thereby cleanse the outward. The Franciscan
will not so much as touch silver. The Carthusians will not eat a bit of flesh,
though their lives depend upon it: What folly is this? Meat and money are the
good creatures of God; if we do abuse them, they are not to be blamed, but our
corrupt lusts within. If a whorish woman wear gold and precious stones to
allure others, they are in themselves good, though she abuse them to an ill
end: And thus all the comforts and mercies we enjoy are Gods good gifts, and it
is not the actual abdication of the use of them, but the mortifying of our lust
within that will make us please God.

CHAP. III.
Of the Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, as the Effect of Original
Sin, so that the Godliest man cannot do any holy Duty perfectly in this life.
SECT. I.
The Text explained and vindicated from corrupt Interpretations.
GAL. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would.
THe Apostle in the verses before admonished them about the use of their
liberty, that it should not be turned into licentiousness, but that they make
love the Rule thereof. For though in respect of the right of my Christian
liberty, my conscience is to regard none but God, yet the use and exercise of
it must be regulated by love and prudence, according as the edification of our
brother does require.

As a remedy therefore to refrain from all excess therein, he gives us an
excellent precept, with an emphatical Introduction thereunto, [This I say then]
that is, This is the sum, the main, the all in all in these cases.

Then you have the Antidote it self, Walk in the Spirit. The only way to
prevent all those importunate temptations of the flesh, is to give up your
selves to the Spirit, to obtain the direction and illumination thereof, as also
the inclination and powerful operation of it, whereby we may be established in
that which is good, To know what is good, and then to be enabled to do it,
which if done, he declares the blessed effect and issue thereof, Ye shall not
fulfill the lust of the flesh. Some (as Beza) reads this imperatively,
because of the (...), but the Text he instanceth in is not parallel to this.
And Grotius brings in several places, where this (...) relates to the
future. This then is the happy issue of a man, who keeps wholly to the Spirit
of God inlightning and working by the Word, that he shall get dominion over the
lusts of the flesh, He shall not fulfill them: He does not say, he shall not
have them, he shall not feel, and perceive them working in him, for that cannot
be in this life; only he shall not fulfill them, which is the same as to walk
in the flesh, and to mind the things of the flesh, which those that live in the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit cannot do.

In the next place, The Apostle gives a reason, why they are thus to give
themselves up to the Spirit, else the flesh will quickly prevail, and that is
from the contrary nature and inclinations of these two, expressed in that
Proposition, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh. By flesh and spirit we are not to understand the body and the soul, nor
the spiritual sense and literal sense of the Scripture, as Origin most
absurdly; nor as many Papists and others, the rational part, and the sensitive,
as if the Apostle were here speaking no more then Aristotle does about his
incontinent person, as distinct from an intemperant one. Therefore that is too
frigid and dilute of the late Annatator on this place, in his paraphrase, as if
the opposition were between the carnal and rational wills, between the carnal
and rational part of a man instructed out of the Gospel, for this arises to no
more then that ethical and moral conflict, which Heathen Philosophers describe;
whereas the Apostle is here speaking of that which the godly find in
themselves, and that from the two contrary principles of the flesh and spirit
within them.

Neither are we to understand this with the Remonstrants, as if the Apostle
spoke in the general, or Idea only, making the sense to be no more, then the
flesh of a man, opposes the Spirit of God, putring it self forth in the
powerful preaching of the Word; for the context makes it evident, that he
speaks of this opposition, as it is in the subject, by which no godly man can
do the things that are holy with that perfection, as he desires.

Lastly, Neither are we to understand this of persons, as if the Apostle meant
the carnal man, and the spiritual man, as Isaacl did Isaac, will always oppose
one another: For it is clear, he speaks of two principles within us, the one
whereof is flesh, that is, our whole man so far as it is unregenerate, the
mind and the will as well as the affections; (for by sin incarnavimus animas
nostras, as the Ancient said, our souls are become flesh,) and the whole man so
far as he is regenerate: For this in several respects, a godly man is both
flesh and Spirit.

This contrariety in their nature is declared by the effect thereof, They lust
one against another: He does not say, they work one against another, though
that be true; but the Apostle would direct us to the head and spring of all
outward evil or good, and that is the desire within.

In the next place, the Apostle amplifieth this contrary motion between the
flesh and the Spirit from the nature of them; They are (...), immediately set
one against another, even as darkness and light, as fire and water. Now
although it be a Rule, That contraries do expel each other; yet it is also
another Rule, That contraries while they are in pugna, in fighting with one
another, they may be together, as also in remiss degrees: And thus it is with
the godly, the flesh and the Spirit are always in conflict; These are the
twins in the womb, that by their opposition make the godly mourn, and long for
Heaven, where the flesh shall be wholly overcome.

Lastly, Here is the consequent and issue of this Combat, So that the things
ye would not, those ye do; which words are subject to many interpretations:
Some say, they are only to be interpreted as the end to which these contrary
principles do incline, not that they do denote the event. By the flesh we are
carried out to this end, not to do the good things we would do; yet this event
does not always at least follow, because Gods Spirit works in us both to
will and to do; This exposition they are the more confirmed in, because in the
Greek it is not (...), which would denote the event, but (...): This seems to
have no great strength, for (...) is taken eventually sometimes. But then if
so, still there is a difference among* Interpreters: Some understand it of the
good will only, as if the meaning were those good things you would do, the
flesh does hinder and retard you therein. Grotius with others that follow him,
understand it of the evil will, in this manner, The Spirit lusts against the
flesh, so that those evil things, which otherwise you would do, if the flesh
did prevail in you, now ye cannot do. And the late Writer (Vnum Necessarium,
cap. 7. page 482.) is so peremptory for this Exposition, That (he says) we
cannot make it sense else with what had gone before: (being beholding to
Arminius for this Argument) For the Apostle bid us, Walk in the Spirit, so we
should not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; and this is the reason, Because the
Spirit lusts against the flesh, and so we cannot do what that would have us;
whereas if by the flesh we were hindered from what the Spirit would have us do,
this would directly contradict what he had said before.

But to answer this, Some read all the former verse by a parenthesis, and make
this clause to belong to the precept, verse. 16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, so that ye cannot do those things,
which the flesh would incline you unto: But this seems too much forced.
Though therefore we understand it of the good will, as well as the bad, yet the
sense runs smoothly; neither is this brought as a reason of the later part,
You shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for so it would have some
apparent contradiction, but of the duty commanded, why they should walk in the
Spirit. For if they do not, such is the contrariety of the flesh to every thing
that is spiritual, that if yielded unto, it will carry you away to act those
lusts, which otherwise you would not do, and so the connection is very
harmonious. But for my part, I think this must be understood generally, both of
the good will, and bad also. For the Apostle having named two contrary
principles, and their lustings one to another, there is no reason to limit it
to one; but that we understand it thus, That even in had things a godly man is
not carried out with the full command of the flesh, but the Spirit of God does
in a great measure check and prohibit it. And also in good things, though the
Spirit of God does enlighten and enlarge the soul, yet the flesh does something
retard, and by its opposition, causes that we cannot do holy things with that
fullness, purity and perfection as we would do.

Thus you have this noble Text explained, which will afford excellent practical
matter, concerning that property of original sin, that it remains in some
measure even in the most holy, and that therefore there is no perfection in
this life. None is all spirit without any flesh at all in them. Therefore the
(...) in the Text may have its emphasis, The same things ye cannot do, that ye
would. For what godly man does not feel, that it is not the same prayer, the
same faith, the same repentance he desired? The duty like Jeremiah's vessel
comes to be marred upon the wheel in the very doing; so much deadness,
distraction, lukewarmness and senslesness of spirit appears, that he
wondereth to see how different the duty exercised is from the desire and
purpose in his soul. From the words thus declared observe,

That original sin remains in every man, though never so godly in some
measure, whereby there is a combat between the flesh and the Spirit, so that
we cannot do any holy duty perfectly in this life. I limit my Discourse only to
the good will in the Text, not the bad, because that is most homogeneous with
my subject. And besides, The Pelagians calumniated this Doctrine of original
sin, as a discouragement unto holiness, and that hereby perfection could
never be attained, because this sin is said to have some being and working in
the most holy, though it have not dominion. It is from original sin, that the
most holy men find a combat within them more or less; that always in this
life they find a need both of pardon of sin, and of the righteousness of
Christ, which if any deny, as the Pelagians did, we will not believe them with
Austin, in that they say, but attribute it to their arrogance and hypocrisy,
pretending more holiness to the world then they have, for their self-advantage,
or else to their stupidity and senslesness, not feeling what does indeed annoy
and oppose the Spirit of God; and truly they who have not the Spirit of God
abiding in them, How can they discern of such a combat? That moral conflict
which Aristotle speaks of in the incontinent person, he may perceive within
himself, but this of the Spirit and the flesh, He cannot know, because it is
spiritually discerned.

SECT. II.
Several Propositions clearing the truth about the Combat between the Flesh and
Spirit in a godly man.
. 1.
The Difference between Original and Actual Sin.
THe only way to comprehend the latitude of this excellent truth about the
Conflict between flesh and spirit in the true believer, because of original
sin still adhering to him, is to lay down several Propositions, wherein we
may at the same time assert truth, and obviate some error.

First, Original sin does greatly differ from actual sin in this
particular, that when an actual sin is committed, there remains no more but
the guilt of it, which upon repentance by justification is wholly removed away,
and thus an actual sin is as if it had never been; but in original sin,
although the guilt of it be taken away, yet the nature of it abides still,
though not with such dominion as formerly it did. It is true the Schoolmen,
except Biel and some others, say, actual sins leave a macula, a blot or
defilement upon the soul, as well as a reatus, or guilt; and what this macula
is, they are different in their explication of: but we must necessarily grant,
that every actual sin does defile the soul, depriving it either of the beauty
it has, or ought to have, but yet still the act of sin is passed away, whereas
in original sin, the sin it self does still continue, by which it is, that
though to those who are in Christ, there is no actual condemnation, yet there
is that which is damnable in them; insomuch as without Christ there is a woe to
their most holy and praiseworthy actions. It is true, the Papists and others
look upon this as nonsense, or a contradiction, that sin should be in a man,
and not make him guilty; as if actual condemnation might not be separated from
sin, though indeed the desert of condemnation cannot. It cannot be but
wheresoever sin is it does deserve hell, it has enough in it to provoke God
to wrath, but yet when humbled for and withstood, then through the blood of
Christ, this actual guilt, though not the potential one, is taken away. Yea
original sin does not only differ from actual sin, but also habitual,
because though habitual sins do abide in a man, yet when a man is
regenerated, and made a new creature, all the habits of sin are expelled; for
if the habits of sin and grace should abide together, then a man might at the
same time be holy and unholy, the son of God, and the son of the Devil,
seeing our denomination is from the habits that are within us; therefore that
cannot be. But though in our Regeneration the habits of sin are removed, yet
it is not so with original corruption, that is not an acquired, but an innate
habit of sinning within us. Thus our original corruption is far more
pertinaciously cleaving unto us, then any habits or customs of sin can be,
though of never so long continuance.

. 2.
IN the second place, That is a false position which the Remonstrants have
(Exam. Censurae cap. 11. page 128.) that the difficulty which new converts have
to leave their former lusts, does arise chiefly from their former custom and
exercise in ways of impiety, not from original sin. For they distinguish of
godly men such as are incipients, new beginners, that are but newly converted
unto Christ, and these they say have a great conflict within them, they have
much ado to leave their former lusts and impieties they have been accustomed
unto: and then there are the Adulti, such who are proficients, and grown up;
now these they say may arise to such a measure of holiness, as to be without
any conflict at all between flesh and spirit, or to feel it very rarely: but
that is directly to contradict this Text, which speaks it universally of all
that have the Spirit of God in them while in this life, they do meet with
opposition not only from the devil without, but the flesh within: Therefore
they would elude this Text, as if it did not mean an actual reluctance or
lusting against one another, but only potential, that it is the nature of the
flesh and Spirit thus to oppose one another, for this is say they against the
nature of habits, seeing it is the property of habits to make the will readily
and willingly will and do those things, which formerly were grievous and
troublesome, but the Scripture speaks of the actual reluctance; it does not
say it may or it can, but it does lust; and as for habits, though we grant when
these supernatural habits of grace are infused into the soul, we are carried
out with readiness, delight, and willingness in those holy duties which
formerly were tedious and grievous unto us; yet because neither the habits of
grace are perfect within us, nor the acts that flow from them, therefore it is
that there is a mixture of our dross with the spirits gold. For although the
habits of grace are immediately inspired or infused from God, and so as they
come from him are perfect; yet because that is a true rule, Quicquid recipitur,
recipitur ad modum recipientis; whatsoever is received, is received according
to the capacity and qualification of the subject: Hence it is, that these
habits of grace are imperfect as received and seated in us; and whereas again
they reply, that suppose this Text be understood of actual reluctance, yet it
is not generally to be extended to all, but limited to the Galathians, who were
but new converts, but beginners, and therefore had this fight within them; that
is also false: The Apostle says the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh in the general: It is an universal Proposition,
neither is it any more to be limited to the Galathians, then the duty enjoined,
which is to walk in the Spirit; so that as the duty belongs to every godly
man, the reason likewise must, and therefore the Apostle does not say, the
flesh lusts against the Spirit in you, (they put ( in vobis) into the Text)
but speaks universally of all that have the Spirit of God: Besides this Text
opposes them, for grant these Galathians were new converts, yet the cause of
the combat within them, is not attributed to their former custom of impiety
as they would have it, but to the flesh, which is original sin within them,
when therefore a man is truly converted, that difficulty to leave his former
lusts does not arise because the habits of sin do still abide in him, but
because original sin is still living in us; and therefore according to the
greater or lesser measure of grace healing and sanctifying of us, so we find
the greater opposition in parting with the sins we formerly committed.

. 3.
WE are to lay it down for a certain foundation to build upon (as has formerly
been delivered) That this spiritual conflict was not in the state of integrity.
Adam before his fall could not find such a rebellion in him; for if so, this
would greatly have interrupted all his blessedness; and withal such a duel
within him, and that necessarily flowing from his creation, would have
redounded to the great dishonor of God his Maker. Now the Adversaries of
original sin, whether Papists, Remonstrants or Socinians, who do usually
traduce the orthodox Doctrine about it, as if horribly injurious to God, do in
this particular far transcend all such supposed reflections, either upon the
justice or mercy of God. For they do boldly affirm, That by the very natural
constitution of man, there is a necessary conflict between the rational and
sensitive part; only say the Papists, original righteousness (which the
Socinian derideth as much as original sin) did keep down this repugnancy, so
that Adam had not any actual rebellion within, though it was there potentially
and radically. Thus Soto (though Stapleton fluctuateth, and seems to be his
Adversary therein) expressly affirms ( Lib. de Natura and Gratia, c. 3.) that
the conflict mentioned by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 17. is Homini a natura ingenita,
inbred in the very nature of a man, which he would prove from a philosophical
Discourse out of Aristotle, who divides man into two parts: his rational and
sensitive, adding that the sensitive part obeys the rational, not
despotically, as servants who have no right of their own do to their masters
(for so the members of the body only do serve the mind) but politically and
civilly, as a Citizen does his Prince, in whose power it is to disobey. But as
Aristotle knew nothing of man's creation, or the Image of God put upon him, nor
of his fall, and the utter depravation of man's soul thereby, so it would be
absurd to run to his darkness to fetch light about these things. Hence also
it is, that the same Author ( Cap. 13.) in another place, compares man fallen
with man standing to some weighty piece, that hangs on high, but is hindered
that it cannot fall; and the same piece, when the impediment is removed. For as
such a piece of timber had the same proneness to fall to the ground, while it
was hindered, as when the obstacle was removed, only it did not actually fall:
Thus man abiding in his state of integrity had this principle within, to carry
him more affectionately to sensible things then spiritual; only original
righteousness did stop and hinder the actual motions thereof. It is true, that
all Papists do not assert this repugnancy from our primitive constitution: For
Cajetan upon the place does note truly, Sermo est, etc. says he. The speech is
of the flesh, as infected with original sin, for thence the flesh lusts
against the Spirit, not from the primary Creation. Yea their admired Thomas a
Kempis, (Page 77.) for his practical devotion, confesses that Adam in the
state of innocence had not this conflict. And no wonder that Papists thus
dogmatize, when Arminius, who uses to be very wary, being he was the first
that was to broach those dangerous errors, the Devil delighting to use a
Serpent, not an Ass, because he was more subtle then other beasts of the field,
yet asserteth that the inclination to sin was in Adam before his fall, Licet
non ita vehemens and inordinata ut nunc est, although not so vehement and
inordinate as now it is. It is true, the whole Paragraph is put by way of
question, but in the procedure thereof, this is spoken affirmatively, (
Articul. perpendendi, cap. de peccato originis.) And with the Socinians nothing
is more ordinary then to affirm such a rebellion in man, and that so
peremptorily, that from this they conclude, Adam did sin, it was from his
concupiscence that he did break the Law of God; Yea some are not afraid to
attribute this repugnancy and conflict to Christ, as if when he prayed, Father,
if it be possible let this Cup pass away, that this came from the Agony
between the rational, and sensitive part within him. It is wonder that these do
not also hold, that it will continue in Heaven also: so that as long as man
has a soul and a body, this opposition cannot be removed; but surely the
naming of this to tender hearts and ears is confutation enough. For is not this
truly and properly to make God the Author of sin, that he put a rebellious
thorn in our sides at first, and that because we are his creatures, made of a
soul and a body, therefore we must necessarily be divided within our selves.
Thus those who charge original sin with Manichism do herein exceed the
Manichees themselves; for they attribute this evil in a man to an evil
principle; but these make the good and holy God to be the Author of this
rebellion. Neither is it any evasion to say, This rebellion of the sensitive
part is no sin, unless it be consented unto; for it is such which is contrary
to the Law of God, it is to be resisted and fought against. And certainly that
demonstrateth the evil nature thereof. Luther indeed speaks of a Franciscan,
which makes this concupiscence to be a natural good in a man, as it is in the
fire to burn, or the Sun to shine: But certainly such qualities or actions
are not to be resisted, or fought against, as these are; How can that be good,
which is confessed to be a sin, if consented unto?

. 4.
When we say the flesh and the Spirit do thus conflict with one another, Prop.
4.
you must not understand it of them as two naked bare qualities in a man, but
as actuated and quickened from without. For the gracious habit in a man, is not
able to act and put it self forth vigorously without the Spirit of God exciting
and quickening of it. And although inherent sin of it self be active and
vigorous, yet the Devil also he continually is tempting and blowing upon this
fire to make it flame the more impetuously: So that we are not to look upon
these simply as in themselves, but as subservient to the Spirit of God, and the
Devil. The Spirit of God by grace in the heart does promote the Kingdom of God,
and the Devil by suggestions, does advance the kingdom of Satan in our hearts:
So that grace and sin are like the Deputies and Vicegerents in our souls to
those Champions that are without us. Now because the Spirit of God is stronger,
and above the Devil, therefore it is that the flesh shall at last surely be
conquered. Nay, if the godly at any time fail, if sin at any time overcome,
it is not because the Spirit of God could not overcome it, but because he is a
free agent, and communicates his assistance more or less, as he pleases;
only in this combat the godly are to assure themselves, that they shall
overcome all at last, that the very root of sin will be wholly taken away,
never to trouble or imbitter the soul any more.

. 5.
FIfthly, In natural and corrupt men, there is no sense or feeling of any such
conflict. They never groan and mourn under such wrestlings and agonies within
them, and the reason is, because they are altogether flesh, and flesh does not
oppose flesh; neither is Satan set against Satan. It is true, there is in some
natural vicious men, sometimes a combat between their conscience and their
appetite; their hearts carry them on violently to sin, but their consciences
do check them, and they feel a remorse within them, but this is far different
from that spiritual conflict, which the Apostle does here describe, and is to
be found only in such men, who have the Spirit of God: No wonderthen if there
be so many who look upon this as a figment, if so many even learned men write
and speak so ignorantly and advisedly about it; for this truth is best
acknowledged by experience: It Is not the Theologia ratiocinativa, but
experimentalis, as Gerson divides Divinity, that will bring us to a full
knowledge of this, It cannot then but be expected that you should see men live
at ease, and have much quietness and security in their own breasts, thanking
God, as if their souls, hearts, and all were good within them, all were as they
desire it; for the strong man the Devil keeps all quiet; flesh would not
oppose flesh: It is true, one sin may oppose another, covetoufness;
drunkenness; and so a man who would commit them both be divided within himself;
one sin draws one way, and another sin the other way: but still in the
general here is an agreement; all is sin, all tends one way still, and
therefore is not like this combat in the Text; but of this more in its time.

. 6.
SIxthly, In all regenerate persons though never so highly sanctified, there is
a conflict more or less: It is true, some are more holy then others; some are
babes, and some are strong men; some are spiritual, some in a comparative sense
are carnal; some are weak, some are strong; and according to the measure of
grace they have received, so is this conflict more or less, Amyraldus a much
admired Writer by some, (neither do I detract from that worth, which is due to
him,) does industriously set himself. ( Constd. cap. 7. ad Rom.) to expound the
7th of the Romans of a person not regenerated, but in a legal state, yet
disclaiming Arminianisme and Socinianisme: which Exposition being offensive and
excepted against, (as justly it might) by William Rivet; he makes a
replication thereunto, wherein he delivers many novel assertions. Among which
this may be one; That making four ranks, or classes of Christians, he
apprehends the first, to be such who have attained to so high a degree of
sanctification, that they consult, and deliberate of nothing, but from the
habit of grace that is within them; and that this conflict within a man, is
rather to be referred to the legal work upon a man, then the Evangelical
condition we are put into: hence he understands this Text not universally, but
particularly of the Galathians, who were then in that state, viz. a legal one,
not Evangelical, which he thinks the next Verse will confirm, where the
Apostle says, If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law: now of
this sort, who may be apprehended ordinarily to live without such a combat; he
places the Apostles, especially when plentifully endowed with the Spirit of
God, after Christ's resurrection: and for Paul he is so far ravished with the
Idea of godliness represented in his life, that he says, ( Consid. in cap. 7.
ad Romans cap. 74.) if God had pleased so to adorn Paul, with the gifts of the
Spirit, that in this life, he should attain to that perfection, which other
believers have only in heaven, none might find fault herein. The general rules
he goes upon (and others though disclaimed by him,) is, because there are many
places of Scripture, which show that some godly persons are victorious and
tryumphing above this conflict; as when this Apostle says afterward, ver. 24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof, and Romans 8. 2. The law of the Spirit of life in Jesus Christ, has
made me free from the law of sin and death: So that they conclude it injurious
and contumelious to Paul, reproachful to the grace of the Gospel, and a
palpable encouragement to sin and wickedness, to interpret the 7th of the
Romans of a regenerate person: But because this is a truth of so special
concernement, we shall take these things in a more particular consideration;
for it would be found an heavy sin lying upon most orthodox Teachers in the
Reformed Church, if they have constantly preached such a Doctrine, as is
injurious to Gods grace, and an incentive to sin, as also slothfulness and
negligence in holy duties: for the present this Text will bear us out
sufficiently, that where ever the Spirit of God is in persons while in the way
to heaven, they have a contrary principle of the flesh within them, whereby
they are more humbled in themselves, and do the more earnestly make their
applications to the throne of grace; and that all have such a conflict within
them, may appear by these following Reasons: yea we may with Luther say, so
far is it that any do attain to such a measure of grace, as to be without
this combat, that the more holy and spiritual any are, the more sensible they
are of it; for they have more illumination, and so discover the exactness and
spiritual latitude of the law, more then formerly they did, and also their
hearts are more tender, whereby they grow more sensible even of the least
weight of any sinful motion, though never so transient. It is true the godly do
grow in grace, they get more mastery and power over the lustings of sin
within, yet withal they grow in light and discovery about holiness, they see
it a more exact and perfect thing then they thought of, they find the Law of
God to be more comprehensive then they were aware of; and therefore they are
ready to cry out, as Ignatius when ready to suffer, Nunc incipio esse
Christians: Oh me never godly, but beginning to be godly; I believe, but how
great is my unbelief! This Paul declares, Phil. 3. 12. Not as if I had already
attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after, etc. Thus Paul is
far from owning such commendations which happily others may put upon him. It
is true indeed Amyraldus denies, that any are absolutely perfect; but yet he
goes beyond the bounds of truth, in attributing too much to Paul, or other
Apostles, which will appear,

First, Because the most holy that are, have used all. means to mortify and
keep down the cause of these sinful motions; If they did not continually throw
water as it were upon those sparks within, the most holy man would quickly be
in a flame. Even this Apostle Paul, does not he confess this of himself, 1 Cor.
9. 27. I keep down my body, and bring it into subjection, etc. He does not mean
the body, as it is a mere natural substance; for the glorified Saints will not
keep down their bodies. but as it is corrupted, and made a ready instrument to
sin: for though the Apostle call it not (...), but (...), yet these are not
opposite, but suppose one another, as Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your
mortal body, and it is a very frigid and forced Exposition of Amyraldus, as if
the Apostle did understand it of the exposing his body to hunger and thirst,
and all dangerous persecutions for the Gospels sake. For this was not Paul's
voluntary keeping down of his body; those persecutions and hardships to his
body, were against his will, though he submitted to them, when by Gods
providence he was called thereunto; but he speaks here of that, which he did
readily and voluntarily, lest from within should arise such motions to sin,
as might destroy him; yea it is plain that even in Paul there was a danger of
the breakings forth of such lusts, because 2 Cor. 12. God did in a special
manner suffer him to be buffetted and exercised by Satan, that he might not be
lifted up through pride: neither is this any excuse to say with Amyraldus, That
such sins are apt to breed in the most excellent dispositions; for it is
acknowledged by all, that such sins have more guilt in them then bodily
sins, though not such infamy and disgrace amongst men; Luther calls them
the sublimia peccat; the sublime and high sins, such the Devil was guilty of,
and they were the cause of his final overthrow and damnation: If then the most
godly have used all means to mortify sin within them; it is plain they found
a combat; and that if sin were let alone, it would quickly get the upper
hand.

Secondly, That there is a conflict of sin appears in those duties enjoined
to all the godly, that they watch and pray, that they put on the whole armor
of Christ. Yea the Disciples are commanded to take heed of drunkenness and
surfeiting, and the cares of this world, Luke 21. 34. and generally Paul's
Epistles are full of admonitions and exhortations to give all diligence in the
ways of holiness: especially that command is very observable, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirits, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Here you see both flesh
and spirit, that is the rational and sensitive part, have filthiness; and that
those who are truly godly are to be continually cleansing away this filthiness,
and to perfect what is out of order. What godly man is there, that can say,
This command does not belong to me, I am above it, I need it not? No less
considerable is that command of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against
the soul. Not as if this were wholly parallel with my Text, as Carthusian is
said to bring it in, thereby proving that by flesh is meant the body, and by
spirit the soul; but only it shows, that no godly man in this life is freed
from a militant condition, and that with his own flesh, his own self, which
makes the combat to be the more dangerous. For this cause David, though a man
after Gods own heart, though Gods servant in a special consideration, yet
prays Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins; which
expression denotes, that even a godly man has lust within him, that would
carry him out like an untamed horse to presumptuous sins, did not the Lord keep
him back. But we need not bring more reasons to confirm that which experience
does so sadly testify.

SECT. III.
A Consideration of that part of the seventh Chapter to the Romans, which
treats of the Conflict within a man: Showing (against Amyraldus and others)
that it must be a regenerate person only, of whom those things are spoken.
. 1.
THe next Proposition that may give light to the weighty truth about the
spiritual conflict that is in the most regenerate persons is this, That besides
the reasons formerly produced, and many others which might be named, there are
two famous places of Scripture, which do most signally and eminently declare
such a combat in the most holy men. The first is this of my Text, which has
sufficiently been explained and vindicated from corrupt Interpretations. And
truly the light of this Text shines so clearly, that there are very few who
are not convinced that this speaks of the fight which regenerate persons find
in themselves between those two contrary principles of the Spirit and flesh
which are within them. The second place, which does so firmly establish such a
conflict in those who by grace are made new creatures, is Romans 7. from v. 14.
to the end of the Chapter, where we have a most palpable delineation of this
duel that is fought in the inwards of a godly man; but that place is not so
freely consented unto, as this Text I am upon.

Now because the clearing of that is of special use, and because it is of such
affinity with my Text, I shall enlarge my self (for I will not call it a
digression) in the full explication of that part of the Chapter, showing, How
that it must be a regenerate person, and him only of whom those things are
there spoken. And you will find that the distinct opening of that portion of
Scripture will afford us many necessary things both for Instruction,
Consolation and Admonition, and all immediately adhering to this point I am now
upon. This I intend to dispatch in several particulars, which will be as so
many branches growing from the flock of that Proposition I have already named.
And

First, You are to know, that the Discourse which Paul there uses concerning
the combat within himself, is by some interpreted, as if Paul, though he name
himself, Yet does not mean himself, while regenerated, but while unregenerated.
So that (say they) Paul does therein take upon himself the person of one that
is not yet in the state of grace. This they conceive must necessarily be so,
because such a person is said to be carnal and sold under sin. The flesh is
always said to have the better, whereas regenerate persons they have crucified
the flesh and the Spirit; And the Law of the Spirit of life has freed them
from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. Only when they expound it of an
unregenerate person, they distinguish of such,

1. One who is grossly ignorant and profane, wallowing in his sins in a most
senseless and stupid manner, whose conscience are wholly dead within them; and
such are carried out to sin with all impetuousness, having no check or
remorse of conscience within them, of such the Apostle does not speak. But

2. There are others who are in a Legal state, under the powerful convictions
and operations of the Law, as Amyraldus expresses it: Men who besides the mere
knowledge of the Law have by the efficacy of Gods Spirit the convincing power
of it so set home, that now their enlightened minds do greatly incline them to
that which is good; but because their hearts are not sanctified, their
affections are not mortified, therefore these lusts do hurry them away against
those legal convictions that are upon them; or as Arminius expresses it ( in
cap. 7. ad Rom.) not in a much different way, the Apostle speaks of one, who
is in some preparatory way to conversion. By the Law he is so far wrought
upon, that he is afraid because of his sins, he cries out of them, mourns
because of them, has many wishes and desires: Oh that I could leave these
lusts, I do not like or consent to such evil things that I do! Thus this person
is supposed to have a servile fear, which is initial to the work of conversion.
And this frame of spirit, although it be not regeneration, yet is to be
reckoned among the good and spiritual gifts of God. This (say they) is the
direct case of that person, who is here described by Paul; and it cannot be
denied, but that many of the Ancients, and some later Writers have expounded it
of a man under such legal convictions. And although the Pelagians boasted, That
all Ecclesiastical Writers did interpret it of such a person, yet Austin
opposes them therein, instancing in some, who did understand it of a person
regenerated. It is true, Austin himself, while younger, did expound it of an
unregenerate person; I understood it (says he) in that manner, or rather I did
not understand it. But when he came to be elder and more exercised in the
Scripture and other Writers, then he was compelled to yield to the truth, and
to interpret it of a person regenerate; so that they caluminate Austin, who
make him fly to this Interpretation out of the heat of his Disputations with
Pelagians, taking this sense (though formerly he had done the other) as being
more subservient to his present interest; for he attributes his change of mind
to the truth of God in other Scriptures, as also to the light he had from the
tractates of other learned men. Especially those places compelled and forced
him, as he says, ( viz) Now I no longer do it, but sin within me, and I
delight in the Law of God in the inward man. He that delights does it not for
fear of punishment, but love of righteousness. Vide August. lib. 1. Retract. c*
23. etc. 26. and l. 3. contra Julianum. c. 26. and lib. 6. contra Julianum.
cap. 11. We grant indeed that there is such a legal state in which some men
are, that there are some who are miserably divided between their enlightened
consciences, and their corrupt lusts, so that they do the they would not do.
Yea the godly themselves, though they have a superior and more subline
combat; yet because they have an unregenerate part within them, therefore they
sometimes have even this conflict between their consciences, and some
importuning corruptions; but this is not remarkable in them comparatively to
the other.

In the second place, There are others who do zealously contend, that that
discourse cannot be applied to any, but a regenerate person; and to understand
it otherwise would be to plunge the godly in a deep gulf of discouragements,
and to attribute such things to unregenerate persons, which those that are
truly sanctified cannot go beyond; And this way Austin, and others of old do,
willingly go. Yea most of the Popish Interpreters, Estius, Contzen, Pererius,
Sasb^lt, etc. Tolet is taken notice of, as the most eminent dissenter. The
Lutherans also generally, and the Calvinists, yea most Protestant Writers. Even
Musculus, whom the adversaries of this Interpretation do so much allege in
this point, and labor to decline all suspicion by his name, yet does clearly
and fully expound it of a man truly regenerated and converted, but in the
lowest degree and initials of grace; although in the lowest form, yet
sanctified and regenerated he confesses him to be. Arminius and Amyraldus have
indeed in a peculiar manner set themselves against this Exposition. Yea there
is an English Writer, who goes so high, as to call the explication of this
portion of Scripture, as spoken in the person of a regenerate man, An
encouragement of an evil life, and a scorn cast upon the holy Ghost; yea that
it is verbum dictum contra Spiritum sanctum. (Vnum Necessarium, chap. 7. page
456.) But herein he follows Arminius, out of whom also he seems to borrow
all that he has in this point of any appearing strength and validity. In cap.
7. ad Romans where he would have it considered, whether this fight described here
in the Text, can be attributed to the Spirit of God, Citra apertam gratiae
Christi, and ejus Spiritus contumeliam and ignominiam. And a little after,
Constabit diligenter inspicienti, citra enorme Spiritus sancti dedecus, illi
luctam istam attribui non posse. Thus Aristotle's speech is very true, (...),
Ethi^. lib. 7. cap. 10. Yea the late Annotatour is so far from thinking, That
doing the ill we would not, and the not doing the good we would, to be a fit
ingredient in the character of a regenerate man, that he makes it the
aggravation of a wicked man. Thus he says, The Heathens made the highest pitch
of villainy in Medeas person, when she is said to see and like that which was
good, and do the direct contrary. So that it should seem by this, That the
Annotatour would think Arminius, and those who think this Discourse to be
understood of a man in a preparatory way to conversion, and as it were not
far from the kingdom of God, to yield too much: We must rather look upon it
as spoken in the person of some enormious and transcendent sinner: but I think
herein he is primus and solus. Besides his assertion is against Aristotle, who
writing of the incontinent person, that in some respects knows the actions to
be sins, yet does them, says notwithstanding, that he is not a wicked man,
but (...), a semi-wicked man, Ethic. lib. 7. cap. 9. (...). But concerning this
sinning against knowledge in a regenerate person, as also the collation of him
with an incontinent person more hereafter. Only by the way we may wonder, why
the above mentioned Annotatour in his Annotations on this place, is so
industrious to prove this passage cannot be meant of a regenerate person, from
verse the eighth and the ninth in this Chapter, where it is said, Sin wrought
all manner of concupiscence in him, that sin revived and he died. For surely
he cannot but know, That none of the Dissenters from him in this Exposition, do
apply those verses to a regenerate man; but that the application to such a
person begins at the fourteenth verse, or else as Calvin, at the fifteenth
verse; But it is not so material to know what men say, as what may be evinced
out of the Chapter it self. Only we may add, That the Socinian is likewise
very stiff and zealous in the Interpretation of this Chapter concerning a
non-regenerate person. Yea the Polonian Knight, that writes the life of
Socinus, would have us take notice of a wonderful work of God, convincing an
eminent man of this Exposition; for thus he relates, Page 21. That anno 1585.
in the Synod of Lublin, the opinion of Socinus concerning the seventh of the
Romans, was exceedingly agitated; and that one Nicolaus Zitinius, being one of
those Pastors, who opposed the Socinian Exposition, was desired to explain that
Chapter contrary to the mind of Socinus; which he stoutly managed, till he came
to those words, I thank God through Jesus Christ, and then standing like a man
amazed; What is that benefit (says he) which drew from the Apostle so great
thanks? Was it that he was of necessity detained in such a servitude of sin?
Certainly, I cannot believe such a thing; and thereupon gave thanks to God, for
the light shining upon him, and freeing him from his error, and afterward
entered upon a contrary way of explaining it to the amazement of his own party.
But it had been well, if this writer had set down the reasons which made such a
change in that man.

Thirdly, We cannot say it is heresy and an error in fundamentals, to expound
this place of an unregenerate person; yet as the grounds and reasons may be,
such an exposition may be either heretical, or bordering thereupon. For there
are two principles, which may be supposed, upon which the Exposition of this
Discourse concerning an unregenerate person may be built; for either some will
not understand it of a regenerate person, Because they think it opposes
perfection in this life, whereas they think a man may and ought to be
altogether pure and without sin in this life; or else they do acknowledge the
imperfection of out regeneration, and the relics of original sin abiding in
us, whereby we are not able to answer the purity and holiness of the Law: Only
they think this is not a proper place to prove such a truth, but is rather
injurious to the grace of God working in believers. And in the number of these
later Arminius does acknowledge himself: Now if such men be real in what they
say, and do not secretly nourish some monster within, till they have a fit time
to bring it forth, they are not much to be blamed. For as long as they agree in
the true Doctrine, though they differ in the Texts, that do prove it, that is
not so material. Certainly Calvin was most unjustly traduced by Hunnius the
Lutheran, for Judaizing and denying the Trinity; yet he did not think that
Doctrine was to be proved out of every Text, that the Ancients did make use of.
But then to deny the exposition of this place concerning a regenerate person,
Because they hold perfection in this life, and an immunity from sin, for
which end the Pelagians of old did seem to oppose it; yea and that this
perfection was to be obtained by our own free will, this may justly be looked
upon as heretical, Upon which account Castalio is inexcusable, for he
interprets it of an unregenerate man, only subject to the Law, merely to
establish perfection; affirming, that the old man is wholly crucified in this
life, denying Christ's imputed righteousness, and affirming men may be without
sin. ( De Justific. page 67. and frequenter alibi.) This is certain that the
true Exposition of this place does powerfully overthrow the Doctrine of
perfection in this life: For if a Paul does find this civil war within
himself; if Paul creep thus upon the ground comparatively to the admirable
holiness required in the Law, who then may not have cause to be humbled for
that spiritual agony he feels within himself?

Fourthly, Although we affirm this later part of the Chapter is to be
understood of a regenerate person, yet we also acknowledge, that a Minister is
to manage this truth with much wisdom and dexterity, that so the Doctrine of
imperfection in regenerate persons, may not be an occasion to ^ull men a sleep
in their laziness, that hereby they do not content themselves with incomplete
and sluggish wishes in the ways of holiness. If any do abuse this Doctrine to
lukewarmness or indulgence in sinful ways, saying, their estate is like
Paul's the evil they would not do, they do: This is not the fault of the
Doctrine, but either of the Minister, who does not wisely dispense it; or of
the hearer, who does wilfully suck poison out of the sweet herb: Even as the
whole Doctrine of the Gospel, and Gods grace, may be abused to licentiousness.
It is true, that the proper character of Christianity is, That it is an
acknowledgement of the truth, which is after godliness, Tit. 1. 1. And
certainly there is no point may more quicken up to godliness, s^ur on the most
holy to greater growth in piety, then this truth about the imperfection of the
graces, that are in the best; and also that we have a treacherous enemy within
us (the relics of original sin) which without daily watching and praying,
will quickly plunge us into confusion, Now the Minister of Christ will so
handle this Exposition, though of a regenerate person, very profitably and
advantagiously to the increase of godliness, if he add these qualifications to
his Interpretation:

1. That the evil which this person is said to do, is not to be understood of
gross and enormieus crimes, but partly of the very motions to sin within us,
and sometimes a consent thereunto, and (it may fall out so, as to be) an acting
of them in our lives; but this is not of gross sins, or if of a foul sin,
yet not continued in, but with repentance and greater hatred recovered out of
it. Unless the Preacher do thus limit his Exposition, he leaves the
battlements without rails, he does not fence against the pit wherein some may
fall. Let no man therefore think that this passage of Paul's is to be extended
to gross sins, as if many profane sinners, who sin, and their consciences
check them, and then they sin again and have remorse again, could take any
comfort from these places, as if they might say with Paul, It is not I, but
sin that dwells in me; The evil that I would not, that I grieve for, in the
temptation, I do: Oh take heed of abusing the holy Word of God to such corrupt
ends! Austin some where speaks to this occasion, when this part of Paul's
Epistle was read, I fear (says he) left this may be ill understood, but let
none think, as if Paul 's meaning was, he would be chaste, but he was an
adulterer, he would be merciful, but he was cruel, etc. Thus it would be very
dangerous to interpret this passage of gross sins, and yet it cannot be
denied, but that men who sin grossly, yet with some remorse and grief of
conscience are apt to cover themselves with these fig leaves, and think this is
sanctuary safe enough to run unto, that though they do sin, yet it is not
with full consent and delight. Arminius affirms ( in cap. 7. ad Romans page
753. as he says, Vere and sancte) That he had sometimes the experience of
this, that when some have been admonished, that they would take heed of
committing such a sin, which they knew was forbidden by the Law; They would
answer with the Apostle. To will was present with them, but they knew not how
to perform what they willed: Yea he adds, He had this answer from one, not
when the sin was committed, but when he was forewarned that he should not
commit it. But the same Author goes on, and says, he knew both men and women,
young and old, who when he had explained this Chapter in the sense he
defends, did plainly confess to him, that they hitherto had been in this
opinion, that if they committed any sin with reluctance of their mind, or
omitted any duty, the same regreeting of them, they were not greatly to trouble
themselves, or grieve in this matter, seeing they thought themselves like Paul
therein, and therefore gave him hearty thanks that he delivered him from that
error by his interpretation. But what needs all this, if any read Calvin's,
or other Expositions upon this place, might they not have been fully satisfied,
that such persons offending in that manner ( viz.) sinning, having only terror
and contradiction from their conscience against the sin they commit, but
their hearts otherwise carry them out to it, do no ways agree with the person
here described, whose hear and will is said to be against sin, as well as
his mind and conscience? We must not therefore understand it of gross sins,
especially of a continual custom therein. No doubt but David did commit the
adultery and murder, he would not have done. No doubt when Peter denied Christ,
he could say, the evil that he would not do, that he did; but this was in
sudden temptations. This was not often or customary, therefore they did
recover out of them with bitter tears and sorrow. We must therefore understand
it chiefly of the motions and lustings of the heart to sin, and oftentimes a
consenting thereunto; yea and in lesser sins an acting thereupon; so that it
is no more in sense then what the Apostle Jam's says, In many things we offend
all, Chap. 3. 2. So that howsoever the Jesuits and Arminians would make
Austins, and the later Expositions to differ, as if Austins were more innocent,
because he understood it only of motions to sin, which the godly man did
suffer against his will within him; but the later apply it even to actions; yet
who so diligently compares them together, cannot find any real difference; for
the sum of their Exposition is, That the Law requiring such a perfect and
pure holiness, that is does not allow of the least spot, or blemish, the most
godly do find themselves so depressed and weighed down with that remainder of
corruption that is within them, that they come exceeding short of that
excellent and perfect holiness, and therefore do abhor and loath themselves,
and judge themselves miserable, while they carry about with them such a body of
sin.

Secondly and lastly, This Exposition will be advantagiously managed for
godliness, (...) also inform, That Paul does not here speak of every particular
temptation, as if in every conflict he had the worse, and the flesh had the
better; but he speaks of good and evil in the general, and that in the whole
course of his conversation. In the general his heart was set upon the good
commanded, and against the evil forbidden, but yet he could never attain to his
fullness of desire, though in several combars, the spirit might and did conquer
the flesh. And certainly the Arminians, who will hold us to the rigid letter,
as if this person never had he better, no not at any time in any sin, must
take heed of that fault they charge upon us ( viz.) that they be not injurious
to the grace of God, even according to their own Exposition; for they
acknowledge those workings of the Law in this person against sin, are from
the Spirit of God: These are the good gift of God, and although they come not
from the Spirit, as regenerating, yet as moving and preparing the heart for
Regeneration. Now will it not be derogatory to say, that in this conflict the
Spirit of God is overcome in every conflict, that at no time he cannot do the
good he would? This is to make the conflict of a man in this legal estate
inferior to Aristotle's incontinent person, who has only the mere light of
natural reason to help him; for he compares ( Lib. 7. Ethic. cap. 9.)
intemperance to the disease of a Dropsy or Consumption, because incurable, but
incontinency to the falling sickness, because curable. And then because the
former is continual, the later sometimes only. If then in very Heathens, whose
conflict is only between a natural conscience, and their lusts, conscience does
sometimes prevail, their lusts do not always overcome; Shall we think less is
done by the Spirit of God in them, who are in this legal conflict? It is true,
if we speak of perfect obedience to the Law of God: so at all times in all
things, the Law of sin within a godly man does retard and make him to come
short; but then in particular combats, there the flesh does not always
prevail; only the Apostle instanceth in the tyranny of sin, and not the
dominion of grace, because hereby he would inform the Jews how much they were
to sigh and groan under this burden, and thereupon to have higher thoughts of
Christ. For seeing there were two things that did keep them off from Christ,
The ignorance of the power of original sin, and a desire to find out a
righteousness by the works of the Law: The Apostle does take an excellent way
to cure them of these two evils, by showing what deep root original sin has
in the most holy, and how opposite and fighting it is against the grace of God
within us, insomuch that we cannot have our full comfort but in Christ alone.

. 2.
Reasons for this Exposition.
THat there is no godly man living free from this spiritual combat, because of
the flesh which still abides in him, has been proved by Reasons and
Scripture. To this Text we have joined Paul's Discourse, Romans 7. which you
heard was to be understood of no other then a regenerate person. But because
such an Exposition, as also the Doctrine of the imperfection of Regeneration
may be abused; You heard with what limitations that Chapter was to be
interpreted, though of a godly man.

It is remarkable what Austin says in defense of himself, expounding this
place of a regenerate person, whereas he had interpreted it otherwise formerly,
Non ego primus aut solus, etc. ( Lib. 6. contra Julianum. lib. 11.) He was not
the first, or only man that did interpret it so. Yea he confesses he
understood it of unregenerated persons once himself; and his greatest reason
was, because he thought Paul could not say of himself, That he was carnal and
sold under sin; but afterward (says he) Melioribus and intelligentioribus
cessi, vel potius ipsi veritati, etc. The example of this excellent man might
much convince, but that prejudice does blind men's eyes.

Let us see what Reasons are cogent for this Exposition.

First, This is very considerable, That the Apostle in the former verses
speaking of himself, uses the Preterperfect tense, speakth of that which was
past: only at the fourteenth verse, there he changes the tense, and speaks
of the present time; which may persuade us, that he speaks of himself, what
he was once, before regenerated, and what he has experience of in himself,
though sanctified. This changing of the time, argues a change also in the
person; for so his Discourse runs from the seventh verse to the fourteenth,
I had not known lust, and sin wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, I
was alive without the Law once, and sin deceived me, etc. All these
expressions are concerning what was done in him. Then at the fourteenth verse,
with the rest following, he speaks of the present time, I am carnal, I do
that which I allow not, etc. This altering of the time may incline us to think,
that it is very probable the Apostle does compare his former estate of
unregeneracy with the present of sanctification that he is now in. It is true
indeed, we grant that the Apostle does sometimes assume the person of another
man; he supposes such a thing in himself, which yet we must not conclude to be
in him, as Romans 3. 7. For if the truth of God has abounded more through my
life unto his glory, why yet am I judged as a sinner? Here it is certain, he
personateth a wicked object or and caviller. So 1 Cor. 13. 2. If I have all
faith, and not charity, etc. As also Gal. 2. 18. If what I have destroyed, I
build the same again, I make my self a transgressor. But who does not see a
vast difference between these expressions and Paul's Discourse in this Chapter?
For they are spoken hypothetically by way of supposition. And therefore every
one may perceive that the Apostle does not intend an absolute speech of
himself. Had the Apostle used such conditional expressions here, then there had
been some color, If I do the evil I would not, if I do not the good I would,
if I delight in the Law, if the Law of God, etc. then we might have doubted
whether he spoke of himself or no. Or had the Apostle as absolutely and
peremptorily spoken in those places, as he does here, we should have wondered at
it. Should he after a large Discourse to that purpose have concluded, So then I
my self distroy what I have built, it would have greatly amazed us? As for that
place insisted upon by so many, 1 Cor. 4. 6. These things I have in a figure
transferred to my self and Apollo, etc. and from thence gathering, That it is
ordinary with Paul by a figure to assume another habit (as it were) then his
own. Suppose it be granted, Does it therefore follow he does here in this
place? What, does the Apostle never speak in his own person? If we will not
take this as spoken of himself, Why do the Dissentients take the second verse
in the next Chapter, as to be understood of his own person? The Law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin and death.
Besides this very place makes against them: for when the Apostle does thus
assume a person, he plainly discovers he does so; you see he does expressly
say, that what he did, he did by a figure, but here is not the least hint given
of any such thing, there is not a syllable by which we may gather any such
transfiguration: So that it is a wonder that the Apostle should continue in
such a long discourse, and that with so much vehemence, and yet give no
discovery that he does not mean it of himself, especially when the Adversaries
to this Exposition say, That to understand it of Paul, is so contumelious to
the Spirit of God, and so destructive to all godliness. Certainly if so, the
Apostle would have manifested something to remove this stumbling block.
Although I may add that even that very Text, I have in a figure transferred to
my self and Apollo, etc. does not necessarily allude, to that mention made of
th^^, 1 Cor. 2. 12. where speaking of their factions, some said they were of
Paul, others of Apollo; as if the Apostle did by figure, use their names,
intending thereby the false Apostles; for (say they) The Corinthians made their
divisions by occasion of the false Apostles glorying in them, and exalting them
against those that were faithful. But if so, what argument could there be in
Paul's words? Was Paul crucified for you? Were you baptized in the name of
Paul? If he did mean false Apostles, and not himself, why should he thank God
that he had baptized so few? Therefore Pareus acknowledges, that the common
Interpretation of that Text, as if Paul by a figure use his name and Apollo for
the false Apostles, is no ways agreeable with the scope of the place: For how
could that be an example to teach them humility, as he there enlarges himself.
Heinsius also does not like the translation of the Greek word (...), for such a
transmutation of names and persons, but makes it the same with (...), but
enough of this.

2. A second Argument is, In that this person is said to hate evil, not to will
what is evil, not to know or approve of it, and then he is said to will that
which is good. Now this is the Description of godliness, to love good, and to
hate evil. It is true, that in convinced men, who yet retain their lusts, as
also in legal men, they would not do the evil that they do, but yet they cannot
be said to hate it: No they love their lusts; therefore when any fear does
abate, they presently fall unto those sins again, but this man does hate
sin; So that in this property two things discover a regenerate person, 1.
That not only his conscience and his judgment is against sin, but his will,
his heart and affections also, whereas in all unregenerate men, their
judgments, and their consciences being enlightened and terrified, makes them
afraid to commit sin; but their will, then affections (...) not against it.
And then secondly, The Apostle speaks generally of evil and good, he does not
say, I do this evil, I would not, or I do not this good that I would, but evil
and good indefinitely, and this is only proper to the regenerate, he only
hates all evil, be only loves all good, whereas the unregenerate person does
hate only some evil, and it is some good only that he would do, though if a man
truly hate any sin, he hates all sin, because odium is circa genus.

Thirdly, This person must be a regenerate person, because there are two
distinct principles in him, Sin and He are made two different things, verse.
17. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: And ver. 18. I
know that in me (that is my flesh) dwells no good thing; Here then are (as it
were) two distinct persons; this person has two selfs, which does necessarily
demonstrate that this is a sanctified person. For can a man under legal
convictions say, It is not I, but sin within me? Can he that has only errors
upon his soul say, It is not I, but sin within me? How absurd and false were
that, for their hearts are set upon evil, only the terrors of the Law restrain
them? Now a man is, what his heart is, not what his conviction is. It is true,
the Libertines did abuse this Doctrine, and would thereby acquit themselves, it
was not they, but the flesh: Yea some blasphemously would attribute it to God
himself; but till a man be regenerated, he has but one self, and that is the
flesh. But (says Arminius) those legal preparatory workings by the Law, are
the good gift of God, and are to be reckoned among the works of the Spirit, and
therefore the Apostle may oppose them and sin together. To this it is
answered, Though those legal operations are from Gods Spirit, yet because the
person is not regenerated, he is still in the state of the flesh, he is still
without Christ, and therefore cannot distinguish himself from the flesh within
him. As long as those good gifts of God are not in a subject regenerated, the
same person and the flesh are all one. Yea though those good effects come from
Gods Spirit, and so are in themselves spiritual, yet as they are in a person
unregenerated, they are improved carnally, they are managed only to
self-respects; and thus temporary believers, though they do enjoy the good and
common gifts of Gods Spirit, yet as they are in them, they are carnally
improved, spiritual things being prostituted to temporal ends. It is plain
then, that only a godly man may say, It is not I, but sin in me; and thus
Aquinas on the place says, it may be easily understood of a man in the state
of grace, and of a sinner, it can be only interpreted extorte, by violence: His
reason he goes upon is, because that a man is said to do, which his reason
does, not which his sensitive appetite inclines unto, because homo est id quod
est secundum rationem; By reason we must understand sanctified reason,
otherwise a man's reason is corrupted, as well as his sensual part. Besides,
there is a further Argument used by the Apostle in this distinction he makes,
It is no more I that do it. No more, that implies, once it was he that did it,
formerly he could not make such a distinction as now he does.

Fourthly, The person here spoken of must needs be a regenerate person, Because
it is said, He delights in the Law of God after the inward man, ver. 22. This
is one of the places that compelled Austin to change his former opinion.
Certainly to delight in the Law of God, is an inseparable property of a
regenerate person: David expresses his holy and heavenly heart thereby; yea
the Greek word is (...), I delight with. Arminius does well observe the
emphasis of the word, for he makes the Preposition (...) not redundant, but
significant. So that the meaning is, he delights in the Law of God, that is,
he delights in Gods Law, and Gods Law delights in him; there is a mutual
sympathy and delight (as it were) which makes the reason the stronger for a
regenerate person. For can any but he delight in Gods Law, and Gods Law (as it
were) delight in him again? It is true, it is (...) in the inward man, but that
is not a diminution, but a specification of the cause, whereby he does delight
in Gods Law. I will not say that the inward man does always signify the
regenerate man, and so is the same with a new creature. For although some
understand that place so, 2 Cor. 4. 16. The outward man perishes, but the
inward man is renewed daily; yet happily the context may enforce it another
way, yet here it must be understood of the mind as regenerated, because it is
opposite to the flesh, and so signifies the same with the hidden man of the
heart, in which sense a Jew is called one inwardly, because of the work of
grace upon his soul.

Fifthly, The sad complaint he makes concerning his thraldom, does evidently
show, that it is a regenerate person: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! If we take body for the material body,
which is mortal, and so sinful; or else for that body of sin, which abides
in the godly, it comes much to one point. It argues that the person here
spoken of, feeling this weight, this burden upon him, is in sad agonies of
soul, judges himself miserable and wretched in this respect, and thereupon
does earnestly groan for a total redemption; he longs to be in heaven, where no
longer will evil be present with him, where he shall do all the good, and as
perfectly as he would. It is true, a godly man cannot absolutely be called a
wretched and miserable man, but respectively quoad hoc, and comparatively to
that perfect holiness we shall have hereafter. So we may justly account our
selves miserable, not so much from external evils, as from the motions and
stirrings of sin within us, that do press us down, and thereby make our lives
more disconsolate. Hence it is that Austin calls this Gemitum saactorum, etc.
the sighs and groans of holy persons fighting against concupiscence within them.

Sixthly, The affectionate rejoicing and assured confidence that he has, about
the full deliverance of him from this bondage expressed in those words, I thank
God through Jesus Christ, does greatly establish this exposition also of a
regenerate ate person. It is true, there is variety about reading of this
passage; however this plainly comes from an heart affected with assurance of
Gods grace to give him a full redemption, though for the present he lie in sad
conflicts and agonies. This is so palpable a conviction, that some of the
Dissentients will make Paul here to speak in his own person, as if he did give
God thanks for that freedom which the person spoken before had not obtained.
Neither is it any wonder to see such a sudden change in Paul from groaning
under misery, presently to break forth into thanks and praises of God: For we
may often observe such ebbings and flowings in David's Psalms, that we would
hardly think the same Psalm made by the same man, at the same time; one verse
speaking dejection and disconsolateness, the next it may be strong confidence,
and rejoicing in God.

Lastly, The conclusion which Paul makes from this excellent experimental
Discourse, is fully to our purpose, So then I my self serve the Law of God, but
with the flesh the law of sin. To serve God, and to serve the Law of God is all
one, and this none but a godly man does. Yea to serve him with the mind and the
spirit is a choice expression of our grace. But because this is not perfect and
complete, he adds, He serves also the flesh, and the law of sin. It is true,
None can serve God and mammon, Christ and sin, but yet where there is not a
perfect freedom from thraldom to sin, there, though in the principal and chief
manner we are carried out to serve God, yet the flesh retardeth, and so
snatcheth to it some service: you heard contraries might be together, while
they are in fight. Neither is our redemption from sin full and total. It is to
be done successively and by degrees, that so we may be the more humbled and
grace exalted. Besides that expression (...), is emphatical; this is used when
Paul expresses himself in some remarkable manner, I the same, and no other
man, as it is used in other places, 2 Cor. 10. 1. Now I Paul my self beseech
you, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 13. except it was, because I my self was not burdensome to
you. Romans 9. 3. I could wish that myself were accursed, etc. which is enough to
convince such as are not refractory.

. 3.
Objections Answered.
I Shall now consider what is objected against this Interpretation, and shall
not attend to the general objections, such as that, That who are Christ's and
regenerated have higher things attributed to them; They have crucified the
flesh, they have mortifiedeth old man, etc. As also this seems to be
injurious to Gods grace, it will encourage men in slothfulness and negligence,
etc. for these shall be answered in the general. I shall therefore only pitch
upon two objections, which the Adversaries insist upon.

The first is, That this person here spoken of, is said to be once without the
Law, which (say they) is the description of a Gentile in Paul 's language;
therefore he assumeth some other person then his own; for Paul always lived
under the Law. Austin indeed expounds it thus, I did live once without the Law.
that is, says he, when he was a child, before he had the use of reason. This
is too harsh. Therefore it is better answered, The person here spoken of, is
not said to be without the Law, which is indeed the description of a Gentile,
but that he was alive without the Law once, that is, he, as all the Pharisees
understood the Law of God, as forbidding only external sins, and Paul living
unblameably as to that respect, thought to have life and righteousness by the
Law, but when the commandment came in power to him, and he was convinced that
it did prohibit not only outward sins, but inward lustings of heart, then he
began to find himself a greater sinner than he was aware of; then he found the
Law to be death to him, so that he lived without the Law, because he was not
affected with the full and exact obligation thereof.

The second thing much insisted upon is, That the person here spoken of, is
said to be carnal and sold under sin, which (they say) is made by the
Scripture a certain property of a wickedman. Thus it is said of Ahab, Thou have
sold thy self to do wickedly, 1 Kin. 21. 10. yea of all the children of Israel,
2 Kin. 17. 13. They caused their children to pass through the fire, and sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord. But first, Calvin does grant,
that this is spoken of Paul, while unregenerate, and therefore begins his
Exposition at the 15th verse of a sanctified person: yet that cannot well be,
because there the Apostle begins to alter the tense; There he says, I am
carnal, I am sold under sin, whereas before he had used the past time. We
grant it therefore, that Paul says this of himself, though regenerated, that
he was sold under sin. But then we say, The expressions above named, and this
is not a like; here it is in a passive sense, there in an active sense; of
those wicked men it is said, They sold themselves, which denotes their
wilfulnes and obstinacy; of this, he was sold, which implies it to be done
against his will, as captives are; there it is absolutely, here it is limited
to the flesh: And if this phrase did denote a wicked man in an high degree,
then how can they apply it to a man under legal convictions, and in a
preparatory way to conversion? It would be very hard to say of such men, that
they sold themselves to do evil. Besides, there is a twofold bondage and
captivity under sin, even as the Israelites had a twofold one they were born
in, that of Egypt, and another they voluntarily by their sin sell into, which
was that of Babylon. Thus there is a bondage unto sin, we are all born in; for
in Adam we were all sold to sin, and so needed a Christ, Redermer. And
secondly there is a bondage unto sin, by our own voluntary transgressions; It
is true a regenerate person cannot be sold under sin in this later sense, but
he is in the former, and so it is no more injurious unto the grace of God, as
Austin notes, then that he is yet mortal and corruptible. Thus you have this
great and necessary truth established: Paul speaks here of a regenerate
person, and that not only of him, as he is in the lowest estate, and initials
of grace, as Musculus thinks; but of every godly person while in this life,
even the most perfect that is, though this conflict be more applicable to some
then others; yea if we do regard the exact purity of the law, the most holy do
most humble themselves under it.

. 4.
The several Ways whereby Original Sin does hinder the godly in their
Religious Progress, whereby they are sinful and imperfect.
THe next Proposition in order is, That this flesh, this original sin in a
man does several ways hinder the godly in their religious progress, whereby
they are sinful and imperfect, whereby every one is forced to cry out, as he; O
me nunquam sapientem! so, O me nunquam pium! Oh me never godly, never
believing, never answering the holy Law of God! This treacherous enemy within
us is so multiforme, puts it self Chamelion-like into so many shapes, that
the most holy men have cause to be always on their guard, to keep continual
watch, lest sometime or other this Daliah betray them into the hands of the
Philistines. How were it possible that some eminent servants of God, as David
and Peter, have fallen so grievously, and committed such sins which some
Heathens by the light of nature would have abhorred? but that there is this
fuel and spawn of sin abiding in every regenerate person. It may well be
affirmed, that the reliquiae peccati originalis; the relics of original sin
are in the most holy: for as when an house has been for the greatest part
consumed, but at last the fire is quenched, yet there remains some little
sparks and embers, which cause a constant watch, lest they kindle and consume
whatsoever is left yet undestroyed: Such care and fear ought the godly to have,
lest the remaining corruption break out suddenly, and so destroy them.

I shall instance in some particulars whereby original sin does thus hinder
and retard the work of grace in us. As

First, This flesh within the godly makes us imperfect in this life by its
strong opposition; and contrary thwarting it has to the grace of God within
us. These two says the Text are (...), they are two adversaries daily
combating with one another; Insomuch that what the Spirit says, do, the flesh
says do it not. Thus original corruption is like Solomon's brawling woman,
whose contentions are a continual dropping, Prove. 19. 13. What rest can such a
man have? no more then he that lies in his bed, and has constant droppings of
rain upon him: Such a disturber, and far more troublesome inmate is original
sin to a believer, grace has no rest, no quietness, but the flesh is always
raising up oppositions against it, always crossing it, what the Spirit would
not, that the flesh would. Therefore Romans 7. 23. the Apostle expresses the
violent actings thereof by military terms, it warreth, and it brings into
captivity; In this sense we may say, the flesh is Satan, for that is an
adversary in our way, that rises up and stops us in our spiritual progress:
It is true, the natural and carnal man finds no such opposition; he never
cries out, Oh how hard a thing is it to be heavenly minded, to be godly
indeed, to live a life of faith? how difficult to live and die upon Scripture
and spiritual grounds? for all is flesh within, dead men feel no pain, they
find no opposition; Mortuus non belligerat, is the Proverb, but the godly are
in continual exercises, no sooner does grace begin to work, but the flesh
presently begins to counterwork.

Secondly, The flesh does retard and hinder the work of grace by subtle
allurements and enticements: Thus as the Devil sometimes appears as a roaring
Lion, and sometimes again as a glistering Serpent, and in this latter way is
most dangerous; so it is with this flesh within us; sometimes it grossly, and
violently opposes the grace of God, at other times it craftily insinuates, It
readily interposeth, it propounds many sweet baits; thus what it cannot do as a
Lion, it accomplisheth as a Fox, so that what counsel is given, Mis. 75. Keep
the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom, implying there would
be treachery in the nearest relations: This is much more to be observed against
original sin that lies in thy own bosom, yea it is thy own self; and
therefore how easily may it persuade thee, yea no temptations without could do
thee any hurt, did not this flesh within betray all: Thus it craftily
insinuates, and surprizeth the strongesth holds of the soul, before we are
aware: so you heard from that of James 1. 17. Every man is tempted and drawn
aside with his own lust. Sweet poison does more easily destroy, white powder
that gives no noise more certainly kills; and this is the Reason, why the
godly may be carried away to sin of profit, and pleasure, and not judge them
to be so, their hearts may not condemn them, and all because the flesh can so
bewitch us; it does cast such mists before our eyes, that we are not able to
discern between things that differ.

Thirdly, The flesh within us does keep off grace from its perfect work, by
depressing it and weighing it down; that when grace would lift up the soul to
heaven, that is like a millstone about our neck, and pulls us back again, it
is lime to the birds wings, it is the string to her feet: This made Paul cry
out of it as a weight lying upon him, Romans 7. O wretched man that I am who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? yea Heb. 12. 1. it is called a
weight; now as that must needs be an impediment to any who run in a race, no
less burdensome is original sin to a godly man in his way to heaven.

Fourthly, It hinders the perfection of grace, cooling and remitting the
fervor and zeal thereof; and herein chiefly the mischievous effect of original
sin is discovered, it makes the soul halt in his progress, it allayeth the
heat of grace, it is like smoke to put out the fire. The adversaries to this
Truth say, it is not intelligible how the Spirit can make us will one thing,
and the flesh another, seeing a man has but one will, and he cannot velle and
nolle, will and nill at the same time about the same object; But they may know
that by such expressions are chiefly meant, That the hearrt of a man through
this flesh within him, is very faint and remiss in all its actions about that
which is good; when he does will it, it is so inefficaciously, so slluggishly,
so imperfectly, that it may be called a nilling as well as a willing; and this
is the sad issue of original sin, it makes us go halting to the grave, it
abateth that activity and zeal of spirit, which ought to be in holy things.

Fifthly, The flesh hinders absolute compleatness of grace, by soiling,
debasing, and infecting our holy duties; It is as some mud cast into a pure
stream, it is as some poison mingled with wine; and for this it is, that the
most holy have prayed, God would not enter into judgment with them, because in
his sight no flesh could be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. For this, the Scripture
compares even our righteous actions to a menstruous cloth, Isa. 30. 22. This
is the frog that is drawn up with the pure water out of the well; though our
godly duties are not sins, yet they are sinful, they are damnable in
themselves, and therefore need the mercy of God to forgive the imperfections
adhering to them.

Lastly, The flesh is an hindrance in the way of grace, by dividing and
distracting of the heart. In the stare of integrity when there was no such
intestine war, then the whole strength of the soul emptied it self one way;
but now though grace has for the main settled our hearts upon God, yet the
flesh interposeth, that propounds other objects, and thus because the pool
runs into diverse streams, it is not so full and plentiful, so that it is
impossible there should be any perfection, where there is any distraction or
division; and therefore we may justly expostulate with all those, who plead
they are without sin, Whether they never have so much, as one wandering thought
in any holy duty they go about. If they should say they have not, it is our
duty to flee from such persons as are puffed up with such self-love, and
self-confidence, that they know not, or feel not what they are, or do: Such are
like those distracted persons, that conceit themselves Kings and Emperors,
when at the same time they are miserable and indigent. Now by these several
actings of the flesh within us, the godly man may perceive what little cause he
has to trust in himself: thou can not be secure, while in this mortal body;
the wound original sin has given thee is not wholly cured; sometime or other
this close secret enemy may rob thee of thy Pearls and Jewels, if thou art not
diligent in praying and watching over thy self.

In the next place, I shall proceed to a second Proposition, and therein shall
answer such general Objections that may plausibly be urged against the actings
of original sin within us, and thereby against the imperfection of
regeneration: for some have thought it no dangerous error to plead for a
perfection even in this life: Therefore Arminius his heirs ( Epistola
dedecati. ad cap. 7. ad Rom.) say that the unseasonable and excessive urging of
the constant imperfection of regenerate persons, and the impossibility of
keeping the Law in this life, without adding what the godly might do by faith
and the Spirit of Christ, such a thought as this might easily enter into the
hearts of the hearers, that they can do no good at all; and they add, the
ancient Church thought not the question about the impossibility of the law, to
be reckoned among capital ones, which is apparent (say they) from Austin, which
wishes the Pelagians would acknowledge it might be performed by the grace of
Christ, and then there would be peace between them. But certainly Austin may
best explain himself, ( De perfectione justitiae ad Caelestiam, ad finem) where
he says, he knows some who hold there either have been, or are some, that
were without sin: Quorum sententiam de bac re non audeo reprehendere,
quanquam nec defendere valeam; as he dared not reprove it, so he could not
defend it. This is his modest expression, but if Austin could not defend it, I
do not know who in that age could, seeing Austin by the gloss in the Canon law,
has justly the pre-eminence above all the Ancients for Disputations, as Hierom
for the Tongues, and Gregory for Morals; and certainly the places brought to
prove this point, do argue that no man is without sin, that none can be
justified, if God enter into judgment: It was also Pelagins boast in that
Epistle ad Demetriadem, (for it is taken to be his) That in the first place he
does enquire what men are able to do, how far their own power extends as if
this foundation were not laid, there could be no exhortation to godliness.
Hence the Pelagians charged it as a consequence upon the Doctrine of original
sin, that it would work in men a despair about perfect righteousness, ( lib
secundo coutra Julianum in initio) But of late Writers setting aside Papists,
Castellio, (for we must not call him Castalio, seeing he bewaileth his pride, (
Castle. Defens. page. 356.) for assuming that name to him from the fountain of
Muses) does with the greatest earnestness propugn the perfection of regenerate
persons and immunity from sin, understanding that prayer for pardoning of
sin, like as that duty to forgive our enemies, viz. when we have them: This
Writer calls that question, Whether a man may by the Spirit of God perfectly
obey the law, a very profitable question, but adds that the error on the
right hand, viz. that we are able perfectly to fulfill it, is far less
dangerous then the contrary; for God will never find fault with that man, who
does endeavor for a perfect obedience, and that by the help of God, ( De
obedientia Deo praestanda page 227, 228.) but his arguments are as weak as his
affections are strong in this point.

. 5.
Objections against the Relics of sin in a regenerate man answered.
LEt us examine what is usually objected against this truth. And

First, The command of God requiring we should not lust, and that we should
love God with all our heart, and all our soul, and might: From hence they
argue, if these two commands cannot be perfectly fullfilled, why are they
required of us.

To this it is answered, that it must be granted, no man living is able to
answer the perfection and exactness of this law: who can say he loves God, as
much as the command requires? that he never fails in the least degree? who
can say that he never finds any sinful motions? any irregular workings of
heart? though he do not consent to them; suppose that were always true, which
is not to be granted, yet such motions being in the heart, the very having of
them makes us to fall short of the exactness of the law; But yet these
commands are necessary; for the rule must always be perfect, not wanting or
failing in any thing. The command does represent the perfect Idea of complete
righteousness, as Statues that are erected up in high and eminent places, are
commonly of greater length, then the ordinary stature of men is. Thus it is one
thing the righteousness commanded in the law, and the participation of it in
the subject, that receives it according to its proper capacity; The law then
is perfect, but we are imperfect, true obedience and imperfect must not be
confounded, as Castellio most ignorantly does, and therefore abandoneth that
opinion ( De Justificat. page 46.) which makes imperfection a sin: but he
calumniateth the orthodox, when he says, we hold nothing a virtue, but what is
chiefest ( ibid. page 43.) neither do we call that imperfection, which may have
a greater degree; Adam was not imperfect, because he had not so much holiness,
as the Angles have; In heaven it may be judged, that one Saint shall have more
grace then another, yet every one perfected in their measure; and though it be
so, he that has not so much holiness as the chiefest, shall not be judged
sinfully imperfect; there is a negative imperfection, and a privative; this
later is, when the subject does not partake of what degrees it ought to do, and
then it is always a sin: The star has not as much light as the Sun, but
this is no privative imperfection, because it is not bound to be the Sun: Now
the command of God requires of us the chiefest love that we can by grace put
forth, not the highest degree of love, which is possible, but what we are bound
to do, and any defect herein is a sin; We admit that all graces are not
alike, no more then all sins, one may be more holy then another; yet he that
is the highest attainer does not reach to the utmost of the command; and
therefore whatever falls short of that, is damnable deserving wrath of God.

Secondly, When we say no man is able to fulfill the Law of God in this life,
because the flesh does still abide in us; We mean not as if this were so,
because God could not subdue it, or sin and the Devil were more potent then
Christ, but he has in his Word declared, that he will not give such a measure
of grace in this life, by the righteousness whereof we should be justified. So
that Castellio's exclamations in this case are ridiculous; here is no injury
done to the Spirit of God; we do not make Christ a semi-Saviour; for we readily
grant, That the Spirit of God could make us absolutely free from sin in the
twinkling of an eye. In the hour of death we are immediately purged from all
evil. So that it is plain, the Spirit of God could make us thus complete, but he
will not; neither does this tend to his dishonor, no more than that we die,
that we are ^^ck, and carry about with us corruptible bodies. For did not
Christ die that we might have glorious bodies, that we might be redeemed from
this corruption? Yet this is not done immediately. Seeing then Christ has
assured us, that both soul and body shall be made perfectly holy and happy in
time, though it be not done as soon as we would have it; we are not to cavil
herein, but satisfy our selves with the wisdom of God, who does every thing
beautiful in his season, It is true, Christ when he cured bodily diseases, he
did perfectly cure them; but does it therefore follow, that he must do so in
soul-diseases, as Castellio urges? No certainly, but rather as Christ, though
he healed some perfectly of their diseases, yet he did not take away their
mortality from them: So though by the grace of God, we have strength to
overcome gross sins, yet we are not made impeccable, as the glorified Saints
in Heaven are, but there remains the fuel of sin still within us; not but
that God could remove it, as he could have enabled the Israelites to have
conquered all the Canaanites, but because he will not; God could have made all
the world at once, but he proceeded by degrees; and thus he does in our
sanctification. So that herein we are daily taught to be humble in our selves,
and to depend alone upon the grace of God. It is true, if all sin were
removed, and we confirmed in a state of grace, then there would be no danger of
pride, as there is not in those who are made glorious in Heaven: But were were
we made perfect and delivered from all sin, yet abiding still in a mutable
condition, we should quickly be drunken with the thoughts of our own
excellencies; so that perfection, while we are in the way, would not be so
advantageous unto us, unless to perfection God should also add confirmation,
and this would be to confound Heaven and earth together. And thus much for the
first Objection.

. 6.
I Shall only name a second Objection made in the general against the relics
of original corruption in a man, though regenerated, and thereby the
imperfection of our renovation, because this does more properly belong to
another head in Divinity, which is much disputed, viz. De Perfectione Justitia,
Of the Perfection of righteousness in this life.

The Objection which is plausibly and speciously urged against this truth is,
That this Doctrine is an enemy to a holy life, it is pernicious to godliness,
that it is a pleading for sin, and an encouragement to men to content
themselves in their formal and sluggish way, because they cannot be perfect.
Thus it is thought we bring up an ill report about the way to Heaven, as those
Spies did about Canaan, we discourage people, making their hearts faint,
because of great Giants that we say are in the way. In this manner Julian the
Pelagian old of calumniated Austin, that he did in naturae invidiam malae
conversationis sordes refundere, that he did Peccantibus metum demere quorum
obscenitatum Apostolorum and sanctorum omnium injuriis, he did consolari,
because he made Paul to speak those words, The evil that I hate, that I do, of
his own person: Yea (he says) Austin's purpose was ad infereadum virtutibus
bellum, ad excidium civitatis Dei, etc. ( Lib. 3. contra Julianum, cap. 26.)

What a boasting Goliath is here, or a railing Rabshaheb, as if the holding of
this corruption adhering to a man, though godly, did proclaim war against all
godliness, and did overthrow the City of God. Cassalio also makes such
preaching as this, to be to sow thistles that we may reap figs, It is to make
God accept of blind and same Sactifices, says he ( Quinque Impedim. page 11.
and 12. and 19.) that we are like children holding a bird whose legs are tied
by a thread, and letting her fly a little, we presently pull her back again:
Thus we bid people obey (...) Law of God, and when a man endeavors to do it,
then they tell him he cannot. Therefore (says he) spend as much time to get
perfect obedience, as thou do to get learning, the knowledge of the tongue,
or as thou do to get wealth, and then thou will see, we are not perfect,
because we do not spend so much time in this, as in other things. But this is
to speak like a Philosopher rather than a Christian.

To the Objection we answer, There is no injury to godliness offered by this
truth.

First, Because we say it is every man's sin that he is not perfect, therefore
we ought to humble our selves under all our failings. As it was the Israelites
disobedience, that they were not active to destroy every Canaanite; whatsoever
comes short of the exact Rule of the Law is sinful, and thereby damnable:
Hence God is angry, not only with gross sins, but the imperfect graces of his
people, Revel. 3. 2. I have not found thy works perfect (...) before God. I
here was much emptiness, much vacuity, the Church wanted solidity and fullness
in her duties: For this it is that the godly are subject to many afflictions
and temptations, they are under diverse chastisements, because all the dross of
corruption is not yet purged from them. So that the godly man is so far from
delighting and contenting himself in these imperfections that he mourns and
groaneth under them.

Secondly, Here is no impediment to godliness, because we press it as a duty
upon the godly, to be pressing forward every day, to be perfecting holiness
constantly, and that they are to take heed of self-fulness, or to rest
contented in low principles. Hence the Apostle, Heb. 5. 11, 12, 13. and Chap.
6. 1. speaks very terrible to such as remain in their rudiments (as it were)
and are not carried out to perfection. The Corinthians also, 2 Cor. 7. 1. are
commanded to perfect holiness in the fear of God. It is therefore our duty to
endeavor after perfection, as Paul professes he did, Phil. 3. though he had
not attained unto it; but yet when all is done, Our perfection will be to
bewail our imperfection; we shall find absolute purity is Res voti magis quam
evenius, as Ambrose of old. Hence the most godly have failed in the exercise of
those graces, which they have been most eminent in; Abraham is called the
father of the faithful, whose steps we are to follow; yet through fear in his
lying or equivocating, he manifested unbelief. Sarah is noted for obedience to
her husband, and propounded as a pattern to all wives; yet in what a sinful and
sad passion did she break out against Abraham, when he was innocent, and she
was in all the fault that was about Hagar? The Lord (says she) judge between
me and thee, Genesis 16. 5. Thus David for his sincerity, called a man after Gods
own heart; but how false and hyporitical in the matter of Vriah? Here then is
no encouragement to stand still; we are not come to our races end, we are to
grow every day, there is more to be done, then yet we have performed; and this
striving after further holiness will be while we are in this life.

. 7.
The Objection returned upon the Perfectionists.
THirdly, Those that plead for perfection, they hinder the progress of
godliness; they persuade men with foolish and ablurd conceits, that they ^ay
attain to perfection; for when men do believe, they are perfect; What ^^ed they
labor more, if they be at the races end? What need they run still? Nothing
does more destroy the life and power of godliness, than such arrogant and proud
conceits: So that as Seneca said, Many had been learned men, if they had not
been conceited of their learning; so many might profitably proceed in the
mortifying of sin, if they were not persuaded, it was mortified already. Thus
these Perfectionists preach men into arrogant persuasions of their own
righteousness, and thereby hinder them from a true progress in holiness.
Besides such Doctrine is in an high degree injurious to the grace of the
Gospel, to our Evangelical Justification; if we be whole, we do not need the
Physician. Though God vouchsafe inherent grace to us, so far as to be
delivered from the dominion of sin, and also to be subduing of it daily, yet
the grace of God exalted in this life is by imputation. The grace without us,
not the grace within us is that which does justify. This is the grace so
frequently spoken of in the New Testament, and to which all the godly make
their recourse under the guilt of sin, and the accusations of the Law;
whereas the Doctrine of Perfection wholly evacuateth this admirable and
precious way of Gospel Grace. But enough of this.

. 8.
The several Conflicts that may be in a man.
I Come to another Proposition, which is, That we may conceive of three
conflicts and contrary lustings that may be in a man; not at all naming that
which is for the most part in every sinner, that he would have the profit of a
sin, the pleasure of a sin, but not the bitterness of it. Such a conflict
is in most sinners, they would have the advantage by sin, but not the damage
by it. Thus Arianus (Epictetus lib. 2. cap. 26.) (...), Every sin has
division in it self, and so goes on saying, That every rational soul is obnoxi
us to this fight. The thief would not steal, as it is a sin, but as it is
profitable. Hence it is, that (...), that (...), that what he would that he
does not, and what he would not do, that he does, which are almost the same
words with the Apostle. But this I do not insist on.

The first combat is, That which may be in Heathens, between their conscience
and their appetite. The light of nature inclining one way, and their lust
another way, which is notably taken notice of by Aristotle; a man in such a
conflict is called by him an incontinent person, as distinct from an
intemperate, who having the habit of sin, is carried out to the actings
thereof without any remorse or regretings of conscience or reason. To clear
this, he speaks of a twofold part of the soul, the rational, and that which
has not reason, or which does repugn reason. The rational part (says he, Lib.
1. Ethic. cap. 13.) (...), does provoke and incite to what is good; but the
rebellious part gain-sayeth. Even as in the paralytical parts of the body, when
a man would move such to the right side, they fall to the left side. Now this
Discourse of Aristotle's we acknowledge, as having some truth, for even Heathens
have by nature their consciences accusing or excusing of them, Romans 2. 15. But
Papists and others do horribly perve^t this, when they bring it into Divinity,
and so put a new piece of garment into the old, thereby making a rent, because
there is no agreement with them; otherwise we grant such a combat: yea it is
in too many men, whose convictions are strong, but their lusts stronger; and no
doubt this is in a regenerate person so far, as nature still abides in him;
but such men's dislike and renitency of conscience does not excuse them, though
they be not such great sinners, as those that sin without any remorse, yet
their condition is damnable. Though such have many good sentences, and you
shall hear many good speeches come from them, yet they are still under the
bondage of sin; for though they have a knowledge condemning their sin, yet
it is but universal; when they come to the particular, then they are carried
away, or their knowledge is but habitually in them, not actually; as with
drunken men, or men in a sleep; so that the good sayings they utter, they have
no practical application of them, and therefore compared by Aristotle (Lib. 7.)
to a City, which was derided by this saying, (...), The City consulteth and
advises, that yet regards not Laws, or like such who did utter Empedocles
his grave sentences. A sad thing it is: And oh how often is it for some men to
speak excellent religious truths in discourse, of which they have no practical
power? Solomon has two excellent expressions to this purpose, Prove. 26. 7. The
legs of the lame are not equal, so is a parable in the mouth of fools. As the
legs of a lame man being not equal, make the going uncomely; so it is when a
man has good speeches, but evil actions. Again verse. 9. As a thorn goes up
into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools; As a
drunkard feels not the sharpness of a thorn running into his hand; so neither
does such an incontinent person, the power and efficacy of the most excellent
and savoury truths which he speaks: yet all the while such convictions of
light are upon man, there is the more hope, and he may be the more easily
cured, insomuch that he is not as evil, as a man habituated and senseless in his
sin. Hence Aristotle says, That though an incontinent person does the same
things with an intemperate, yet he is not an intemperate person, as was said of
the Milesians, They are not fools, but they do the things that fools do, (...),
Lib. 7. Ethic. cap. 9.

. 9.
Another Combat in those within the Church, which yet may not be godly.
IN the second place, There is a second Conflict that is in those who are in
the Church of God, and are in a preparatory way to conversion: These besides
the natural light of conscience, have the supernatural light of the Word, which
does powerfully awaken them, enlighten and humble them; so that they feel a
troublesome war within themselves, yet for the present obtain not that grace
which sets them at full freedom. Many men before their conversion have been
in this soul-fight a long time. Prudentius the Christian Poet has his
Psycomachia, wherein some sins and virtue, as chastity and uncleanness,
covetousness and liberality are brought in combating with one another. And thus
many times some godly persons in their unregenerate time have been entangled in
some special lust or other. There are many assaults and skirmishes ere the work
of grace does take full possession. Austin does excellently declare this in his
own experience ( lib. 8. Confess.) Velle meum tenebat inimicus meus, etc. My
enemy did take hold of my will, and made a chain thereof, whereby he was fast
bound; and hereupon he did sigh and groan to be delivered, being ligatus non
ferro alieno, but ferrea mea voluntate, bound with his iron will. In these
aestuations of spirit he lay wearying himself, till at last the grace of God
came in with full power upon him, making a through change, cutting off the
fetters that were upon his soul.

. 10.
Of the Combat in the godly between the Flesh and the Spirit, and how it may
be discerned from the former.
IN the third place, There is the Combat in regenerate persons between the
work of grace, and the flesh in them. The former was only between the natural
conscience and lust; The second between the Spirit of God, but moving and
working only in a man, and his corruption; The last between the Spirit of God
inhabiting and dwelling in a man, and the flesh in him. So that if a Christian
ask, How shall I know whether the combat I feel be between the Spirit and the
flesh, or conscience, and my lust? Though practical Divines give many
differences, yet briefly in these three particulars, one conflict may be
discovered from the other.

1. From the principle and root. In the godly this arises from a total
renovation, or the Image of God placed in a man: In the other it is only from
partial illumination or natural light.

2. In the motive. This combat in the godly is upon holy grounds, out of
hatred to sin, out of love to that which is holy. In the other it is out of
terror and slavish fear, it is because they would not be damned, it is because
of horror upon them, not any delight in God.

3. In the manner. In the other the fight is between two parts of the soul,
only the mind against the appetite; or if there be any work upon the heart, it
is but transitory and vanishing; whereas in the godly man this combat is
universal, he has will against will, love against love, as well as his mind
against these. Thus Austin (ibidem.) speaks of the two wills he had, his
carnal will, and his spiritual will; his meaning is, that because his will was
not so full and efficacious as it should, therefore he had two wills, as it
were, Non igitur monstrum, etc. says he: It is not therefore a monster partly
to will, and partly to will; but the sickness of the mind that cannot rise up
fully to what is good; and therefore there are two wills, because one is not
wholly and fully carried out to that which is good. This expression of Austin
fully answers that Objection, when they demand, How can the will, will and
nill at the same time? It is a contradiction to say so. But Austin answers,
It Is therefore called two wills, or therefore it is said to will and nill,
because it does will sickly and faintly, It Is not so thoroughly and totally
carried out to God as it ought to be; and this halting like that of Jacobs
thigh will go with us to the grave. Thus we are as weak men that are partly
well, and partly sick, as the twy-light, when it is partly light, and partly
darkness, or as wine mingled with water; not that in such a mixture we are able
to say, this part is water, and the other part is mere wine: So we must not
think that in a regenerate man, one part is merely spiritual, the other merely
carnal, but the corruption in a man does adhere to every part that is
sanctified; and therefore as the principle is mixed, so are the actions which
flow from it. But it is time to hasten to the last Proposition, which is,

. 10.
Of the Regenerates Freedom from the Dominion of sin; And whether it be by
the Suppression of it, or by the Abolishing part of it.
THat though original sin be in a regenerate person, yet it is not in its
dominion there, it is in part abolished. For there are these things to be
considered in this inbred defilement; there is,

1. The Guilt.

2. The Dominion, and both these are removed in a regenerate person.

3. There is the sense or presence of it, and that is not taken away but by
death.

4. Some add the Root of it, and that (they say) is not destroyed till the
body be consumed to ashes. For although it be true, that death puts an end
to all sin, yet that must be understood of an ultimate and final death;
otherwise if it be a dispensatory death, as it was to Lazarus and some others;
as that did not put a period to their bodily miseries, when they lived again,
so neither did it to sinfulness in their souls. But even Lazarus and such like
persons raised upon a special economy were regenerated but in part; and this
conflict of flesh and Spirit was in them, and so they needed to pray for
forgiveness of sin. But though we must acknowledge, that original sin has
not the power in a godly man it once had. All the difficulty is, Whether it be
by suppression of it only, or abolishing part of it; and if original sin be
in part diminished, How can the whole of it be propagated to the child? Or why
may not the last part of it be consumed in this life? It may be this Question
may be more subtle then profitable. Scotus, as Pererius alleges him ( in Romans
cap. 7.) thinks that in a godly man original sin is not at all abated,
only grace is every day augmented, and so that cannot weigh us down, as it did
before: As (says he) if an Eagle should have any weight upon her, but the
strength of her wings be increased, then though the weight were not diminished,
yet because her strength is increased, it would not hinder her in flying. But
to answer this Question, we must conclude, that in regeneration original sin
is more then suppressed, there is a qualitative change, and so a diminishing of
darkness in the mind, by light; of evil in the will by holiness: So that the
increasing of these graces do necessarily argue the decreasing of original
sin. And For this purpose the Scripture uses those terms of crucifying and
mortifying; only when we say, original sin is diminished: You must not
understand it has quantative parts, as if they were cut off by degrees, but
potestative, that is, the power and efficacy of original sin is not so
lively, so vehement as it was once, yet where it is thus weakened, a regenerate
person begets a son in an unregenerate estate, because he is the son of
Adam fallen, and is not a father as he is godly, but as he is a man. Now though
it does thus tenaciously adhere unto us, yet death will give it a final and
full blow: not death merely, as it is a dissolution in a natural way (so that
Castellio does absurdly endeavor to perplex this Doctrine with curious
interrogatories) but as the nature of it is altered by Christ, the Spirit of
God putting forth its greatest efficacy at that time: Yea though a godly man
should be so overcome by a disease, that he were not able to act faith in
Christ at that time, for the utter subduing of sin in him, yet his faith
formerly put forth on Christ for that purpose, and the promise of God at that
time will effectually conquer all. This being so, how ought the godly gladly to
submit to death? The terrible vizour of it is now taken away. No vain thoughts,
no wordly or distempered affections shall ever molest thee more. It is not
death to thee, but to thy sin. It is not a death to thy graces and comforts,
but to thy corruptions, Miseria non home moritur, said the Martyr, when he was
to die. It is misery not man that dies.

CHAP. IV.
Of Death coming upon all men, as another Effect of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
The Text explained.
1 COR. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive.
THe chief scope of the Apostle in this Chapter (as was formerly declared from
the 49th verse) is to establish that fundamental and necessary Article of the
Resurrection of the dead; which because of the incredibility of it to mere
humane reason, was much derided by the Heatheus, and Paul for the preaching
thereof, was called (...), Acts 17. 18. A trifling babbler. Hence because of the
difficulty to receive this truth, Synesius was ordained Bishop, though as yet
not persuaded of the Doctrine, which afterward by the grace of God toward
him, he did acknowledge. Yea it is observed, That the Philosophers when made
Christians, received this as the last Article of their Christian faith, because
so contrary to those Philosophical principles they had been accustomed unto.
The Sadduces also denied this main Article, but they might be supposed to do it
upon corrupt grounds futable to their lusts; for being (though not so numerous,
nor so applauded for piety by the people, as the Pharisees were, yet) for the
most part the richest and most wealthy, they embraced that opinion, which
denied the Resurrection, as being more convenient for their carnal hearts, and
that they might with more delight and security give themselves up to this
present world. But the Apostle does here most industriously and powerfully
confirm this Doctrine, which if not true, all our Christian Religion would be
in vain.

The principal Argument to prove this Doctrine is from the Resurrection of
Christ: For the rising as our Head, it necessarily follows his members should
also rise to such glory and immortality. So that Christ's Resurrection does
necessarily infer outs, which made the primitive Christians so affected with
it, that in their ordianry salutations, whenmeeting with one another, they did
use to say. Christus resurrexit, Christ is risen. For this end, Christ is
called, The first fruit of them that slept, verse. 20. As the first fruits did
sanctify the whole harvest of corn that was afterward to be gathered: So did
Christ rising, all his members by his Resurrection, assuring them of theirs.
Hence it is that the Apostles Arguments are not to prove the Resurrection of
wicked men (for they arise upon another account) but only of the godly who are
his members, and have an interest in his mediation.

It is indeed a Dispute, Whether even wicked men do not rise by the virtue of
Christ's merit, and his Resurrection. Baldwine for determining the negative ( in
locum.) is traduced by another Lutheran for Popery and Calvinism, as
introducing that Doctrine of the particularity of Christ's death. But certainly,
The wicked man's resurrection is not to be accounted in the number of any
mercies, and therefore not merited by Christ. Hence it follows necessarily,
that they rise not by any relation to Christ, but by the power and justice of
God, because of that immutable and unchangeable Decree, that every sinner
unrepenting shall die both temporally and eternally, which later could not be
accomplished, unless the bodies of wicked men were raised up to life again out
of the dust.

Now our Apostle to prove Christ the cause of our Resurrection, draws an
Argument from a comparison between Adam and him, making them two originals and
fountains, but of contrary effects, the one of death, the other of life; For as
in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive. Not that all men
universally shall be saved by Christ; but the universal particle must be
limited according to the subject matter in hand; All that are in Christ, all
that are his members shall be made alive by him. And therefore in the next
verse it is so limited, Christ the first fruits, and afterward they that are
Christ's at his coming; So that the sense is, That as all Adams posterity die,
because of him, so all that are Christ's seed shall live by him. For the
expression in Adam, and in Christ, do denote a causality in them, the one of
death, the other of life. Therefore we must not think, that the Apostle does
here only make a bare similitude and comparison, showing that as by Adam we
die, so by Christ we shall be made alive, but it is an Argument from the power
and causality that is in one to the other.

The Apostle does in the fifth of the Romans make the like comparison, only
there is this difference, as Calvin observes. In that place the Apostle makes
the comparison chiefly in respect of spiritual effects, death as it brings
condemnation, and life as it is accompanied with justification here, and
glorification hereafter. This Text is greatly agitated in the controversy
between Puccius and Socinus, (Vide Disput. de statu primi hominis ante lapsum.)
The former holding truly (though he superaddeth many gross errors) that Adam
was not made mortal, and that death came in only by sin: only he goes
absurdly beyond his bounds, when he holds the beasts were also made immortal.
The later on the contrary he holds, That Adam was made mortal, that death in
natural, that though by sin we are under a perpetual necessity of death,
(which is an ambiguous phrase he uses) yet death it self is natural; He
grants, That immature and violent death comes by sin; but death as it is a
mere dissolution of a person, so it is from his primitive creation and
constitution. Therefore be would have this difference between the Text I am
upon, and Paul's Discourse in the fifth of the Romans, viz. That there indeed
he speaks of the sin of Adam, by which we come to die; But here he would
have the Apostle consider Adam as he is by Creation, and that being mortal from
the beginning we also are mortal from him. But who can persuade himself, that
these passages concerning the change of the body hereafter to what it is now?
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in corruption, it is sown in dishonor,
it is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power, are to
be understood of our bodies, as at the first Creation, and not as they are now
by Adam's fall? Our bodies are made corruptible and vile bodies by reason of
sin. We must then understand the Apostle as speaking of Adam sinning, though
sin be not here named. So that the fifth of the Romans will excellently
illustrate this place; and that makes the sense to be, That Adam sinning, by
his sin death entered upon all mankind, so that death is not natural, neither
does it arise from our first constitution, but it comes in wholly by sin.

SECT. II.
Death an Effect of Original Sin, explained in diverse Propositions.
HAving then heretofore spoken of some spiritual effects of original sin,
(and more might be named, such as a necessity to sin, an impotency to all
good, senslesness and stupidity therein, the aldom to Satan; but I shall pass
them by, (as being very proper to the Commonplace of Divinity, which is of the
grace of God, and man's free will) and shall proceed to the effects of original
sin that are of another nature, and that is temporal and eternal death. The
former effects did so slow from original sin, as that also they are sinful
properties in a man, but these are merely punishments. It is not our sin that
we are sick, that we die, but it is the effect. From the words then we observe
this truth and doctrine,

That death comes upon all mankind, because of our sin we have originally
from Adam. It is true, the Socinian will say, We put more in the Doctrine, then
is in the Text; but you heard the comparison used by the Apostle in the fifth
of the Romans compared with this, does necessarily suppose death to be, because
of Adam's sin, not only as imputed unto us, but because thereby we are made
inherently sinful. This truth is of a very vast compass, but I shall consine
my self within as narrow bounds as may be; I shall follow my usual method to
explicate this in several Propositions.

. 1.
FIrst, This controversy about man's mortality is very famous in the Church,
and has been of old solliciously disputed. The Pelagians as they denied
original sin, so consonantly to that falsehood they affirmed, That death was
not the punishment of sin, but did arise by the necessity of our natural
constitution; Which Assertion was condemned by some Councils, and the Laws of
Emperors, as injurious to God the Creator of men. For this experience, that
Infants new born are subject to many miseries, and death it self, was a thorn
in their sides, which they could not endure in, nor yet possibly pull out.
Sometimes with the Stocks they would deny death to be an evil. Sometimes they
would say, Children in the womb are guilty of actual sins, for which they
deserved death: but that which they did most constantly adhere unto, was, That
Adam was made mortal, and would have died, if he had not sinned, death being a
necessary consequence (as they say) from a man's corporal constitution. The
Papists, especially the Schoolmen of old, and the Jesuits of late (to whom
Jansenius does vehemently oppose in this point, (...), as the Greek expression
is) say, That Adam was indeed by nature mortal, but by grace and superadded
favor, he was immortal. So that both Papists and Protestants agree in this,
That Adam was made immortal in his Creation: Only the difference is, Whether as
original righteousness, so immortality may be said to be natural or
supernatural to Adam; We say it is natural, they say it is supernatural; and yet
Bellarmine (De gratia primi Hom. lib. cap. 5.) in his explication of himself in
this point comes very near us, or at least speaks contradictions to himself:
For (he says) if natural be taken for that which was put into man from his
nativity, if natural be taken for that which was to be propagated to Adam's
posterity; if natural be taken for that which is convenient, to perfect and
prepare a man for his end, then they say original righteousness, and so by
consequence immortality would have been natural to Adam's posterity; but if we
take natural for that which does internally constitute nature, or necessarily
flow from the principles of nature, then (they say) immortality was
supernatural, even as original righteousness. But the Protestants, when they
call original righteousness natural, they do not mean effective, as if it
were not the gift of God bestowed upon us, as if it did flow from the
principles of nature; but subjective, that is, original righteousness and
immortality were not supernatural to Adam, as they are now to us, being we are
corrupted, but connatural, or a due perfection to man, supposing God created
him for such an end, as to enjoy himself. So that it is due not so much to the
nature of man, as to Gods Order and Decree concerning man. Thus as in birds,
supposing God would have them to fly, it was necessary they should have wings,
(though they come from a natural principle) so in man, supposing God made him
for communion with, and enjoyment of himself, it was necessary that he should
be indewed with holiness ( Though flowing not from nature, but concreated by
God with man.) Thus that which is the gift of God, and comes only from him,
may be in respect of the subject a due perfection. It was thus with Adam in
respect of his soul, that was created immediately by God, it did not flow from
any natural causes; yet supposing God would make him a rational creature, then
this became a due perfection to him. Adam then was immortal by nature in a
well-explained sense, as he had a reasonable soul by nature. But however it be,
Protestants and many Papists agree in the thing, that he was made immortal;
only they differ in the manner How. Now the Socinian differs from all; for he
dogmatizeth, That Adam was made mortal, that death was natural, and denies any
original righteousness or immortality that was bestowed upon Adam any way. It
is true, sometimes he says, That though Adam was made mortal, yet God might
have preserved him from actual death by some way or other; only that he was
made immortal, that he denies. So that what the Papists dream about their
imaginary pure naturals, saying, God might have created man so: Socinians
affirm defacto, it was so. The late Writer Dr. T. is also positive for Adam's
mortality by nature, That Adam was made mortal by nature (says he) is
infinitely certain, and proved by his eating and drinking, etc. (Further
Explicat. page 453.) instancing in those Arguments the Socinians use to bring.
All which Assertions do directly and evidently oppose the word of God.

. 2.
How many ways a thing may be said to be Immortal; and in which of them man is
so.
SEcondly, When we say, God made Adam immortal, and that upon his transgression
both himself and his posterity are subjected to a necessity of death, We must
rightly understand in what sense he is said to be so. For

1. A thing may be said to be immortal absolutely and essentially, having no
principles of death within, nor cannot be destroyed by any cause without. Thus
1 Timothy 6. 16. God is said only to have immortality. This is that comfortable
attribute which the people of God make use of under all changes and
vicissitudes, God is always the same. Though father die, though mother die,
yet God does not; as one in the Ecclesiastical Story said, when word was
brought him, that his father was dead, Desine (says he) blasphemias loqui,
pater enim meus immortalis est, Cease to speak blasphemy for my father is
immortal.

2. That may be said to be immortal, which is so by some singular dispensation
of God, either in respect of mercy, or of justice; and thus it is with the
glorified bodies of the Saints, and the damned bodies of wicked men; for the
Saints their vile bodies shall be made like Christ's glorious body, they are
raised to incorruptibility and glory; and as for the bodies of damned persons,
though they be raised to reproach and dishonor, yet by Gods justice they are
preserved immortal; so that the fire cannot consume them to ashes, neither
shall length of time ever destroy them. For if God could make the Israelites
clothes and shoes to last so many years without being consumed, no wonder if he
do a greater matter upon the bodies of men.

3. That may be said to be immortal, which by the will of the Creator is so
constituted, that being separated from all matter, it has no principles of
dissolution from within. And thus the Angels are immortal, they have no
principle of corruption within, yet they are annihilable by the power of God;
should God withdraw his preservation of them they would cease to be, but from
within they have no cause of dissolution. The Devils also in this sense are
immortal, and that is the reason, though many wicked and bloody persecutors of
Gods Church have died, yet the Devil being immortal has stirred up new ones,
which made a good man say to one who did greatly rejoice at the death of a
cruel persecutor, At diabolus non moritur, but the Devil does not die.

Lastly, A thing may be said to be immortal, Conditionally supposing such and
such conditions he performed, and in this sense only we say, God made Adam
immortal; for (...) had a power to sin, and so a power to die, he had a power
to stand, and to a power to be freed from death. So that we do not say, Adam
had such an immortality as the glorified bodies have that cannot die, but
conditionally only. As he had in him power to sin, so he had a power to
deprive himself of all happiness and immortality, which fell out also to our
utter undoing. Autin's expression of Posse non mori, and Non posse mori, is
known by all. It is not then an absolute, but a conditional immortality we
speak of.

. 3.
Propos. 3. ALthough we say that God made man immortal, yet we grant, that his
body being made of the dust of the earth, and compounded of contrary element,
it had therefore a remote power of death. It was mortal in a remote sense, only
God making him in such an eminent manner, and for so glorious an end, there was
no proxim and immediate disposition to death. God indeed gave Adam his name
(whereas Adam imposed a name upon all other creatures, but not himself) and
that from the originals he was made of, to teach him humility even in that
excellent estate, yet he was not in an immediate disposition to death, When
Adam had transgressed Gods Law, though he did not actually die upon it, yet
then he was put into a mortal state, having the prepared causes of death within
him; but it was not so, while he stood in the state of integrity, then it was
an immortal state, now it is a mortal one; I say state, because even now,
though Adam has brought sin and death upon us, yet in respect of the soul a
man may be said to be immortal, but then there was immortality in respect of
soul and body, the state he was created in, did require it. So that although
death be the King of terrors, yet indeed original sin, which is the cause of
it, should be more terrible unto us. Now man by sin is fallen, the beasts
could they speak would say; Man is become like one of us, yea worse, for he
carries about with him a sinful soul, and a mortal body.

. 4.
Distinctions about Mortality, and that in several respects Adam may be said to
be created mortal and immortal.
THe fourth Proposition is, That from the former premises, it may be deducted,
that in several respects Adam may be said to be created mortal, and immortal;
yet if we would speak absolutely to the question, when demanding how Adam was
created, we must return, Immortal. Some indeed, because man's mortalilty and
immortality depended wholly upon his will, as he did will to sin, or not to
sin; so they have said he was neither made mortal, or immortal, but capable
of either; but that is not to speak consonantly to that excellency of state
which Adam was created in; for as Adam was created righteous, not indifferent,
(as the Socinians say,) neither good or bad, but capacious of either
qualification; so he was also made immortal, not in a neutral or middle state
between mortal and immortal; so that he had inchoate immortality upon his
creation, but not consummate or confirmed, without respect to perseverance in
his obedience: for the state of integrity was, as it were the beginning of that
future state of glory. Again Adam might be called mortal in respect of the
orginals of his body being taken out of the dust of the earth, but that was
only in a remote power, so God did so adorn him with excellent qualifications
in soul and body, that the remote power could never be brought into a proxime
and immediate disposition, much less into an actual death, for a thin^ may be
said to be mortal, 1. In respect of the matter, and thus indeed Adams body in a
remote sense was corruptible.

2. In respect of the form. Thus Philosophers say sublunary things are
corruptible because the matter of them has respect to diverse forms, whereas
they call the heavens incorruptible, because the matter is sufficiently
actuated by one form, and has no inclination to another; and thus Adam might
truly be said to be immortal, for it was very congruous that a body should be
united to the soul that was suitable to it; for that being the form of a man,
and having an inclination or appetite to the body, if man had been made mortal
at first, the natural appetite would in a great measure have been frustrated,
it being for a little season only united to the body, and perpetually ever
afterward separated from it: Surely as an Artificer does not use to put a
precious Diamond or Pearl into a leaden Ring; so neither would God at first
join such a corruptible body to so glorious and an immortal soul.

3. A thing may be said to be mortal in respect of efficiency: and thus it is
plain Adam was not made mortal: for he might through the grace of God assisting
have procured immortality to himself; that threatening to Adam, In the day he
should eat of that forbidden fruit, he should die the death, Genesis 2, 17. does
plainly demonstrate, that had he not transgressed Gods command, he should never
have died.

4. A thing may be said to be mortal in respect of its end; Thus all the beasts
of the field, (whatsoever Puccius thought) are mortal, because their end was
for man, to serve him; so that it is a wild position to affirm, as he does,
that there shall be a resurrection of beasts, as well as of men, for they were
made both in respect of matter, form, and end, altogether mortal, whereas Adam
was made after the Image of God, to have communion and fellowship with God, and
that for ever, which could not be without immortality.

. 5.
Prop. 5. THe true causes of death are only revealed in Gods Word. All
Philosophers and Physicians they searched no further then into the proxim and
immediate causes of death, which are either external or internal; they looked
no further; and knew of no other thing, but now by the Word of God, we
Christians come to know that there are three principal causes of death; so that
had not they been, those intermedious and proxime causes of death had never
been: The first cause is only by occasion and temptation, and that was the
Devil: he tempted our first parents, and thereby was an occasion to let death
into the world: for this cause the Devil is called, Joh. 8. 44. a murderer from
the beginning; it does not so much relate to Cain, as to Adams transgression;
yet the Scripture Romans 5. does not attribute death to the Devil, but to one
man's disobedience, because Adams will was not forced by Satan, he had power to
have resisted his temptations, only the Devil was the tempting cause. The
second and most proper cause of death was Adams disobedience; so that death is
a punishment of that sin, not a natural consequent of man's constitution. The
History of Adam as related by Moses does evidently confirm this, that there
was no footstep of death, till he transgressed Gods Law, and upon that it was
most just, that he who had deprived himself of Gods Image, which is the life of
the soul. should also be deprived of his soul, which is the life of the body;
that as when he rebelled against God, he presently felt an internal rebellion
by lusts within, and an external disobedience of all creatures, whom he did
rule over before by a pacifical dominion; so also it was just, that he who had
deprived himself of spiritual life, should also be divested of his natural
life. Hence it is that the Apostle informs us of that, which all the natural
wise men of the world were ignorant of, Rom 5. 12. That by one man's sin,
death entered into the world, where the Greek word (...), is observed to have
its peculiar Emphasis, pertransiit sicut lues, even as the rot does destroy an
whole flock of sheep; and therefore at the 14th Verse the Apostle uses another
emphatical expression, Death reigned, and that upon those who had not sinned
after the similitude of Adams transgression: Seeing then by Adams transgression
death comes thus to reign over all mankind, and there would be no justice to
have (...) inflicted, where there is no sin; it follows necessarily that
every child becomes inherently sinful because internally mortal and
corruptible. Thirdly, The third and last cause, is the anger of God justly
inflicting this punishment of death upon us; death may be considered in respect
of the meritorious cause, and so it is not of God, but of sin. Secondly in
respect of the decre^ing and punishing cause; and this death is from God, as an
evil justly inflicted upon man for his sins; God inflicts the sentence of
death upon us, but sin deserves it; not that death can properly be caused by
God, for that is a privation, but by removing life, God in taking away life, is
thereby said to cause death: Even as when the Sun is removed from our
Hemispere, then darkness does necessarily follow. These then are the causes of
death, but oh how little are they attended unto^ men attributing death to many
other causes besides this.

. 6.
Prop. 6. When we say that death comes by original sin, in that we
comprehend all deseases pains and miseries, which are as so many inchoate
deaths, yea all labor and weariness; for so God threatened Adam, Genesis 2, 17.
Cursed is the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return
unto the ground: for out of it wast thou taken. In this sentence there is
matter enough to humble us; there is not a thistle in thy corn, not a weed in
thy garden, but it may put thee in mind of original sin; yea there is not the
least pain or ach of thy body, but this may witness it to thee: so that Austin
says truly, we do circumferre testimonium, etc. We carry about with us daily
full evidence to confirm this Doctrine of original sin: for such evils and
calamities as do necessarily follow our specifical nature, accompanying us as
men, they cannot be attributed unto any other cause but original sin; which
consideration viz. of mankind being universally plunged into miseries, and not
knowing the cause thereof, made the Platonists, and some Heretics conclude,
that the souls of men had sinned formerly, and by way of punishment were
therefore adjudged to these mortal and wretched bodies. Though death be only
mentioned, because that is most terrible, and all other miseries tend
thereunto; yet they are necessarily included. Some ask the Question, Why God
did not threaten hell, rather then death; but no doubt eternal death is
understood in this commination, for temporal and eternal death are the wages of
sin, only death is mentioned as being most terrible to sense, men being more
affected with that, then with hell which is believed by faith. The Scripture
then mentioning death only, how absurd and preposterous are the Socinians, who
in that threatening will comprehend any thing but death; death they say comes
from the necessity of that matter we are constituted of, but sickness, labor,
and such miseries, as also eternal death, these are the proper fruit of sin:
Thus men delivered up to error, are hurried from one dangeous precipice to
another. But let Christians in all deseases, miseries, and death it self, look
higher then the Philosopher, or the Physician: Let them acquaint themselves
with original sin, and thereupon humble themselves under Gods hand.

. 7.
The several Grounds assigned by Schoolmen of Adam's immortality rejected, and
some Causes held forth by the Orthodox.
Propos. 7. ALthough it be agreed upon by all, except Socinians and their
adherents, that Adam was made immortal at least by grace, and the favor of his
Creator; yet there is difference among the Popish Writers, upon what to fasten
the ground of his immortality: What was the cause of it, therein they disagree.
Some place it in a certain vigor and excellency that was then in the soul,
whereby it was able to preserve the body from death: Molina likes not this, (
De opere sex dierum Disput. 28.) and therefore he does affirm, that the body of
Adam was made immortal and impassible, by an habitual gift bestowed upon it,
which he says was a corporeal quality extended through the whole body;
Because, says he, this immortality was not a transient thing, but an enduring
gift, suitable to that state; and God is used to give permanent gifts, not
immediately, but by some inherent principle: Even as the glorified bodies are
made immortal by some intrinsecal quality accommodated to that state; yea and
the bodies of the damned also, though they are immortal, yet they are not
impassible, because they are tormented in the flames of hell fire. But Suarez
(Lib. 3. de hominis Creatione cap. 14.) does upon good grounds reject any such
supposed corporeal quality, as being without any foundation from the Scripture,
and introducing a miraculous way without necessity. For who can think, that
Adam had such an intrinsecal quality in his body, that fire would not burn him?
that if he went upon the waters, his body would not sink? Others they attribute
his immortality to the tree of life, that was (say they) both alimentum, and
medicamentum; as it was both nourishment, so it preserved life; and as it was
medicinal, so it did repair that partial abating of natural strength in
concoction, which would otherwise in time have come upon man: But this opinion
takes that for granted, which yet is greatly controverted, viz. that it was
called the tree of life, as if there had been some active physical power in the
fruit thereof to continue a man's life, either for a long time, as some think,
or for ever, as others; whether indeed once eating of it, or constant eating
was necessary, as opportunity did require, is also debated by curious Authors;
for some make it to be called a tree of life, only Symbolically, as being a
sign of eternal life, which Adam should have enjoyed had he continued in
obedience. And truly though it should be granted, that there was such a virtue
in the tree, yet when Adam had sinned, it would no ways have helped him, or
preserved him from death, because the wages of sin is death, and therefore
would not have produced that in him, which it is supposed that it might have
had in Adam's obedience; yet God would cast him out from Paradise, lest he
should eat of that tree: For it was just that he who had incurred the sentence
of death by his transgression, should be deprived of all the signs of life, and
symbols of Gods favor. Furthermore this tree of life, was not it self
immortal; Would that always have continued? Was not that subject to
alterations as well as other trees? How then can man's immortality be attributed
to that? Seeing then there is so much uncertainty amongst Schoolmen upon what
to place Adam's immortality, the Orthodox do consonantly to Scripture, put it
upon these things, concurring as causes to preserve him from death.

The first is, That excellent constitution and harmony of his body, whereby
there could not be any humor peccant or excessive. So that from within there
would not have sprung any disease. And although in Adam's eating and drinking,
being nourished thereby, there would necessarily have been some alteration in
him, by deperdition and restoration, which is in all nourishment; yet that
would have been in part only, not so as to make any total change upon his body.

2. The second cause was, That original righteousness which God made him in.
For seeing sin only is the meritorious cause of death, while Adam was thus
holy and absolutely free from all sin, death had no way to enter in upon the
body.

3. There was the providence of God in a special manner preserving of him, so
that death could not come by any extrinsecal cause upon him. No doubt but
Adam's body was vulnerable: a sword if thrust into his heart, would have taken
away his life; but such was the peculiar providence of God to him in that
condition, that no evil or hurtful thing could befall him.

Lastly, and above all, Gods appointment and divine ordination, was the main
and chief cause of his immortality. For if the Scripture say, ( Deuteronomy. 8. 3.) in
the general, That man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that comes
from the mouth of the Lord, then this was also true in Adam: And if we read of
Elias, that he went forty days in the strength of a little bread that he did
eat, Is it any wonder, that the appointment of God should work such immunity
from death in Adam? Whereas then there are three things about death
considerable, the potentia or power, the actus, or death it self, and the
necessity, Adam was free from all these; unless by power we mean a remote
power; for if he had not had this power of dying, then he could not have fallen
into the necessity of death. Thus you see the excellent constitution of his
body, original righteousness, a divine providence, and Gods order and decree
therein did sufficiently preserve Adam, not only from actual death, or the
necessity of death, or death as a punishment; but also from any disposition, or
habitual principle within him of death and it may be from this state of
immortality Adam was created. The Poets by (...) obscure tradition, had their
figments of some meats and drinks which made men immortal; as their Nectar,
called so, say some, because when drunk, did make them (...), young again; or
as others, from (...), as that which did not suffer them to die. There was also
their (...), as much as sine mortalitate, (...) is mortalis. They had also
their (...), from (...), luctus, because it did expel all sorrow and grief.
But to be sure when we compare our mortal, sinful and wretched estate we are
in, with this glorious estate of Adams: What cause have we to humble our
selves, to see the sad change that is now come upon us? By this we may see how
odious that first transgression was unto God, that for the guilt thereof has
made this world to be a valley of tears, to be like a great Hospital of
diseased and miserable men.

SECT. III.
Arguments to prove that through Adam's sin we are made sinners, and so
mortal.
. 1.
LEt us proceed to prove our Doctrine, That through Adam sinning we are made
sinners, and so mortal, which necessarily supposes that Adam was made
immortal, and that death had nothing to do with mankind, till sin came into
the world.

The first Argument is, From that glorious condition Adam was made in, and also
the excellent end he was created for. All which would have been horribly
obscured, if death or mortality had then been present. The fears and thoughts
of death are a bitter herb in the sweetest dish that is; when of any comfort we
have, we may say as the young Prophets to their master, there is mors in ella,
death in the pot; death in this or that mercy thou enjoyest, this does greatly
abate our delight. Therefore we read of one of the Kings of France, a Lewis,
that forbad all those who attended him, ever to make any mention of death in
his ears; that profane man thought, such a speech would damp his delights.
Seeing then Gods purpose was to make a man such an excellent and blessed
creature, can we think he was made mortal, and that it might have been said to
him, This night thy soul shall be taken away, and then whose shall this
Paradise, and all these goodly enjoyments be? It is the Scriptures design to
aggravate the goodness of God toward man, and to show the excellency and
honor God put upon him. Whereas the Socinians directly oppose this purpose of
Gods Spirit, and would make man as miserable as may be. Hence they say, he was
created like a mere innocent, that he had not much more knowledge than an
Infant, that he had no original righteousness, that he was made mortal. Yea
Socinus, (Resp. ad Puc. cap 14 page 106.) cavils at the explication of that
place, Genes. 2. 8. which is owned by all Interpreters, about the garden in
Eden. which God placed Adam in; he would not have any such place of pleasure or
delight understood thereby. But although the word may be retained as a proper
name, Eden, for so our English Translators do, yet because it comes of a word
that signifies to delight, Genesis 18. 12. The Church of God has always
intepreted it of a place of delight, yea that Heaven is called Paradise
allusively thereunto; and therefore it is horrible impudency in Socinus to say,
that place was not called Eden, when God planted it at first, but in following
ages it received that appellation. Thus whereas the Psalmist does admire the
goodness of God, for the honor put upon man at the Creation. This Heretic
labors to debase and diminish it as much as may be.

. 2.
ANd if Adam had been made so righteous and glorious, yet subject to death he
would have been like that building Paul supposes, 1 Cor. 3. Whose foundation
was of gold and precious stones, but the superstructure hay and stubble: Or
like Nebuchadnezzar's Image, which was partly of gold, with other additaments,
and partly of clay; all which would have redounded to the dishonor of God his
maker; neither could it so well be said, By one man, (or by the Devil) death
came into the world, as by God who is supposed to make man in such a mortal and
frail estate.

But I proceed to a second Argument, and that may be drawn from the commination
made by God to Adam upon his disobedience, compared with the execution of this
sentence afterward, which might be enough to convince any, though never so
refractory. The threatening to Adam we have recorded, Genesis 2. 17. where God
prohibiting him to eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, confirms
this Law with a penalty (viz.) That in the day he did eat thereof, he should
surely die: dying thou shall die; The gemination is to show the certainty, as
also the continuance or it. So that Socinus and others, who would not
understand corporal death in this place, as being from the natural constitution
of a man, and so would have been, had there not been this commination, does
join too much with the Devil in this business; for his endeavor was to
persuade the woman that this threatening was false, and that she should not die,
death should not be the punishment of her transgression: But what need we any
clearer place then this divine commination? Does not this necessarily suppose,
that if Adam had not transgressed, he should not have died, and so by
consequence have been immortal, it being not possible for death to come in at
any other door, but that of sin? To threaten a mortal man with mortality had
been absurd, or to make his natral condition a punishment, for then it would
have been a punishment to be made a man, if made mortal. The Socinians
therefore to elude this, would not understand by death, the separation of the
soul and body, but eternal death; or as they say at other times, a necessity of
dying; but a necessary death and eternal death are absurdly made parallel by
them. For beasts are under a necessity of death, yet cannot be said to partake
of eternal death, especially the godly they cannot but die, yet they are
absolutely delivered from eternal death. We must therefore take death for
corporal death, not but that the death of the soul by sin here, and eternal
separation from God hereafter, is to be included herein, yet this temporal
death is also a great part of the penalty here threatened, which may be evinced
by these three reasons:

1. Moses is relating in an historical manner, what was done to man in the
beginning. Now in an historical Narration, we are not to go from the literal
meaning, unless evident necessity compel, much less may we do so here, when we
have the Apostle acted by the same Spirit of God, as Moses was in being Penman
of the Scripture, attributing our corporal death to Adam; For no doubt when
Paul wrote this Text, In Adam we all die, he had this historical relation made
by Moses in his mind.

2. The sentence and execution of it must be understood in the same manner. Now
it is plain, that in the execution of it, mentioned Chap. 3. 19. corporal death
is meant, because Adam is thus told, That dust he was, and unto dust he should
return.

3. It must be meant of temporal death, because this alone, and not eternal
death does belong to all mankind. For although at the day of judgment, it is
said, some shall not die, yet that sudden change made then upon them, will be
equivalent to death. Thus you see the threatening made to Adam at first does
abundantly confirm this truth. There is one doubt only to be answered, If death
be meant in that sentence, how then is it that Adam did not immediately die?
How is it that he lived many hundred years afterward? To this some say, That
the restriction of time, viz. the day, is not to be made to the time of eating,
as if at that day he should die, but to death; as if the sense were, thou shall
die one day or other, thou shall be in daily fear of death. But if this be
disliked, then we may understand it of a state of death, that day he did eat
thereof he became mortal, for every day is a diminution of our life. As a man
that has received a deadly wound, we say he is a dead man, because though he
did linger it out, yet all is in a tendency unto death. Now this will appear
the more cogent, if you take notice of the execution of this sentence
mentioned, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. where the ground is cursed, and man also
adjudged to labor and wearness all the days of his life, even till he return
to the ground out of which he was made. But here the Socinian thinks he has
an evasion, Death (says he) is not here made a curse, but only it is the term
how long man's curse shall be upon him. It is not poena, but terminus (says he)
for it is said, he should be under this labor, till he did return to the
ground; but if we consider the sentence beforementioned, it is plain, it is a
curse. So that in this place it is both a curse, and a term putting an end to
all the temporal miseries of this life, though to the wicked it is the
beginning of eternal torments.

. 3.
THe third Argument for our mortality, and also actual death by original sin,
is taken from those assertory places, which do in express words say so. Not to
mention my sext, which has said enough to this truth already. We may take
notice of other places affirming this. And certainly that passage of Paul's,
Romans 5* 12. may presently come into every man's mind, By one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned. It is true, we told you Calvin makes the Apostle to speak of
spiritual death here, as in my Text of temporal death, which the coherence also
does confirm; but though that be principally intended, yet not totally. Even
temporal death is likewise to be understood, as being the beginning and
introduction to eternal death, if the grace of God does not prevent. We have
then the Apostle attributing death not to man's creation at first, but to his
disobedience: Neither is this death upon men, because of their actual sins,
but because of Adam's disobedience by whom we are made sinners, yea in whom we
have sinned; That (...) is diversely translated, and much contention about it,
viz. whether it should be rendered in whom, or causally, for as much? It is
true, the Preposition (...), as learned men observe, is used in the New
Testament variously, sometimes for (...), Luke 5. 5. sometimes for (...), Luke
10. 9. sometimes for (...), Acts 3. 16. and otherwise; but for ought I can
observe it may very well be understood for (...), as Mark 2. 4. and Luke 2. 25.
The Scripture uses (...) for quatentus, as Romans 11. 13. And indeed this is
most consonant to the Apostles scope; for why should Adam's sin be brought in
rather than other parents? Were it not that we were considered in him under a
common respect, as one with him. It is true Erasmus says, he does not remember
that ever he read (...) for (...) with a Dative case; but Heb. 9. 17. may
confute him. And among profane Authors, (...), neither can (...), Matthew. 26.
50. be said by most men to signify in as much. For as De Dieu observes the
postpositive, is for the demonstrative, (...), Art thou come for this? as the
other Evangelists, Do thou betray the son of man with a kiss? Although if
we should render it causa^ly, as the adversaries contend, it would no ways
prejudice the truth we plead for; seeing that the sin here charged upon all
mankind, is, because of Adam. And therefore if we will make any rational
coherence in the Apostles discourse, it must be after this manner, As by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon
all men, as much as all have sinned, that is, all sinned in that one man, for
what sense it is to say, That by one man sin and death entered upon all,
because all sinned in themselves? This would be a contradiction to lay the
death of mankind upon Adam's sin, and upon all men's actual sins likewise:
Yea, it is wholly repugnant to the Apostles scope, who is comparing Adam and
Christ not simply as two originals and beginnings, but as two causes of death
and life. Indeed I would not much contend with any, that would render the word
causally, and so make the verse an whole entire proposition in it self, without
any defective expression at all; so that we understand all men's sinning to be
interpreted of that which they are guilty of in Adam. It is not worth time to
take notice of the wild Divinity imposed upon this Discourse of Paul's, by the
late Writer, ( Vnum Necessar. page 365) who would have Death come upon mankind
occasionally only by Adam's sin, and that but till Moses his time, and after
Moses to come upon a new account, by the Law promulged through his ministry.
The mentioning of this is confutation enough: for here in this Text the Apostle
does make all mankind to die, because of Adam: And why may not (...) here be
the same with (...) in the Text.

Another Text witnessing this truth is, Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death
Here death is not taken only for eternal death as the Socinians say, because
the opposite unto it is made eternal life, but for both kinds of death eternal
and temporal; temporal death being the inlet of eternal, and so contrary to
eternal life. Neither is that cavil of their worth any thing, who would make
the wages of sin to be the Subject, and not the Predicate, because the
Article (...) is put to it; but that is no sure Rule. Sometimes the Article is
put to the Predicate, for some emphasis sake, and not the Subject, as I Cor. 9.
1. Are not ye (...) my work in the Lord? Are ye not that eminent and
conspicuous singular work of mine in the Lord? We see then, what it is that
sin deserves, even temporal and eternal death; it comes not from man's
primitive constitution, but Adam's transgression. Therefore it is that we
deserve many thousand deaths, if it were possible; for original sin deserves
death, every actual sin deserves death, yea and hell also: Oh how miserable
is man, who thus deserves to die, and to be damned over and over again!
Therefore the Apostle uses the plural number, (...), to signify the manifold
evils that are in this death. The word properly signifies that meat, which was
allowed soldiers for their service in war. We see then how fearful we all
are to be of sin; What wages will thou have for every pleasant, every
profitable sin? even death temporal and eternal.

The last Text I shall mention is, that which Austin so much urges in this
point, Romans 8. 10. The body is dead because of sin, which is chiefly to be
understood of our mortal body; now he says it is dead, because of the sentence
of death passed it, so that there is no way to escape it. It is sin then that
makes the body in a state of death, that deserves the whole harmony and good
temperament of the body should be dissolved, and thereby follow a dissolution of
the whole man. For though sin deserve death, yet there must be thereby some
ataxy or disorder made in the body of a man, otherwise death would not follow.
So that though sin be the meritorious cause, yet several diseases the effect
of sin, do actually cause death. Not that sin makes a substantial change
in a man, but an accidental only. Thus you see the Scripture constantly
attributing death, yea and our mortality and corruptibility to sin only, and
not to our natural constitution. Therefore those are strange positions we meet
with ( Vnum Necessar. cap. 6. Sect. 1. page 371, 372.) That death came in not
by any new sentence or change of nature, for man was created mortal, and that
if Adam had not sinned, he should have been immortal by grace, that is by the
use of the tree of life. That to die is a punishment to some, to others not. It
was a punishment to all that sinned before Moses and since, upon the first it
fell as a consequent of Gods anger upon Adam, upon the later it fell as a
consequent of that anger which was threatened in Moses Law; but to those who
sinned not at all, as Infants and Idiots, it was merely a condition of their
nature, and no more a punishment, then to be a child, is. But seeing he
professes himself to be of the same judgment with his incomparable Grotius,
let him consider how these positions agree with him, who does against Socinus
industriously and solidly prove, ( Defens. fid. de satisfac. cap. 1. page 19,
20, 21.) that death has always some respect of a punishment, instancing in
the Texts I have mentioned, using such words, Quidclarius? Quis vel verba
legens non videat hanc sententiam, and Corinthians (the words of my Text) and
an ad anussim respondereisti ad Romanos? Yea he concludes, That it were easy
to prove, that it was the perpetual judgment of the ancient Jews and
Christians, that death of whatsoever kind it be, (viz. whether with violence,
or without violence) was the punishment of sin, adding, that the Christian
Emperors did deservedly condemn, beside other things, this opinion of
Pelagians, that they held mortem non ex insidiis fluxisse peccati, sed exegisse
eam legem immutabilis constituti. And indeed, if death were not the effect of
sin, but consequent of man's nature it would be no evil, whereas the Scripture
accounts it of that nature, as Deuteronomy. 30. 15. See I have set before thee this
day, life and good, and death, and evil.

SECT. IV.
Arguments brought to prove, that Adam was made mortal, answered.
THe next work to be done, is to consider those Arguments which they bring to
prove, that Adam was made mortal, and so had a proxim principle of death in
him, which would have taken effect, if God did not provide some way against it,
and that which is used by all Adversaries to this truth, is, Because Adam was
created in such a condition, that be must necessarily eat and drink, yea and
was also to propagate children; all which actions do contradict immortality.
For he that eats and drinks, must by degrees have a decay in nature; and
our Savior seems to prove immortality from this argument, Luke 20. 35, 36.
because in heaven they shall not marry, so that to procreate children is not
consistent with such a blessed estate.

But these Objections are easily answered, if we remember the distinction at
first given in this point, that there is an immortality absolute and immutable,
or conditional and changeable upon supposition. Now it is true, neither eating
or marrying can consist with unchangeable mortality with immortality of glory,
But it may very well consist with conditional immortality, that is in tendency
to that which is absolute. Eating and drinking in the state of integrity was a
means subserving to keep up the state of immortality, so far was it from
repugning of it, This therefore is the root of his error, that men apprehend
no other immortality, but what is complete; that unless Adam had been made in
the same estate, that the glorified Saints are put into, he could not be said
to be immortal.

Secondly, They say, Adam is said to be earthly, and of the earth, to have a
natural body, and so opposite to that immortal body, we shall have in heaven, 1
Cor. 15. 47. But first when the Apostle gives those names to our bodies of
vile, corruptible, and to be in dishonor, this is to be understood of our
bodies after the fall, they are made so through sin. It would be derogatory
to God, to say they were made such at first. It is true, the first man is said
to be earthy, but that expression denotes only the original of his body,
whence it was first made; not the state he was created in, as appears by the
opposite; the second man is said to be the Lord from Heaven. It is one thing
then to speak of Adam's body in respect of its original, and another to speak
of the whole person in respect of his condition.

Thirdly, They say, All the internal causes of death were in Adam, while
standing, as well as fallen; and therefore he was mortal as well as we. To this
we answer, there were indeed the causes of death in him materially, but not
formally, for the bodily humors were not peccant, either in quality, or
quantity; the natural heat would not have consumed the radical moisture, so
that in that estate there would never have been formally existent the proxim
causes of death: besides the adequate and principal causes of death, are the
Devils suggestions and man's transgression, as you heard.

Fourthly, They ask, If man were not made mortal, why should immortality be
promised as a reward, if he had it already? Why should it be promised him upon
his obedience? The answer is easy, Adam 's immortality was inchoate only; the
consummation of it was promised as a reward to his obedience.

Lastly, They object, If death be the punishment of sin, then Christ has
freed believers from this death, which is against experience. But

1. The Socinians grant, That a necessity of death is the fruit of sin, yet
Christ has not freed us from the necessity of it, no more than the naturality
of it.

2. We must distinguish between an actual abolition of death, and the right to
do it. Christ has purchased for us a right to immortality, yet the actual
investing of us into it, is to be done in its time, Death will be swallowed up
in victory; and for the present, the nature of death is changed, as to a godly
man; it is no more a curse to him, the sting of death is taken away, as when a
Serpent or Wasp have lost their sting, they can do no more hurt, Thus to the
godly it cannot do any hurt. It is like Elijah's fiery chariot, to carry them
to Heaven, It Is like passing through the red Sea into the Land of Canaan; thus
as the cloud was full of darkness to the Egyptian, but light to the Israelite;
so is death full of terror, and of curses to an ungodly man, but pleasant and
lovely to a godly man; it is his gain to die; To live in this world is his
loss and disadvantage.

SECT. V.
Q. Whether Adam's sin was only an occasion of Gods punishing all mankind,
resolved against D. J. T.
I Shall conclude this Text with answering a twofold Question; The full
discussing whereof may inform us about the most secret and mysterious truths
that are in this point. And

First, It may be demanded, That suppose it be granted, that by Adam we die,
may not this be understood any more than occasionally? God was so displeased
with Adam for his transgression, that thereupon he insticts the curse threatened
to him upon his posterity. Even as we read often in Scripture, that God for
Magistrates sins, or for parents sins does take an occasion to punish a people
or children for their own sins. Thus it may be thought, that God by occasion
from Adam's transgression, did impose on us for our sins the same curse that
was denounced to Adam; not that we were sinners in him, not that we come into
the world with any inherent sin, but because of our actual impieties, God
punishes us with Adam's curse. In this manner the late adversary to original
sin does explicate himself. ( An Answer to a Letter, page 30, 31, 32.) as if
this were all the evil by Adam, that for his sake our sins inherit the curse.
Insomuch (says he) that it is not so properly to be called original sin, as
an original curse upon our sin. That we may not be deceived in his meaning
(though it is very difficult to reconcile himself with himself) For at another
time he says, The dissolution of the soul and holy should have been, if Adam
had not sinned: for the world would have been too little to have entertained
the ^yriads of men, which would have been born, (An Answer to a Letter p. 86,
87) Now how Adam's sin should bring in the sentence of death, as he says in
another place, ( Vnum Necessar. cap. 6. sect. 1. page 367.) and yet he have
died, though he had not sinned, is impossible to reconcile.) He gives us two
similitudes or parallel expressions, which may demonstrate how it stands
between Adam and as.

The first is, Psalm. 106. 32, 33. They angered him also at the waters of strife,
so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes. Because they provoked his
Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. Here was (says he) plainly
a traouction of evil from the Nation to Moses their relative; for their sakes
he was punished, but yet forasmuch as Moses himself had sinned. But surely we
may here say, Behold a new thing under the Sun. This was scarce ever heard of
before in the Church of God, so that it (...) too much honor to it, to confute
it; yet something must be said, lest words prevail, and similitudes, when
reasons cannot. Not to meddle with any large explication of that passage in the
Psalm; If we consult with Bellarmize and Genebrard, this place will no ways
serve his turn. For Bellarmine (inlocum.) would have the 33. verse not to
contain any sin of Moses, as it he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, but
refers that to Gods Decree or Purpose pronounced by his mouth, which was to
destroy the Nations, as it follows in the next verse; which they did not do,
affirming the Hebrew word cannot be applied to an unadvised speaking, or as it
is rendered by some, ambiguous and doubtful: Neither is it in the Text that God
punished Moses for their sakes, but as our Translators, It went ill with Moses
for their sakes; And this translation Genebrard takes notice of, as following
the Hebrew, adding, that some expound it, not of any punishment God inflicted
upon Moses, but of that vexation, trouble and grief which he had, because of
their murmurings and rebellings against him. And it this be so, then here is
not so much room for his opinion, as to set the sole of its feet. But let it be
granted, That Moses was occasionally punished by the Israelites rebellion for
his own sin: For who can deny but that God does sometimes take an occasion
from some men's sins to punish others for their own sins, as the Hebrews
have a saying, especially when related to one another, That in every punishment
they undergo, there is an ounce of that Calf, which Aaron made, as if God did
from that, take an occasion to punish the Israelites for their other
transgressions; yet this is no parallel to our case in hand; for here the
Israelites were an occasion to make Moses sin, for which God was so angry
with him, that he was not suffered to enter into the Land of Canan. But we are
now speaking of men, who are punished by death, that yet never were occasioned
to sin by Adam, in the Adversaries sense. For the people of Israel were
present with Moses, and by their froward carriages did provoke him to that
sinful passion; but Adam has been dead some thousands of years since. Who can
say, It is Adam that stirs me up, it is Adam that will not let me alone, but
compels me to sin? Yea, how can Heathens and Pagans be said to sin
occasionally by Adam, when they (happily) never heard that there was such a man
in the world? Besides, Infants they are subject to death, What actual sin
does Adam produce the occasion of to them? If then Adam were now alive, and
Infants could be tempted to actual sins, as Meses was by the Israelites, then
there had been more probability of his instance.

But it may be his second example will be more commensurated to our purpose,
and that is from 1 King. 14 16. where it is said, God would give Israel up,
because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and made Israel to sin.
Thus says he, alluding to the words of the Apostle, By one man (Jeroboam)
sin went out into all (Israel) and the curse, captivity or death by sin;
and so death went upon all men (of Israel) inasmuch as all men (of Israel) have
sinned. But this is wholly to give up the cause to Pelagians, whose gloss yet
of imitation he utterly rejects, though much more that which affirms, we
are made properly and formally sinners by him. ( Answer to a Letter, page 54.)
For how did Jereboam make all Israel sin? was not by his example, and in the
fame sin of Idolatry, as he did? Now do we follow Adam in eating of the for
bidden fruit, and so offend God in the same sin as he did? So that this was
wholly by imitation; and therefore one generation did transmit this sin to
anotherly example, till at last there was no more mention of it. But did Adam
thus offend, and then Cain and others follow him in the like sin? He cannot
then wash his hands from the Pelagian Doctrine of original sin from Adam,
only by imitation, if he adhere to this inftance. Again Jeroboam is said to
make Israel sin for some time only, while his memory and example had some
influence, and it was the sin of the Israelites only, for many separated
themselves from him, and went into the kingdom of Judah, that so they might not
be polluted with that worship, as appears, 1 Chronicles. 11. 14. 16. whereas
Adam's sin brings death upon all mankind, and this will endure to the end
of the world; for the Apostle says in the Text, In Adam all die. Besides, This
Author gresly contradicts himself; for at one time, he says, God was s^ angry
for Adam's sin, that he indeed punished men with death, yet but till Moses
his time, and then death came upon a new accout. At other times he makes it a
punishment of all men, because of Adam's sin. And indeed the Text we are upon
does evidently enforce this.

Furthermore, Death is said to reign over all markind, to pass on all; and are
not Infants part of the world? It is true, he says, Children and Idiots that
cannot commit actual sins, death is no punishment to them, they die in their
nature; but if there had been no sin, how could there have been idiots, and
children that die in their Infancy? Certainly, that must be an immature death.
Now although it be said, That death is a conlequent of nature, yet immature
death must needs be a punishment of sin; for so this Auther answers that
Text, Death is the wages of sin; The Apostle (says he) primarily and
^terally means the solemn^^es, and causes, and infelicines, and (...) of
temporal death, and not merely the dissolution, which is direct, no evil, but
an in let to a better state. ( Answ. to a Letter, page 87*)

(...) this discourse of the occasionality of death by Adam 's sin, is (...)
mere non-us, and fancy of his own, will appear by the opposite to Adam (...)
comparision with Christ. What was Christ only the occasion of our
righteousness and life? Did God from Christ's obedience take the occasion only
(...) us for our own obedience? who sees not the absurdity of this? Though
therefore he does super^^^usly overlook Calvin, Knox and the Scoich
Presbyterics in this point; yet I suppose he will bearken with more reverence
to what the late Annotatour says in this matter, Annotat in cap. 5. of the
Romans.) for in his paraphrase on the 12 Verse, he makes death and mortality to
come upon all men by Adam's disobedience, because all that were born after were
sinners, that is born after the likeness and image of Adam; And again on Verse
14, death came on the world, because all men are Adam 's posterity, and
begotten after the image and similitude of a sinful parent. By this we see the
cause of death is put upon that image and likeness we are now born in, to our
sinful parent, which is nothing else but our original corruption. Let not this
consideration of our sinful souls and mortal bodies, pass away before it has
wrought some affectionate influence upon our souls; Cogita temcrtuum brevi
moriturum: Every pain, every ^ch is a memento to esse hominem. That is an
effectual expression of Job cap. 17. 14. I said to corruption thou art my
father, and to the worm thou art my mother and sister: You see your alliance
and kindred, though never so great; it is your brother-worm your sister-worm:
Job gives the worms this title, because his body was shortly to be consumed
by them, and thereby a most intimate conjunction with them would follow; Post
Genesim sequitur Exodui, was an elegant allusion of one of the Ancients; yea
the life that we do live, is so full of miseries, that Solomon accounts it
better not to have been born; and the Heathen said, Quem Deus amat moritur
juvenis, which should humble us under the cause of this sin.

SECT. VI.
Q. Whether Death may not be attributed to man's constitution considered in his
mere naturalls.
I Proceed to the second and last Question, which is; May not death be
attributed to man's constitution considered in his mere naturals? Is there not a
middle state to be conceived between a state of grace and sin, viz. a state
of pure naturals; by which death would have come upon mankind, though there had
been no sin at all? This indeed is the sigment of some Popish Writers, who
make Adam upon his transgression to be deprived of his supernaturals, and so
cast into his naturals; although generally with the Papists, this state of pure
naturals is but in the imagination only; they dispute of such things as
possible, but de facto, they say man was created in holiness, and after his
fall he was plunged into original sin. Now the Socinians they do peremptorily
dispute for this condition of mere naturals, de facto, that Adam was created a
mere man without either sin or holiness, but in a middle neutral way, being
capable of either as his free will should determine him. This state of mere
nature is likewise a very pleasing Doctrine to the late Writer so oftern
mentioned, it helps him in many difficulties; Death passed upon all men, that
is the generality of mankind, all that lived in their sin: The others that
died before, died in their nature, not in their sin, neither Adam's nor their
own, save only that Adam brought it upon them, or rather lest it to them,
himself being disrobed of all that which could hinder it. Thus he. ( Answer to
a Letter page 49.) This is consonant to those who say (as Bellarmine and
others) that man fallen and man standing differ as a clothed and and naked
man; Adam was clothed with grace, and other supernatural endowments, but when
sinning, he was divested of all these, and so left naked in his mere natural.
Thus they hold this state of mere naturals to be a state of negation, not
privation, God taking from man, not that which was a connatural perfection to
him, but what was merely gratuitous: The late Writer uses this comperison of
Moses his face shining, and then afterward the withdrawing of this luster. Now
as Moses his face had the natural perfection of a face, though the glorious
superadditaments were removed; thus it is with man, though fallen, he has his
mere naturals still, and so is not in a death of sin, or necessity of
transgressing the Law of God; but though without the aid of supernaturals he
cannot obtain the kingome of heaven, yet by these pure naturals he is free in
his birth from any sinful pollution, says the known Adversary to this truth.
Thus he that calls original sin a mere non ens, he lays the foundation of
his Discourse upon a mere non entity; Now if you ask what comes to man by
these mere naturals, he will answer death, Yea that which is remarkable, is the
long Catalogue of many sad imperfections containing three or four Pages that is
brought in by him, ( Vnum Necessar. cap. 6. Sect. 7.) a great part whereof he
says is our natural impotency, and the other brought in by our own folly; As
for that which is our natural impotency, man being thereby in body and soul so
imperfect, it is (he says) as if a man should describe the condition of a
Mole, or a Bat; concerning whose imperfections no other cause is to be enquired
of, but the Will of God, who gives his gifts as he pleases, and is unjust to
no man, by giving or not giving any certain proportion of good things. To the
same purpose he speaks also in another place, ( further explicat. page 475.)
Adam's sin left us in pure naturals, disrobed of such aides extraordinary as
Adam had: But certainly there are few Readers, who shall consider what is by
him made to be the natural impotency of man in soul and body; but must conclude
he is most injurious to the goodness, wisdom, and justice of God, in making
man of such miserable pure naturals; yea that it is a position worse then
Manicheisme; for the Manichees seeing such evils upon mankind, attributed them
to some evil principle: but this man lays all upon the good and most holy
God; It is Gods will alone, not man's inherent corruption, that exposes him to
so many unspeakable imperfections. It is well observed by Jansenius, who has
one Book only de statu purae nature, opposing the Jesuits and old Schoolmen in
their sigment upon a state of mere naturals, that this opinion was brought into
the Church of God, out of Aristotle, and that it is the principles of his
Philosophy, which have thus obscured the true Doctrine of original sin. I
shall briefly lay down some Arguments against any such supposed condition of
mere nature; from whence they say we have ignorance in the mind, rebellion
against the Spirit, and also death it self, but without sin. And

Arg. 1. The first is grounded upon a rule in reason, That every subject
capable of two immediate contraries, must necessarily have one, or the other. A
man must either be sick or well, either alive or dead, there is no middle
estate between them; thus it is with man, he must either be holy or sinful, he
must either be in a state of grace, or a state of iniquity: The Scripture
gives not the least hint of any such pure naturals. Indeed a man may in a
metaphysical manner have abstracted thoughts of man, neither considering him as
good or evil: in which sense it is disputed between Junius and Arminius,
whether man in his mere naturals, or in a common consideration, as man, neither
looked upon as good or evil, be the object of predestination: but if we speak
of existency, then there never was, or will be a man, but either must be a good
tree or bad: for in such a susceptive subject, one of the immediate contraryes
must needs inexist.

Secondly, The Scripture speaks of man's condition since Adam's fall, as a
state of privation not negation; When David confessed he was born in sin,
Credo (says learned Davenant on Col. cap. 2. 2.) hac verba non ferent
commentum Jesuiticum, in pur is naturalibus conceptus sum, etc. for the Word of
God describes us as blinded in our mind, that we are dead in sin, that we
have a stony heart: all which argue that we have only impure naturals.

Thirdly, To hold death, diseases, and soul miseries, such as grief, ignorance,
difficulty to do good, etc. consequentiall of nature is to attribute cruelty
and injustice to God. This Austin of old urged the Pelagians with, How can an
Infant new born be exposed to such miseries, if there be no sin deserving of
it? What God may do to an innocent creature, how far he may afflict him per
modum simplicis cruciatus, though not poenae, by his sovereign dominion, is not
here to be disputed? It is certain all these miseries of mankind are by the
Scripture attributed to sin; and shall we have such hard thoughts of God,
that the world shall be full of miseries before sin?

4. Man as he is a man has an inward desire to be happy, and God only can be
the happiness of a rational soul. There is by nature an imbred desire to an
ultimate end, and therefore that God at first planted in man such an appetite,
vouchsafed him also a power to obtain this end. So that as we cannot conceive a
man made at first without an inclination to this happiness, so neither without
inherent qualifications that would dispose him thereunto; and this makes any
such state of pure naturals to be an impossible thing: for then God would not
be the ultimate end of such a man. And whereas the Schoolmen have brought in a
distinction of finis naturalis and supernaturalis, of amor naturalis and
supernaturalis, that God is the natural end, but not supernatural; that he may
be loved with a natural love or supernatural: These are mere cobwebs and
niceties; for God is the ultimate end of man from his creation; and as the
creatures were made for man, so man for God: neither can man love God, but by
the help of Gods Spirit; even Adam in his integrity was enabled to love God, by
his grace assisting of him, and he that does not love God upon such motives, as
the Scripture requires, sins, and so this amor naturalis is no more than a
sin; it is cupiditas, not charitas; it is not a loving of God, as he ought to
be loved.

Lastly, This opinion of a third estate of mere naturals between holiness and
sin, must necessarily infer a third place after death, that is neither heaven
or hell. For I would ask this Writer, whether one dying in his nature does go
to Heaven? he cannot, for he has no holiness; to hell he cannot, because he
has no sin. This puzzleth him exceedingly ( Forth. Explic. p. 471.) for though
he is favorable to that opinion of a third place, yet he dare not determine of
any such thing. To be sure the Scripture is clear enough, that there are only
two places after a man's death, that are our receptacles, either heaven or hell.
This may suffice to inform our judgments herein.

Let us hear something from this that may affect our hearts; for more is to be
spoken to this point in the ensuing Discourse. Is all mankind thus sentenced to
death? Are we as so many dead corpse? This should humble us, and make us low in
our eyes; though a rich man, though a great man, yet a mortal man. Xerxes that
potent King, looking from an high hill upon his numerous Army, fell a weeping,
while he thought that within an hundred years there would not be one of them
left: Oh (says Hicrom in allusion to this) that we could get up into some high
Tower, and behold all the Kingdoms and Nations in the world, with every
Inhabitant therein, and then consider that within a short time, there will not
be one left! Mankind runs in a torrent, one generation passes away, and
another succeeds, yet how do these Ants busy themselves upon the earth, as
if they were immortal? As men in a ship, whether they sit or stand, they are
still drawing nigh to the haven. Thus it is with us, whether eating, drinking,
buying or selling, we are hastening to the grave. Hence

In the second place, prepare and provide for death; happy is that man upon
whom it may be said, he does patienter vivere and delectabiliter mori, live
patiently, but die with delight. Think every day, yea hour, that is said to
thee, which was to Hezekiah, Set thy house (and much more thy soul) in order,
for thou shall die, and not live; for though we die, yet our sins, nor our good
and holy works die not, but will go to the grave with us, will go to hell, or
to Heaven with us.

CHAP. V.
Eternal Damnation, another Effect of Original Sin.
SECT. I.
What is meant by Wrath in this Text.
EPHESIANS. 2. 3. And were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.
AS I began this Subject of original sin with the Text in hand, so I shall
conclude with it. My purpose in re-assuming of it, is to treat of the last and
most dreadful effect of our native pollution, which is, The desert of
everlasting damnation. From this alone had we no actual sins, we are made heirs
of Gods wrath, as this verse does fully evince.

I shall not insist upon the Coherence and Explication of the words, that work
is done already. I shall only add some observable particulars that were not
formerly taken notice of, and that will be done in answering of two Questions,

1. What is meant by wrath here? And

2. What is meant by nature?

For the first, no doubt we are to mean Gods wrath; Therefore Tertullian's
Exposition of this place is singular and much forced; he understands wrath here
subjectively, as if it were man's wrath, making the sense to be. We are all by
nature subject to passions, especially that of anger is predominant. When it is
said ( Lib. 3. de anima, cap. 16. says he) that we were by nature the children
of wrath, ^rationale indignativum suggillat, etc. he reproves that irrational
anger we are subject to, which is not nature, as it comes from God, but of
that which the Devil has brought in. Tertullian affirming these three parts or
powers of the soul, the rational, the irascible, and the concupiscible, which
he calls indignativum and concupiscentivum. In the irascible, he speaks of
a good indignation, and an evil one, applying this Text to the later. Cerda his
Commentator illustrating this, says, Tertullian's meaning is, That we are by
nature children to our passions, we are not at our own disposing, we are under
their power; adding, That Paul mentions wrath rather than any other
affection, because of that anger and fury, by which he once persecuted the
Church of God. Thus he mentioning also another Exposition, That by anger is to
be understood the Devil, who may so be called, because of the cruelty he
exercises upon men: but this is so improbable that it needs no refutation.
The wrath then, is Gods wrath, which like himself is infinite, and the effects
thereof intolerable; So that it is as much as to be Children of hell, children
of everlasting damnation, even whatsoever the wrath of God may bring upon a man
in this world, and the world to come.

SECT. II.
What is meant by Nature.
THe second Question is, What is meant by Nature? As for those who would have
it to signify no more then prorstus and vere, altogether or indeed, we have
heretofore confuted; yet granting that this is part of the lease, but not the
principal. For we are to take nature here for our birth-descent, as appears
partly, because the Apostle uses the word (...), which does more properly
relate to our nativity, whereas before he calls the children of disobedience
(...) partly, because the Apostles order is observable; for in the original it
is, We were children by nature of anger, that is, natural children opposed to
adopted ones; and partly, because the Jews pretended holiness by their
nativity, because they were the seed of Abraham; which pride the Apostle would
here abate, making them equal herein to the Heathen Idolaters. Neither by
nature are we to understand custom only, as if the Apostle meant by it the
constant custom of our actual iniquities, which uses to be called a second
nature, we are made children of wrath; for the Apostle does no where use the
word so, no not in that place, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not nature (...) you? etc.
For nature is taken both for the first principles, and also the immediate
conclusions deduced from them, which later the Apostle does call nature.
Therefore it is matter of wonder, that the late Annotator in his paraphrase on
Ephesians. 2. should take in the orthodox sense (viz. And were born, and lived, and
continued in a damning condition, as all other Heathens did (observe that, born
in a damning condition) should yet refer to his notes, on 1 Cor. 11. where he
seems to contradict any such birth-damnation, from this of the 2d to the
Ephesians: For he would understand (...) of the national custom of Idolatry
amongst the Heathens; and if so then (...) is not to relate to our nativity or
birth, as some translate it, which he also notes in the margin. But though
custom may be called nature, yet there is commonly some limiting expression;
as when he quoteth out of Galen, that customs are acquired natures, or out of
Aristotle, custom is like nature: Here are restrictive expressions, whereas
Paul speaks absolutely. And as for that instance which the learned Annotator
has out of Suidas, which the late Writer makes use of for the corrupting of
this Text, ( Vnum Necessar. cap. 6. Sect. 2.) it does very fairly make against
them. For Suidas upon the word (...) enlarging himself, and particularly making
it to signify the principle of motion, and rest of a thing, essentially and
not by accident (alluding happily to Aristotle's definition) does after this,
add, But when the Apostle says we we were by nature the children of wrath,
(...), he does not speak of nature in this sense, because this would be the
fault of him that created us. All which is very true, and does directly oppose
Manicheism; We do not say, there is any evil nature, or that the primordials of
our nature were thus corrupted. They that hold pure naturals cannot answer this
reason of Suidas, it does militate against them. But we affirm this corruption
of our nature came in by Adam's voluntary transgression. So that in this sense
we call it natural malum, as Austin; and quodammod^ natural, as Tertullian.
So Suidas his meaning seems to be, That the wrath of God is not naturally due
to us, as the creatures have their natural principles of motion and rest within
them; but that Suidas does not by nature wholly mean an evil custom,
appears, in that he says, two things are implied in this expression:

The first is, (...) and (...), an in dwelling abiding evil affection (by which
we may very genuinely understand; that innate corruption in us, that sin
which dwells in us.) And

The second is (...), A continual and wicked custom. These are not to be
confounded as the same thing, but one is the cause of the other. Original sin
is that evil, in-dwelling affection; from whence proceeds evil customs in
sin. But it is not worth the while to examine, what the opinion of Suidas was
in this particular. Varinus does better discourse upon the word (...), making
it to be the individual property of a thing, as the fire to burn, and says, it
differs from (...): for this is the essence of a thing, and (...) the (...),
the power or efficacy of a thing; and thus from him we may say, original sin
is not (...), but the (...), though still we must remember, that it is not a
primordial, but a contracted property. It Is made so upon Adam's transgression.

SECT. III.
That by nature through the original sin we are born in, all are heirs of
Gods wrath, all are obnoxious to eternal damnation.
NOw my purpose is to insist chiefly upon the Predicate in ths Propositon, We
are children of Wrath, and that by nature, even of Gods wrath. So that thus
Text does contain the heavy doom of all mankind. For it is observed to be the
form of speech, which the Jewish Judges used, when they passed sentence upon
any capital offenders, to pronounce, That such were the sons of death. From
hence we may observe,

That by nature, through the original sin we are born in, all are heirs of
Gods wrath, all are obnoxious to eternal damnation. This is the most bitter
herb in all this discourse of original sin. Here all the adversaries to it,
seem to be most impatient, when you utter such words as these, by nature
deserving damnation as soon as ever we are born, before any actual sin
committed, it is just with God to throw us into hell, that every Infant is
obnoxious to this vengeance: At these words they are ready to rend their
garments, and to say, we have spoken blasphemy. The late Writer will in some
sense (though in effect it be none at all) grant that Adam's sin may be
imputed to us for some temporal evils, but that the effect of it should be to
put us into a state of eternal condemnation: This seems horrid to him. But
who may let his heart work in pitiful thoughts against Scripture affirmations?
Why should not all say, it agrees not with the mercy of God, that men should
for ever lie roaring in hell, for the sins committed here in a transient
manner? But of this in its time. We must judge of God by Scripture Light, not
by our humane affections. And as Gregory says well, He that cannot find out a
reason of Gods doings, may easily find in himself a reason, why he cannot find
it out. This Text does clearly declare the condition of all mankind by nature,
and therefore it must be for original sin, and not actual, we have also the
Apostle Romans 5. 16. in that comparison between the first Adam and the second
fully establishing this, The judgment was of one (says he) to condemnation,
but the free gift is of many offenses to justification: here we see attributed
to this sin, not only (...), but (...), judgment and condemnation, which
cannot be limited only to temporal curses, because condemnation is opposite to
justification, and to eternal life through Christ: Yea that Text Romans 3. 19.
may like an oath, put an end to all controversies and strifes in this matter;
where the Apostle proving all men both Jew and Gentile to be under sin,
makes this the consequent of it, That every mouth may be stopped, and all the
world become guilty before God. Here we see all mankind is guilty before God:
They are all so many damned men, if the grace of God does not interpose; so
that what is naturally ours, whether original or actual, is wholly damnable.
Therefore to the sense of the word nature, already given, we may take in
Erasmus his Interpretation also, who makes nature to be opposed to the grace
and mercy of God, mentioned in the following verses. So that from this Text we
may conclude, Every man in his naturals, whether originally or actually
considered, is exposed to Gods vengeance, which might take hold upon him as
soon as ever he has a being. Therefore Chrysostom explaineth the Text thus,
We are by nature the children of the wrath of God, and nothing else; for as he,
who is the son of a men, is by nature a man, so are we the children of wrath.
Thus he. And the Apostle adds, as others, to show, That no Church Priviledges
which the Jews enjoyed, made them any ways better in this respect, then the
Heathens.

SECT. IV.
What is comprehended in this Expression, Children of wrath.
BUt let us see the wonders of God in this deep point. And

First, What is comprehended in this expression, Children of wrath? And

1. There is implied, That we all by nature have inherent corruption in us,
that we are unclean and filthy in the eyes of God, for Gods wrath is not any
where, but where sin is. Gods anger does suppose sin, what God indeed may
do by absolute Sovereignty in afflicting of an innocent creature, is disputed
by Divines; but all agree, de facto, that now God does not make any miserable,
but who are sinful: And if this be true of temporal miseries, much more does
it hold of eternal. It does not stand with the goodness and justice of God to
damn any, but sinners: If then Infants new born are by nature the children of
wrath, it follows, there is such an internal defilement in them, whereby they
do deserve it. Therefore they who hold, God punishes man for Adam's sin,
though it be but temporally, when we have no sin by nature inherent in us, are
injurious to the goodness and justice of God: we must be children in sin before
we can be children of wrath.

2. Here is implied, That for this pollution of nature, we bring with us into
the world, God is greatly offended with us and displeased. Let Infants be
accounted never so pretty and innocent babes, yet when we think
Scripture-thoughts, we must conclude, they are children of wrath, that they are
part of that world, which is guilty before God. God (I say) is offended with
them, not simply, because born, or because the children of men, but because
born in sin, and the children of corrupt sinful men. Let not then our humane
and carnal reasonings argue saying, They have no understanding or will, they
have no actual consent to any iniquity, why should such a severe curse be
inavoidably laid upon them, who know not the right hand from the left? For this
is plain, we cannot be by nature the children of Gods wrath, unless he be
greatly offended and displeased with us; How sad then is it to consider, upon
what terms every child comes into the world? Gods wrath is against it, he is
offended with it, as not having his Image, but the Devils; and hereby man's
condition is worse and more miserable then the young ones of beasts, even the
vilest of them, Toads and Serpents: for though man hates such, yet God does
not.

3. This wrath is Gods wrath, not man's, which makes our estate to be far
more dreadful. Now Gods wrath is like himself infinite, and that which a
creature is never able to stand under. Hence it is that we can never
sufficiently apprehend his wrath; for if the wrath of all the great men of the
world were put together, (and yet the wrath of a King is (said to be) like the
roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19. 12.) it is but as a spark to a great fire in
comparison of Gods anger. The Scripture represents it in a more dreadful
manner, then we are able to think of. Hence the Psalmist cries out, Who
knows the power of thy anger? according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. Psalm.
90. 11. where by fear may be meant Gods word, that teaches us to fear, as
Psalm. 19. 9. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever; by which we are
taught, that no man till he apply himself to the word of God, can rightly
apprehend Gods wrath. It is indeed disputed by the Schoolmen, Whether anger be
properly in God, or no? And some do conclude, That it is as properly in him, as
love; only we must not understand it to be in him, as it is in us, with
passion and imperfections. It is an act of Gods holy will, whereby he abhors
sin, and decrees to punish it.

4. This wrath being thus great and unspeakable, hence there is no evasion of
it, but by the blood of Christ, for he only who was God and man could remove
this; and therefore it is, that Infants do need Christ a Savior, which could
not be, if they were not children of wrath; for if he be a Savior, it is to
such who are lest. Neither is that any better than Adam's fig leaves to cover
his nakedness, which the Pelagians of old, and others of late would run unto,
That Infants indeed need Christ to carry them to Heaven, though they have no
sin in them; for this they suppose without the grace of Christ (though that
they distinguished into nature at last) was not of it self able to bring to
Heaven; though it had no sin in it, yet it had imperfection (say they) But
this is to make Christ, a Christ, to whom he was not a Savior; for he is a
Savior, Because he did save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. If then
he brings Infants to eternal glory, he must do it as a Christ, not as a
Savior; which distinction can no ways be founded upon Scripture.

5. From this wrath of God there arises an obligation to eternal damnation.
For you may say, If God be angry with man thus by nature, does it follow
therefore that man must be obliged to eternal death? Will not temporal death,
and the miseries of this life be enough? No, from Gods wrath thus against us,
there is a debt and obligation lying upon us to everlasting misery: And the
reason is, Because this corruption we are born in, is truly and properly a sin
and to every sin there is adhering the merit of utter destruction. So that the
Schoolmen and some Papists, who dispute, Whether original sin deserve
everlasting damnation in hell; and concluding upon the negative, that it has
some less punishment, is frivolous and absurd. For if it have truly and
properly the nature of sin in it, then it cannot be denied, according to
Scripture-grounds, but hell is the proper reward of it.

Lastly, This wrath may be considered either immanently, as it is in God, viz.
his will abhorring all sinners, or transiently in the effects thereof. For that
it is of great use in Divinity to distinguish between the Attributes and
Effects of them; for the Attributes as they are in God, cannot receive any
intension or remission, but the effects may and do. Now the godly they were the
children of wrath by nature, as the Apostle speaks here, but they are not so
now. For though original sin does still abide in some measure, yet it is not
imputed unto a godly man; so that they are not for the present under Gods
wrath, though once they were, not that any change is made in God, but in man,
who is the object. The effects of this wrath are partly in the temporal
miseries of this life, and partly in those eternal torments which shall be in
the world to come. The child comes weeping into the world, as prognosticating
it is misery, thus it is miserable before it has any actual sin; So that
whereas the Infant cannot without teaching learn to speak or go, of it is own
self it inclines to weep. Cerda upon Tertullian (De anima lib. 3. cap. 19.)
speaks of some that thought Infants by these complaints did accuse our first
parents, and that the male children cry A, as if they intended Adam; and the
females E, as if they meant Eve, though he says others attribute it to their
different strengths of nature: But this is a foolish and ridiculous fancy. It
is certain, that these weepings and complaints do argue the misery of our
natures, though but new born, and so by consequence the sinfulness of them. The
other effect is eternal damnation in hell, which God might inflict upon every
child new born; so that he might go weeping hence, into that place of weeping
in hell, of which we have many more things as yet to speak.

SECT. V.
Some Propositions in order to the proving, That the wrath of God is due to all
mankind because of Original Sin.
NOw because this curse seems cruel and unjust to humane reason, till by
actual sins men have procured wrath upon their own heads; It is good to
establish it upon Scripture-grounds, which is so sure a rock, that though the
storms and tempests of men's rage do arise against it, yet it will abide
immovable. But before we do that we are to premise something, by way of
Observation tending thereunto. As

First, In deciding of the doctrinal truths of Religion, we are not to attend
to our own humane affections, but merely to the voice of God in the Scriptures.
Gods dispensations are not to be regulated according to our pitiful
affections; most of the Arminian Tenants are suited to humane compassions,
rather then commensurated to Scripture-regulations: But if men will give way to
that, why shall not Origen's position of the salvation of all the damned; yea
Devils and all at last be received as most commending of Gods mercy, and most
suitable to our pitiful affections? And why should not all embrace the
pleasing and pitiful Doctrine of one Georgius Siculus, mentioned by
Crakanthorpt? (Defens. Eccles. Anglic. contra Spalat. cap. 37.) by whose Books
he says many were bewitched. His opinion was, that neither this or that
particular man was predestined to salvation, but that God had appointed a
time when he would save the whole world, and quicquid de pradestinatione
tradimus, philosophica tantum argutia niti; and what was delivered (by learned
orthodox men as we must suppose) was grounded only upon philosophical
niceties. Is not this absolute salvation of all men very agreeable to humane
desires and affections; yea and why does not God vouchsafe not only the
immediate offers of grace to all men, and effectually bless the same to all, so
that all men shall be converted and saved, for he can as easily save all men as
one if he please? Nay if we do consult with our own pitiful estates, how
offensive would several passages of Gods providence in many outward temporal
judgments be unto us: As in the drowning of the world, where many children had
not corrupted their ways, as men of the world had; yet they were all miserably
destoyed: thus also in the terrible destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, all the
little children therein who could not be guilty of such heinous transgressions,
as the Sodomistes were, yet did partake of that dreadful judgment, whereas at
another time God in his conviction of Jonah, why he would not destroy that
great City of Nineveh, uses this Argument. Jonah 4. 11. to spare that place,
because there were more then sixscore thousand persons, that could not discern
between their right hand and lest: If then a man should give liberty to his
humane affections, to expostulate why these tender babes that knew nothing of
their fathers sins, should be involved in such sad calamities, with their
ungodly parents, how hardly would he keep within the bounds of sobriety and
modesty? Thus it is about this Doctrine of original sin, whereby we are all
in our very birth exposed to eternal damnation; Some call it a rigid and cruel
Doctrine, and all because they judge of God according to their own affections:
But as Bellarmine well observes in the dispute about the state of Infants
dying in their original sin without Baptism, ( Lib. 6. de Amissione, great.)
naming five several opinions, some whereof are more rigid, others more
favorable, That our opinions cannot at all alter or change the state of
Infants so deceased; The rigid opinion does not hurt them, neither does a
favorable opinion do them any good, but the Word of God that will stand; our
favorable and pitiful opinions will not make the natural estate of any man
the better; yea when such Doctrines are found to be contrary to the Word of
God, they may do a great deal of hurt, plunging of them into dangerous
consequences, that may flow therefrom. Therefore to such Disputants, we may
well reply that which Acosta the Jesuit ( Lib. 5. de procur. Indorum salute
cap. 3.) says to some of his own Religion, that held even Heathens might be
saved without the knowledge of Christ; and that the contrary Doctrine was
inhumane and severe: Non hic agitur (says he) durumne hoc and severum sit, an
benignum and liberale; sed utrum verum necne.

Secondly, As we are not to attend to humane affections in this point; so
neither to humane and natural reasonings; Why God should impute Adam's sin to
us. and we all be accounted as sinners in him, and from him the cursed root we
the cursed branches do spring, arises from the just proccedings of God, though
happily the causes the thereof be unknowen to us: When therefore the Scripture
of God does plainly affirm such a sinful, and cursed estate, let not
philosophical Arguments obstruct our faith, lest if we do so in other mysteries
of Religion, as well as in this, at last we fall into plain Atheism; Let us be
content with our own measure of understanding, not invading the secrets of God,
lest we herein betray notoriously our original sin, while we labor to deny
it. For Luther speaking against these Curislae and Quaeristae as he calls
them, ( In Gen.) whereby men will demand a reason of Gods proceedings, and
affect to be like God in knowledge as Adam did, has this expression, Fieri
Deorum est originale peccatum, original sin is the affection of a Deity.

Thirdly, We are always in this controversy to distinguish between the merit
of condemnation, and the actual condemnation it self: It is unquestionably
true, that all by nature do deserve this eternal damnation; but then concerning
the actual damnation thereby, there are different opinions; Some have delivered
positively, that none is ever damned for original sin only; as some Papists,
and the Remonstrants; yea there are many say, that this actual condemnation by
original sin, is universally taken off all mankind by Christ; so that as by
the first Adam all were put into a state of Gods anger, so by the second Adam
all are put into a state of actual reconciliation by Christ, till by their
actual sins they do refuse Christ, and so procure to themselves damnatation,
not upon any account of Adam's sin, but their own voluntary transgresson;
Concerning Infants also dying in their infancy, great Disputes there are; Some
concluding all that die so, though of Unbelievers and Pagans, that they are
saved; original sin not damning any others; they conclude otherwise: but then
they are divided into several opinions amongst themselves; of which in time
more is to be said. For we are not as yet come to that point, concerning the
actual condemnation of any by original sin merely, but the merit and defect
of it, what every man does deserve by it as soon as he is born; though every
sin deserves (...), yet this obligation to eternal punishment may be taken
off, yea and that while the sin abides; as original sin does in some
measure in a godly man. There are indeed some who make the reatus poenae, the
guilt of punishment to be the form of a sin, and if this were true, then
they could not be (...): Others make it a proprium to sin, but this cannot be
understood of actual guilt, but potential guilt. Every sin, and so original
does, deserve that those who are infected therewith, should perish in hell
torments eternally; but yet the actual obligation hereunto may be removed by
the grace of God, the sin still remaining in some degree, as the fire had a
power to burn the three Worthies, though the actual working thereof was
hindered.

SECT. VI.
Arguments to prove, that by Nature we are all as so many damned men; That
Damnation belongs to the Sin we are borne in.
THis being premised, let us now consider those Arguments, which may firmly
establish us in this truth, That by nature we are all as so many damned men;
that of our selves we can expect no other; and that though we were free from
actual transgression, It is the grace of God only, that delivers us: All
mankind is like that wretched Infant, Ezekiel. 16. spoken of by the Prophet,
wallowing in blood, filthy and loathsome, necessarily perishing, unless the
grace of God speak unto us, to live; we all lie like Ezekiel's any bones, of
whom we may say, Can these live? Can these be saved? Not one, unless God give
life. And

First, All deserve eternal damnation by original contagion, Because it is a
state of sin and spiritual uncleanness we are born in. And therefore if once
it be granted to be a sin, the wages thereof must be hell and damnation:
Insomuch that some Popish Writers are very absurd, who disputing against
Pelagians. That our birth-sinne is properly and univocally sin, yet
afterward question. Whether children dying therein do go to hell or no? Some
assign them a Paradise, wherein they have a natural happiness, as Catharinus
(Opusc. de statu pucrorum, etc.) Others, as Bellarmine, that they have poena
damni, but not sensus, as if there were half an hell, or that one might be shut
out from the beatifical fruition of God, and yet not be tormented with sensible
pain. This is certain, if it be truly and directly a sin, as the Scripture so
often calls it; then without the grace of God, there is no possibility of
escaping hell thereby. why then should damnation because of it be thought so
horrid, when it is acknowledged to be a sin? Job (you heard) says, Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14. 4. here we are all unclean. Now
what does the Scripture pronounce of such, Revel. 21. 29. There shall not in
any wise enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, any thing that is unclean, or that
defiles. No unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of heaven; and if they do
not enter in there, they must enter into the kingdom of hell; There is no
middle place, Qui inducis medium recede de medio, as Austin. The Scripture also
calls it sin, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold in sin did my mother conceive me; and
what is the wages of sin but death? Rom 6. 23. not only bodily death, but
that eternal death, which is opposite to everlasting life; and the Apostle
says, The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. which Austin expounds in
this sense, as that by sin death is caused, as that is called Poculum mortis,
a cup of death, which causes death; or as some say, The Tree of life is called
so, because it was the cause of life. If then original sin be a sin, it
must have a sting, and this sting is everlasting death. So that if we attend to
what the Scripture speaks concerning us, even in the womb and the cradle,
that we are in a state of sin; we must conclude, because it is a sin,
therefore it deserves damnation. Hence you heard the Apostle Romans 5. expressly
says, Judgment came by one to condemnation; and Romans 3. That the whole world
is guilty before God.

Secondly, The Scripture does not only speak of this birth-pollution as a
sin, but as an heinous sin in its effects, whereby it does admis of many
terrible aggravations, (as you have heard.) It is the Law in our members, it is
the flesh, tho body of sin, the sin that does so easily beset us, the sin that
warreth against the mind and the Spirit of God, that captivateth even a godly
man in some measure, which makes Paul groan under it, and cry out of his
miserable condition thereby; so that it is not merely a sin, but a sin to
be aggravated in many respects, and therefore necessarily causing damnation,
unless God in his mercy prevent. Let Bellarmine and others extenuate it,
making it less then the least sin, that is (of which more afterward) let
them talk of venial sins, that do not in their own nature deserve hell; yet
because all sin is a transgression of Gods Law, the curse of God belongs
thereunto, therefore it has an infinite guilt in respect of the Majesty of
God, against whom it is committed; and they who judge sin little, must also
judge the Majesty of God to be little also. What shall one respect of
involuntariness, which is in original sin, make it less then others, when
(...) so many other respects (some whereof do more immediately relate to the
nature of sin, then voluntariness can do) far exceed other sins?

Thirdly, Original sin must needs deserve damnation, because it needs the
blood of Christ to purge away the guilt of it, as well as actual sins. Christ
is a Saviors to Infants, as well as to grown men, and if he be a Savior to
them, then they are sinners; if he save them, then they are lost. As for that
old evasion of the Pelagian, Infants need Christ, not to save them from sin,
but to bring them to the Kingdom of Heaven, it is most absurd and ridiculous;
for the whole purpose of the Gospel is to show, That Christ came into the world
to bring sinners to Heaven through his blood; his death was expiatory and by
way of atonement, therefore it did suppose sin: hence he is sad to be the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 29. which is both
original and actual.

Fourthly, That eternal damnation belongs to the sin we are born in,
appears by those remedies of grace, and Ordinances of salvation which were
appointed by God both in the Old and New Testament, for the taking away of this
natural guilt. Circumcision in the Old Testament did declare, that by nature
the heart was uncircumcised and that every one was destitute of any inherent
righteousness; hence circumcision is called, The seal of the righteousness,
which is by faith, Romans 4. 11. To this Baptism does answer in the New
Testament, the external never whereof with the formal Rite of Administration
does abundantly convince us of our spiritual uncleanness, as also the need we
have of the blood of Christ, and also of his Spirit for our cleansing.

Now because the known Adversary to this truth, affirmly, That he knows of no
Church that in her Rituals does confess and bewail original sin: As also
that we might see the Judgment of our first Reformers in England about
Baptism, as relating to original sin; It is good to observe, what is set down
in the Public Administration of Baptism, as by the Common Prayer Book was
formerly to be used; there the Minister uses this Introductory, Forasmuch as
all men be conceived and born in sin; adding from hence, That none can enter
into the kingdom of Heaven, unless he be born again. It is the sin he is
born in (not pure Naturals, as the Doctor says) that infers a necessity of
regeneration.

Again, In the Prayer for children to be baptized, there is this passage, That
they coming to thy holy Baptism may receive remission of sins. Now what sins
can children have but their original? It is spoken in the plural number,
because more than one child is supposed to be baptized. Again in the same
Prayer, we meet with this Petition, That they being delivered from thy wrath;
What can more ashame the Doctors opinion then this? That which he accounts so
horrid, is here plainly asserted, That children are born under Gods wrath;
therefore prayer is made, that they may be delivered from it.

Lastly, In another Prayer after the Confession of Faith, we have this
Petition, That the old Adam in these children may be so buried, that the new
man may be raised up in them. Why does he not seoff at this expression, saying,
(as he does upon another occasion) That they change the good old man with these
things; that he never thought of? No doubt but he will force these passages by
some violent Interpretation, as he does the 9th Article; but certainly it would
be more ingenuity in him to fly to his principles of liberty of prophesying,
rather then to wrest these public professions of original sin. It is true,
the Ancients, and so the Papists put too much upon Baptism. For Austin thought,
every child dying without Baptism; yea and without the participation of the
Lords Supper was certainly damned. But of this extreme more afterward. It is
enough for us, That Christ's Institution of such a Sacrament, and that for
Infants, does evidently proclaim our sinfulness by nature, and therein our
desert of eternal wrath.

Fifthly, To original sin there must needs belong eternal wrath, because of
the nature of it, and inseparable effects flowing from it. The nature of it is
the spiritual death of the soul; by this a man is alienated from all life of
grace; and therefore till the grace of God appear, it is true of all by nature,
as follows in the Chapter where this Text is, verse. 12. Without Christ alient
from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world. Thus Davenant upon that Text,
Dead in sin, Col. 2. 13. says, All the sons of Adam are accounted dead;
first, because they lie in a state of spiritual death, having lost the Image of
God: and partly, because they are under the guilt of eternal death, being
obnoxious to the wrath of God, for by nature we are the children of wram. If
then original sin put us into a spiritual death, if thereby we be deprived of
all spiritual life, How can it be avoided but that eternal damnation must
fo^^ow thereupon by the desert thereof? And as for the inseparable effects of
it, which are to carry us on necessarily to sin in all that we do, to make us
utterly impotent and unable for any thing that is good; What can this produce
but everlasting misery to our souls?

Sixthly, Original sin is of a damnable nature, because of that spiritual
bondage and vassalag; we are thereby put into even to the Devil himself. For
not being the children of God, we are necessarily the children of the Devil:
And therefore to be children of Gods wrath in the Text, is no more then to be
the children of hell, and of the Devil; for which reason he is called, The
Prince of the World. Seeing then the Devil has power over all mankind, they
are in his bondage, and Christ came as a Redeemer to deliver us from him. This
does argue in what a woeful and dreadful estate we are left in by this
original filthiness. To have the Devil possess our bodies, how terrible is
it? But he possesses the souls of every one by nature, till Christ does
destroy him, and cast him out. Hence the Apostle celebrateth that powerful
grace of God, whereby we are delivered from the power of darkness into the
kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1. 13. from which children are not to be
excluded.

Seventhly, That original sin has merit of demnation, is plain, Because by
it we are in an unregenerate, estate, John 3. Whatsoever is born of the flesh
is flesh, and therefore unless a man be born again of the Spirit, and from
above, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: yea none that are in the
flesh can please God, Romans 8 8. If then no unregenerate man can be saved, and
by original sin we come to be in that state of carnality, it is plain, that
by nature we are prepared fuel for eternal flames in hell.

Eighthly, That original sin deserves damnation, appears, in the
consequents of it. For when Adam fell into this spiritual death, which is the
same with original sin in us, (though it could not be called so in him,
because he had not it from his first being, neither was it derived to him from
any other) we may take notice of two sad and terrible effects thereof, besides
many others. The first whereof was the terror and fear upon his conscience,
when God called him by name, saying, Adam, where art thou? He then flies from
God, and would have hid himself from his face: How comes Adam thus to be
afraid, thus to tremble, who had such peaceable enjoyment of God before? Was it
not because he had now lost the Image of God? And this impression is still upon
all men by nature. There is an inward terror and fear of God, knowing he is an
holy, just and omnipotent God, who cannot but hate and punish sin, and
therefore we being conscious of that sinfulness and pollution which is in us,
are afraid of him, dare not think of him, or draw nigh to him, horror is ready
to surprise us, when we think of God, while in our natural estate. The other
consequent upon Adam's pollution, was the casting him out of Paradise, and in
him all his posterity was likewise ejected. Now this was a type (as it were) of
our being cast out of Heaven. This is like that solemn curse at the last day,
Depart from me ye cursed. So that if all these Arguments be duly considered, we
cannot any longer resist the light of this truth, That to us belongs hell and
damnation, as soon as ever we are born, even before we have committed any
actual sin at all.

SECT. VII.
Some Conclusions deduceable from the Doctrine of the damnableness of Original
Sin.
THe Doctrine of our native impurity, and the damnable consequent thereof being
thus established upon the Scripture rock, which will dash in pieces all errors
that beat upon it: I shall proceed to some Conclusions deduceable thence from.
As

First, That position of some, though of different principles, is wholly
contrariant to the word of God, that none are damned for original sin; For
seeing this sin has the same damnable guilt with it as actual sin has,
there is no more reason for the non-damnation of persons in one more then in
another, neither can we conceive God obliged to forgive one more then another;
why then should it thus universally be acknowledged, that for actual sins God
may and does damn men, but not for original sin? It is true, when we speak of
persons grown up, we cannot separate their actual sins and original, because
original sin is always acting and conceiving, putting it self forth into
many diverse lusts; and thereupon we cannot say of any adult person, that he is
damned merely for original sin, because to this original has been superadded
many actual transgressions; and thereupon all impenitent persons dying so, are
condemned for both; yea their condemnation is inhanced thereby; for the desert
of damnation by original and actual sin both, is greater then by original or
actual severally. Seeing then many die in the guilt of their natural and actual
uncleanness, it is an unsavory Doctrine to affirm, that no man is damned for
original sin. It is true, some men do dogmatize, that original sin in
respect of the guilt of it, is universally taken off all, and that all mankind
is put into a state of reconciliation by the second Adam, as they were into a
state of wrath by the first; but this over-throweth the Doctrine of special
election, and does confound nature and grace together; yea it makes Christ to
have died in vain, of which more fully in its time. For the present, seeing
that so many die unconverted in their state of unregeneracy, it must
necessarily follow, that many are damned both for their original, and actual
sin also. For shall the root be less damning, then the branches or fruit?
actual sins demonstrate the effect and power or original sin, and the
aggravation of the effect does necessarily, aggravate the cause: As they said
to Gideon desiring he should slay them, Judge. 8. 21. As is the man, so is his
strength: Thus it is here, as a man's corrupt nature is, so are his actions; the
one is actus primus, and the other is actus secundus: Thus as life though an
actus primus, yet is always expressed in second acts, and the effects thereof:
so it is with original sin; it is by way of a fountain in us, yet always
emptying it self into streams. It is then a subtle devise of Bellarmine, who
being unwilling to make damnation, as it comprehends the punishment of sense,
to be the consequent of original sin, to say, that one dying in his original
sin, is not damned by reason of his original sin, but ratione subjecti, it
brings damnation, because such a subject is destitute of spiritual life and
grace: But this is to confront the Scripture, which attributes condemnation
and (...) to this sin, because of the intrinsecal evil and hainousness
thereof. The essence is of one to condemnation says the Apostle Rom 5. and the
Text says we are by nature the children of wrath. Besides this is a ridiculous
and absurd (...); for original sin is nothing but the spiritual death of the
soul; and does wholly destroy that respect and habitude, which the soul had
unto God. Father, this Popish evasion is of no strength with us, who hold no
venial sins in their sense. For they say a man may be damned in hell for
venial sins, not because they, of their own nature, deserve so; but because of
the subject sometimes, who may die destitute of all grace; and then his venial
sins increase his condemnation. But this Doctrine of a venial sin, in the
Popish sense is immediately opposite to Scripture, and contrary to the Majesty
of the most holy God.

Conclus. 2. In that original sin is thus meritotious of eternal damnation,
Those learned men who hold the corrupt Mass of mankind to be that state, out of
which God chooses, some to eternal life, leaving others in this wretched and
sinful condition they have by Adam, do thereby affirm nothing injurious to
God, or any thing that may justly be complained of by sound reason. It is not
my intent to launch into that vast Ocean of the dispute about the object of
election and reprobation, no not as it is confined among the orthodox; they
themselves disputing whether it be Massa para, or Massa corrupta, from whence
arises that distinction of Supralapsarians, and Sublapsarians. It is enough at
the present to affirm, that if the corrupt Mass of mankind be made the object
of election and reprobation, the justice of God is abundantly cleared against
all Papists, Arminians, and others in this particular, because original sin
does deserve eternal damnation. This was the opinion of Austin and many
moderate learned men; think this opinion less obnoxious to cavils and more
consonant to Scripture, then that of those, who hold Gods decrees herein to be,
supposing Massa pura, or man considered as man, merely in a common sense: Thus
God speaks of hating Esau, and loving Jacob in respect of his purpose
according to election, and that before they had done good or evil, Rom 9 11.
which relates to their actual evil: Yea this was Calvin's opinion, as
appears, ( Lib 1. de eterna Dei predestinatione contra Pighium, alleged by
Crakanthorpe, Defens. Eccles. Anglic. cap. 37.) where Calvin says, when we
treat of predestination, Vnde exordiendum esse semper docui, atque body doceo,
jure in morte relinqui omnes reprobos, qui in Adam mortui sunt and damnati,
jure parice qui natura sunt filii irae; ita nemini causam esse cur de nimio Dei
rigore qu^ratur, quando reatum in se omnes inclusum gestant: Thus Calvin. And
how orthodoxly and vehemently does Crakanthorpe, (though of the Episcopal
judgment) defend this? Potestne quisquam (says he) te Spal^to, quisquam ex
vestris Dei justitiam in damnandis reprobis luenlentius asserere? In Adamo in
massa perditirei omnes mortis, eorum alios ex ista Massa per misericordiam
liberat, alios in eadem Massa per justitiam damnandos relinquit. For Gods
election and reprobation is about Infants, as well as Adult persons; neither
may we think it any cruelty or injustice of God, if he leave an Infant in his
natural impure estate, seeing grace is free if it be grace, and God is not
bound to add a new favor where the former is lost; and although such an
Infant had no voluntary personal acting to this corrupt estate he is born in,
for which God eternally passes him by with a negative preterition, as some
Divines express it; yet because sins in the Scripture Language are called
debts, that which is just between man and man, may be much more between God and
man, who cannot be any ways obliged to show favor to him, and that is amongst
men; children are liable to their parents debts, and what their parents did
wickedly and voluntarily contract by their prodigality and luxury, that the
children stand engaged to pay, though they had no influence into those supposed
debts. Thus all mankind stands engaged for Adam's debt, (I mean as the
consequent corruption of his nature by his voluntary disobedience, does
hereditarily descend to all his posterity,) and the rather, because it is both
aliena, and nstra culpa, as Bernard, both Adam's debt and our own also: No
wonder then if mankind lying in this blood, God spoke to some, to live, and
leaves the restin their undone estate; but I must not enlarge on this. When
that mutable Euripus, and miserable Ecebolius, (though not crying out
afterward as he did, Culcate me insipidum salem; Spalatensis had objected this
as a puritanical opinion, (and also the Doctrine of the Church of England,)
That Infants dying with Baptism may yet be damned; Crakanthorpe defends the
Church of England herein, (Defens. cap. 40) yet with such assertions that
cannot please the late Antagonist of original sin: Vbi e Scripturis habes
Infantes, morientes cum Baptismo non posse damnari, (says he:) An tu a Dei
consili^s es, ut sine Scriptura hoc scias? ut scias tales omnes Infantes
electos esse? You see he puts their salvation upon election that are saved,
concluding indeed that in the judgment of charity, we think such may be saved,
but as for a judicium certitudinis and veritatis, he does leave that to God,
but you must remember he speaks not of all Infants, though of Infidels.

SECT. VIII.
A Consideration of their Opinion that hold, a Universal Removal of the Guilt
of Original Sin from all mankind by Christ's Death: Answering their Arguments,
among which, that from the Antithesis or Opposition which the Apostle makes
Romans 5. between the first Adam and the second Adam.
THirdly, In that original sin is meritorious of eternal condemnation, yea
and does produce this effect actually in some, Hence that Doctrine so
confidently avouched by some, that by Christ the guile of original sin is
wholly taken off stom all mankind, and every one by nature is now born in a
state of Gods love and reconciliation, till by actual sins be does exclude
himself from this mercy, is also an unsavory opinion, and contrary to the Word
of God. But because this Doctrine is very plausible, and has had confident
avouchers of it, let us thoroughly search into all the recesses of it. And

First, We may take notice, that Puccius wrote a book for this purpose, to
prove, that as by Adam we were truly, properly, and de facto put into a state
of sin and wrath, and that antecedently to our knowledge or consent; so by
the second Adam all mankind in the same latitude is put into a state of savor
and reconciliation with God, properly actually, and de facto; and that
antecedently to any faith, or knowledge that they have Christ; but as Adam's
sin was efficacious in men, as men, quatenus homines, to their condemnation,
so was Christ's obedience efficacious for their justification to all men, as
men. This opinion he proves by an hundred and twenty Reasons, and concludes
with excessive confidence of truth on his side, that he has it by the Spirit
of God; and that though for the present it seems not to be approved, yet he
is confident the whole world will at last entertain it. Insomuch that his
boastings and presumptions are such, that you would think not much learning,
but much pride had made him mad. This man considering the diversity of Sect;
and Opinions in Religion, for two and twenty years wandered up and down to
Jews, Manumetans, Arians, and others, that having knowledge of all kind of
opinions, he might at last judge which was the true Religion; but this is not
the way to find the truth; God rather in just judgment leaves such to errors.
In this universal road Jacobus Andraas and Hube^ius are said also to go, though
with some little variation. The man foundation they all build up (...) is, the
comparison made by the Apostle Romans 5. between the first and second Adam,
wherein the extent of justification to life by Christ, seem (...) to be as
universal, as that of condemnation by Adam, the Apostle using the same words of
many and all. This opinion says Puccias is most consonant to that (...) of
God, which the Scripture commends, and removeeth from God (...) all suspicion
of cruelty and injustice. By this instance we may see, there is no stop or
bounds can be put to men's errors, when once they will judge of Gods love and
mercy according to humane compassionate principles. And therefore let such, who
deny original sin, or extenuate it, pleading the awe they have in their
hearts respectively to God, that men may have no hard thoughts of him; Let such
(I say) consider, whether Puccius and his followers do not far transcend them
in this kind; yea, whether by their principles they must not necessarily come
off to his way. For although he does assert original sin, yet he makes it
wholly taken away by Christ's death, and that to all mankind, so that now we are
not born in a state of wrath and enmity against God.

Secondly, There are others that do not receive this opinion of Gods gracious
love in Christ to men, as they are men, but as they are believers, that yet
affirm, The guilt of original sin wholly taken away by Christ, as to all
mankind, so that no man lies under this guilt; and thereupon conclude, That
all Infants, though of Heathens and Pegans, are certainly saved; for having no
actual sin, and their original being removed, the door is set open for them
to enter into Heaven, which is afterward to be considered.

Thirdly, There are yet some who deservedly are reputed as more honorable for
learning and orthodoxy then the former, who though they hold original sin,
and Gods special election of some persons to eternal glory, do yet withal
maintain a possibility of salvation to every one lying in the corrupt mass of
mankind. Thus Crocius (Duod^c. Dissert. Dissert. 1a. de peccato origin.)
although he denies the Huberian way of assuming all men into a state of
favor, so that no man is obnoxious to damnation by original sin, yet
affirms, That none is necessarily damned for it, without the accession of new
sins, and that therefore there is a way of possibility of salvation for every
one. This opinion has many learned Abettors, but if it be thoroughly pursued,
it must either fall into the old known orthodox way, or empty it self into the
Arminian chanel. Yea it seems to be of so brittle subtilty, that it does not
avoid any of those inconven^ercies, which they labor to do; neither does it
practically give any comfort to a man rationally doubting in his conscience
about his interest in Christ's death, or stir up and provoke to obedience unto
those Commands and Exhortations that are pressed upon us. But this Controversy
belongs not so properly to my subject.

I shall conclude against the former opinions mentioned, That by original sin
we are children of Gods wrath; yea and for that, as well as their actual
sins, some are eternally condemned; which Doctrine has received witness and
testimony to its truth from the most eminent Guides and Pastors in Gods Church
in all Ages. Insomuch that Fulgentius comes with his Firmissime tene and
nullatenus dubita, etc. Believe most firmly, and doubt not in the least manner,
but that every one by nature is obnoxious to the wrath of God, that person
cannot be saved. It is true, he adds without the Sacrament of Baptism; of
which opinion in its time ( De incarnatione ad Petrum Diacon.)

The Synod of D^ri also rejects the error of such, who teach, All men are
assumed into a state of reconciliation, so that none is either damned, or
obnoxous to eternal damnation for original sin, but all are free from its
guilt; which opinion (they add) repugneth the Scripture, affirming us to be by
nature children of wrath. ( Acta Synod. Dordr^ct. cap. 2 de morte Christi
reject Erro. 5.)

But let us consider, What Arguments are brought to prove this universal
removal of the guilt of original sin, from all mankind by Christ's death. And

First, They urge the love of God to mankind, so often mentioned in the
Scripture: Insomuch that they say, it does not stand with the (...) and mercy
of God, when man is plunged thus into an undone estate, there to leave him, and
not deliver him out of it. But to this many things may be said. As

First, We grant, that notwithstanding our original sin, yet God loves
mankind, and demonstrateth much mercy to men, even because they are his
creatures. And it must be granted, That the Scripture does often celebrate this
mercy of God to man, though in a sinful condition: But then we must
distinguish between the general love of God, and his special love, between his
love of benevolence and love of complacency, as some express it. God does love
all mankind with a general love, or love of benevolence, so as to do good in a
liberal manner to them. This love of beneficence is demonstrated both to the
good and the bad; yet this does not remove the guilt of sin, we may be
children of wrath for all this. Therefore there is the other special love and
grace of God, a love of complacency and acceptance of us in Christ; and this is
only to some of mankind, as the Scripture in many places does show: And yet we
must add, that when any are damned, we cannot say it is for any defect of Gods
particular love and grace, as if the fault were to be laid there, but upon the
original and actual sinfulness of the person so condemned; for every man's
perdition is of himself.

Secondly, It is no injustice in God, if he let men alone in their lost estate
by Adam; for he did at first endow him with all heavenly ability to stand in
that glorious estate, and thereby to bring happiness to his posterity also. Now
when Adam by his voluntary disobedience, had deprived himself of all this
excellency, was God bound to restore him a second time? If a Debtor by his own
prodigality make himself unable to pay his Creditor, is the Creditor bound to
bestow money upon that man, and to put him into his former condition again? Now
if man own not this to man, much less does God to man.

Lastly, The condition of the apostate Angels, and Gods dispensation toward
them, does abundantly discover, what God might do in this case; for there is no
reason in man, why he should be more kind to him, then an apostate Angel,
seeing all are sinful. Now when the Angels fell, was God bound to recover
theme? Did he deliver any one of them out of that wretched estate? No more
would God have been unjust, if he had not saved any one out of all mankind.

Let us therefore admire at the goodness of God in choosing of some, and
tremble under his justice in passing by of others, taking heed of pride and
curiosity in searching into these mysterious ways of God, especially of his
prescience and providence in this particular, which heads in Divinity are full
of comfort, as well as excellent in dignity: but to be wise in them according
to sobriety is operae pretium, to err periculum, to acquiesce miraculum, as
Junius excellently in his close of his dispute with the foresaid Puccius.

In the next place, let us conflict with their Goliath, the chiefest support of
their cause, and that is from the Antithesis or Opposition which the Apostle
makes Romans 5. 15. between the first man Adam, and the second man Jesus
Christ's, wherein the Excellency and Pre-eminence is given to Christ, that his
grace does much more abound to life and justication then Adam's sin can to
condemnation; Yea the Apostle uses the same note of Universality for the
subject of either; sometimes all, and sometimes many, plainly declaring hereby,
That as there is by Adam a Catholical enmity and offense that we are plunged
into, in respect of God toward us, so there is also as Catholical and
Universal Reconciliation and favor with God, that we are instated into,
through Christ our Mediater; otherwise it seems much to derogate from the
honor and glory of Christ, that his favor and love should be more straightened
and limited than Adam's efficacy to our condemnation.

To this many things are to be considered by way of answer:

First, That if they will rigidly and severely urge the collation made between
Adam and Christ, then they must conclude of the actual salvation of every man,
not one excluded. For it Adam's sin did de facto, put all into a state of
condemnation; so that if Gods grace had not wrought an evasion for some, all
had actually perished. Thus it follows much more than on Christ's part, that
all must be de facto saved, and delivered from Adam's transgression with the
consequents thereof. But the Scripture does clearly evidence this, That in
respect of the event, the greater part of mankind will be damned. The way to
hell is a broad way, and many enter therein; So that Christ is not actually a
cause of saving more than Adam is of damning; if you respect the event and
issue, far more through Adam's disobedience go to hell, then through Christ's
obedience are admitted into Heaven, and yet the Adversaries themselves must
confess, here is no derogation to the honor and glory of Christ, And if it be
said, That it is man's actual unbelief and impentency, whereby he does wilfully
and frowardly refuse Christ the Physician of his soul: Christ has put him into
a state of favor; but he does voluntarily cast himself out again, and so is
made unworthy of the grace, which comes by Christ. It is answered, that is
true. But

1. How comes it about that men have such an actual rebellion against Christ?
Whence is it that they have such an inclination within them, to refuse him that
is a Savior, though he come for their good? Though their sins and the Devil
will never be that help to them, which Christ would be, yet they embrace the
later, and refuse the former; Is not all this from the polluted nature we
receive from Adam? So that hereby Adam may be thought more universally to
destroy, then Christ to heal.

Again, In the second place, Why is it that through Christ they are not
delivered from this rebellion? Why is it that he does not vouchsafe a more
tender and pliable heart? for condemnation comes by one sin, but the Apostle
aggrava^eth the free gift by Christ, that it is of many offenses unto
Justification; If then of many, why is there any stint or limit of this free
gift? It is plain, that rebellious disposion by some against Christ, is wholly
subdued and conquered by him, and the same power he could put forth in others
also, if he pleased, but he will not do it; and therefore the state of
reconciliation by Christ, is not as extensive, as of condemnation by Adam; if
then for the event it is plain, that Adam's condemnation is larger than Christ's
reconciliation (all wicked men being damned in hell both for their original and
actual sins and) then the purpose or decree about this event, was no ways
tending to the dishonor of Christ.

Secondly, It is to be considered more diligently, in what method the Apostle
does here speak of the Universality of the Subject relating to Adam and Christ.
For the Apostle twice speaking in the general of our condemnation, does use the
word all, verse. 12 Death passed upon all men, in that all have sinned. And
verse. 18. Judgment came upon all men to condemnation; but to these generals,
he does presently subjoyn a distribution of this all, and then uses the word
many: By which it is apparent, that the Apostle on purpose altering his speech,
and distributing this all afterward into many of two kinds, he does understand
the word all, not universally, but commonly and indifinitely; e^se why should
he immediately upon the word all, presently interpret it distributively? So
that if the Apostles expression, and the Coherence of his Discourse be more
exactly searched into, it will be found not to patrocinate any such supposed
Catholical reconciliation; For the Apostle divides the all, into the many
condemned by Adam eventually, and the many justified and saved by Christ
effectually.

Thirdly, When the Apostle makes this comparison between the first Adam to
condemnation and Christ to Justification, giving the superiority (...) This is
not to be understood in respect of the number of men, but of the nature of
these gracious effects we hate by Christ. This comparison is not for express
in quantity but quality. The Apostle does not say, O, how many more (as the
P^l^gians of ^^d applying Christ's benefits to Infants bringing them to the
Kingdom of Heaven, who yet (they said) received no polu^^ (...) hurt by Adam)
but how much more shall the grace of God abound through Christ to many? The how
much more lies not in the number, but in the nature of these gracious effect;
which come by Christ, though to some only; for that the Apostle does not
intend an excess of Chriss grace, in respect of the number, it is plain,
because that had been impossible, there could have been but an equality at
most: If it should be granted, That Christ has reconciled all those that Adam
lost, this would be an equality only, we could not say, Christ redeemed more
than Adam destroyed, for that could not have been; therefore it is plain, that
the superabundance attributed by the Apostle to Christ, in respect of
Justification, is to be understood intensively, not extensively, in respect of
the nature of those blessed effects we receive by him, and so indeed there is a
great transcendency in Christ in respect of Adam. For

1. By Christ we have vivification and quickening to grace and glory, whereas by
Adam we have sin and condemnation. Now it is far easier to occasion the
damnation of many, then to procure the salvation of one. To justify and save
one man, is more than to destroy all mankind. As we see amongst men, it is
easier to destroy a thing, then to build it up; one man may kill many men, but
yet the same man cannot bring any one of those to life again. If therefore
Christ had saved but one of all mankind, he was infinitely to be exalted above
Adam, by whose disobedience mankind was plunged into a perishing estate. So
that if we do compare Death with Life Heaven with Hell, Damnation with
Salvation, and that the one comes from a deficient cause, the other from an
efficient; we must necessarily conclude, that Christ has infinitely the
pre-eminence above Adam.

2. There are some that distinguish between the sufficiency and worth that is
in Christ's mediation, and the actual application of it, Now (say they) the
second Adam was infinately more able to save, then Adam to destroy, and that if
we respect the number of men, for Christ is able to save a thousand of worlds
besides this, if there were so many; and therefore if we speak of Christ in
respect of his sufficiency, Adam in a destructing way is no more comparable to
Christ in a saving way, then a drop to the ocean, or a sinite to an infinite.
For the obedience of Christ is the obedience of God and man. Now though this
answer may in a good explained sense be received, yet I shall not so much
avouch it, partly because the distinction is made use of to a far other end,
then the Orthodox do intend; and then partly, because the Apostle does not here
attend, in his comparison, so much to what is sufficient in Christ, as to what
is actual; not so much to what he is able to do, as what he will do. It Is
efficacy not sufficiency the Apostle aims at; therefore we stick to the
former answer, though in many other respects, the excellency of the second Adam
to the first, night be declared, which are not here to be repeated; only that
one the Apostle instanceth in, is not to be passed over, which is, that it is
but one offense to condemnation, whereas the grace of Christ extends to the
abolishing of many offenses, that one sin is enough to damn, but the grace of
Christ appears, not only to the abolition of that, but also all offenses that
do actually flow from it. Thus every godly soul may comfortably improve this
truth, that there is more in Christ to save, then is in all sin, whether
original or actual to damn; Christ is more able to justify, then Adam is to
condemn. Therefore some Schoolmen deny, that Adam's sin did demerit the death
and damnation of all mankind, it deserved his own damnation, and his own death
only. All other men's deaths, and other men's damnation have for their
meritorious cause their original sin inherent in them. Adam did not
meritoriously deserve these; but when fallen, then his posterity descending
from him, did naturally fall into such a corrupted estate, as he himself was
plunged into; and the reason they give of this is, because no mere man can
either m^rer^^ or demereri, for the whole nature of mankind; if Adam had stood,
all his posterity would have been holy and happy: but we cannot say, Adam would
have merited this for all mankind; for that is a peculiar thing to Christ only,
which is incommunicable to a mere man, to merit; for the whole race of mankind.
And although there is a great difference between merit and demerit; (a man may
put himself into a demerit of eternal glory, but not into a merit) yet in this
they are alike. This reasoning of some Schoolmen admitted (which seems very
plausible) then it necessarily follows, that Christ's power to save is
superlative, more than Adams to destroy.

Lastly, That Christ in his efficacy of grace, does exceed Adam in his
condemning guilt, appears, In that at last, he will utterly remove original
sin from all, that are his members; and so totally vanquish it, that it shall
not remain in the least spot thereof. Although Christ came into the world to
take away all sin, yet some Schoolmen conclude, that principally it was to
deliver us from original sin; Because (says Suarez, De Incar. Christi) this is
the cause and the root of all actual iniquities. It is not enough for Christ to
purge us from our actual impieties, but he also intends to heal our natures.
Now because original sin infecteth the nature, chiefly as it is in persons, so
also does Christ principally intend the sanctification of our natures. And
although this be not presently and immediately done, yet it will at last be done,
in that good time he has appointed for that end. Those indeed that limit the
efficacy of Christ's grace to original sin only, as if actual sins were to be
removed by our voluntary penances and satisfaction, they make Christ but a
same. Savior, and a semi mediator. But yet it may well be affirmed, because
this original corruption is the pollution of the nature, and is the cause of
all actual defilements, therefore the blood of Christ does in the most principal
place cleanse from this. And therefore this should exceedingly comfort the
godly, who groan under the relics of this defilement upon them, that Christ
will never leave them, till he has restored them perfectly to their primitive
integrity; for this end he came into the world, so that he would be but an
impefect Savior, if he should not at last cure thee of this nature-defilement;
for this lies upon him to do, that he bring al things to their former, yea a
better perfection; that so all may admire the goodness, wisdom and mercy of God
in Christ; and that all cavillers may stop their mouths, who usually demand,
Why did God suffer Adam to fall? Why did he not prevent sin, when it was in his
power? Now when all the world shall see, that a greater good is wrought by the
second Adam, than evil was by the first; this will make us break out into holy
exclamations, saying, Oh the wisdom of God, how unsearchable are his ways? And
this may suffice for the razing of that foundation they build so much upon.

In the third place, I find that urged for an universal cleansing of all
mankind, and that none is in a state of wrath now by nature; Because in that
vision which Peter had, Act. 10. 28 he says, God had showed him, that he
should not call any man common, or unclear. But this does not any way
contradict this Doctrine o^ spiritual uncleanness, which Job says is upon all
men; but uncleannes is there understood of that Jewish sanctity, which was
vouchsafed to the nation of the Jews; whereby that people alone were entitled
to Church Priviledges (and all Heathens abiding strangers from this Covenant of
grace, were as dogs not children; they were accounted as unclean, unto whom the
word of grace was not to be preached) called therefore Gal. 2. 15. Jews by
nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, until Christ came, and broke down this
parition wall: So that the meaning is, We are not now to include the Gospel
within the Jews, but every nation is as clean in this respect, as they are:
Insomuch that we are not to forbear preaching unto any people under the
heavens; otherwise if we regard this spiritual filthiness, we are to call every
man unclean, as being the child of Gods wrath. Hence Austin of old did urge
that phrase, He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. Joh. 3.
36. he does not say, it comes upon him, it will fall upon him, but it abides
on him, implying, that it was there before, even in respect of his natural
pollution, though he had never committed those actual sins of unbelief and
disobedience to the Gospel of Christ.

But that I may come out of this controversy I shall instance in one Objection
more, and that is, the promise made by God to Adam after his fall. For Genesis 3.
15. when Adam had cast himself into this cursed estate, and through the fear
and horror that was upon him he aid flee from the presence of God; God did in
mercy look upon him, and made: but gracious promise concerning the seed of the
woman, which should bruise the head of the serpent: hereby (some conceive) is a
re-assuming of all mankind into Gods favors again and that the promise is made
to Adam and Eve, as the two principles and (...) of mankind, and that hereby
they are made an holy root, wherein all branches (...) made holy. This place is
indeed mentioned by Puccius (but Sneanus Method des. cons. sal. and dam. c. 3.
etc. 4.) out of whose loins came Arminius and his followers, does much insist
on this place; whereby he makes it a blasphemy to think, that Adae maleficium
should extend further than Christi beneficium not indeed in the Huoerian or
P^^cian sense, who hold an absolute reconciliation antecidently to man's faith
and repentance; but conditional, or conciliabilty, or salvability of all, it
they do repent and believe. But this Text cannot be a foundation for such a
Doctrine. Indeed it is very difficult, and many grammatical and real doubts
there are upon the place; only we must take it for granted, that there is
declared the first promise of a Chris: till Adam heard this from God, he could
have no more hopes for his salvation, than the devils have. Therefore we are to
abominate the Socinian Doctrine, who make this to be only a malediction of the
serpent, or a cu^se upon that creature, putting a natural enmity between that
and a man; affirming also, That Adam and Eve understood no more from God then
that thing. But we see other Scriptures plainly alluding to this, as when
Christ is said to be made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. and that he came into the
world to destroy the works of the devil. 1 John 3. 8. and in other places we
find the devil called the old serpent, and the red dragon, which seduced the
whole earth, Rev. 12. 9, 10. Yea Paul did allude to this promise, when he uses
that expression, Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall shortly tread or bruise
Satan under your feet. And whereas the Socinian asks, How it can be a
promise, seeing it is a curse? Can cold and hot come out of the same month? The
answer is easy: therefore there is a promise, because of the curse; for in
that the devil and his seed is in a mystical sense cursed by God, thereby is a
promise made concerning Christ and his seed for victory over the devil; so that
the promise is of excellent use and comfort; no godly man ought to fear either
devil or wicked men, as long as he remembers this promise. If Satan's head be
not yet bruised, if he have some life still, if he sometimes sting thee, be not
discouraged; for though this promise was made long ago, yet God has not
forgotten it. But although this be so, yet we cannot from hence conclude, that
God is become reconciled with all mankind; or that all after Adam's fall are
received into equal grace. For we see plainly, there are two kinds
distinguished in the Text, there is the Woman's seed, and there is the serpents
seed; and between these there is an enmity placed; The woman's seed is Christ
and his members (as we will here take for granted) The serpents seed are all
wicked men reprobated in their sins; for by nature we are all the serpents
seed; but here it speaks of such a seed as shall continue in opposition to
Christ and his people: That therefore some are the woman's seed, some the
serpents seed; on one part it comes from the mere grace of God, and on the
other part from the justice of God. So that this Text, if rightly considered,
does rather overthrow than establish such an universal Reconciliation of all
mankind. It is true, for those who are made Christ's by free discriminating
grace, both this promise, and that discourse of Paul's, Romans 5. do proclaim
admirable comfort and consolation. For that condition thou were so
irrecoverably plunged into; that sin and devil thou were so afraid of, is
wholly conquered by Christ. Hold up thy head therefore thou member of Christ
and be exceeding glad, for the second Adam has taken off that sin, that
wrath, that vengeance which the first Adam had brought upon thee. And alas! how
free was this grace of God to thee? What did God see in thee more then in the
sons and daughters of Adam? Wast not thou in the same filth with them? Wast
not thou wallowing in the same blood with them? Had not Adam infected thee,
condemned thee, as well as others? Oh stand for ever admiring the unsearchable
ways of Gods grace to thee, who of a child of wrath, has made thee a child of
such special favor and mercy!

SECT. IX.
Of the state of Infants that die in their Infancy, before they are capable of
any Actual Transgressions, and that die before Baptism.
THe next particular in order to be treated upon is, concerning the state of
those Infants, who die in their Infancy, before they are capable of any actual
transgression. These having only original sin upon them, what may we conclude
about their final estate? for we will take for granted, that the Doctrine of
the Lutherans is to be exploded, who hold that Infants have actual sins, and
that some do partake of actual grace; this is repugnant to reason and
experience. Now to proceed more orderly in this point, we are to take notice of
these ensuing particulars.

First, That it is one thing to be a child of wrath by nature, and another
thing to be reprobated for ever by God, never to be admitted into his favor.
When the Apostle calls us children of wrath, the meaning is not, as if there
were a final and total rejection from all grace; for then the meaning would be,
that all men are damned, which is manifestly contradicted by many places in
Scripture. Though therefore all Infants are by nature the children of wrath,
yet all are not reprobated; though all deserve to be damned, yet all are not
actually damned.

Secondly, We are to know that those, who hold some Infants dying in their
original sin to be damned, do yet acknowledge that it is (as Austin calls
it) mitissima omnium poena, the mildest of all punishments, because they have
no actual sins joined with their original, to increase the torments of hell.
It is true, we told you original sin in the nature of it is very great and
heinous, even so great, that none are able to express the loathsomness thereof;
yet because it has this diminishing circumstance, that it is not voluntary
personally in an Infant, therefore we may conclude, that they have lesser
torments in hell, then Adult persons. For that there are degrees of torments in
hell, some punished more extremely then others, is acknowledged by all, though
some learned men question, whether there be any degrees of glory in heaven.

Thirdly, As for the Doctrine of the learned about the state of Infants dying
in their Infancy, there are several opinions; Some hold that all Infants dying
so, whether in the Church, or out of the Church, whether of believing, or
unbelieving parents, are saved. They think this opinion does most suit with the
goodness and mercy of God: of this opinion are not only the Heterodox Doctors,
but even learned Junius in his answer to Puccius; Zuinglius also is alleged
for this. Others they make a distinction of Infants dying in their Infancy. For
either they die without Baptism, or with Baptism; if without Baptism, then
they conclude of their damnation; and in this rigid way Austin went, and many
follow him; yea Austin thought, that if they died without the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper also: for at that age it was generally held that both the
Sacraments were necessary to salvation, and therefore both to be applied to
Infants: But then for these Infants, who die partakers of Baptism, they
concluded undoubtedly of their salvation, this being their Doctrine, that
Baptism does wash away original sin: The Papists they all agreeing in this
likewise, that Baptism is necessary necessitate medii to salvation, either
really, or in voto, in desire; and because an Infant dying without Baptism,
cannot have a desire thereunto; Hence they conclude of eternal death, as a
punishment unto such; yet Elisius a Papist in his piorum clypeus, etc. ( Quest.
10. Art. 3.) is very bold, saying that opinion which many Divines and the
Church holds, concerning the state of Infants dying without Baptism
according to the ordinary law, est sa^^dura and onerosa, is very hard and
burdensome, and not conformable to the precepts of Christ, which are sweet and
easy; and therefore he alleges Gerson and Cajetan for this opinion, which he
is so far from judging heretical, that he calls it pietati conformis; but
generally the Papists go otherwise: But then they differ amongst themselves.
Some of them, as Catharinus, place Infants so dying, in a terrestrial Paradise,
where they have a natural, though not a supernatural happiness, ( Opus de statu
parv) Others make their condition more miserable, viz. that they have the
privative part of eternal death, though not the positive; they have the poena
damni, the punishment of loss, though not of sense, they are shut out from
enjoying God, but yet they say this will not work any sorrow in them, because
they know, that they were not in a capacity for enjoying the face of God, as
(say they) a Country Peasant is not grieved, because he is not a King, because
he never was in any probability for such a dignity. But, as a Popish Writer, (
Flor. Conrius Archip. Thuani.) observes, confuting his own party, and rigidly
following Austin, in a Tractate joined to Jansenius his Works: These Infants
(says he) knowing that they are shut from the face of God, must needs be
exceedingly grieved; because in Adam they had a capacity to enjoy God, even as
a poor man may mourn that he is not a King, when his ancestors had a right to
it, but sinfully lost it, and this is the case of all Infants; so that it is a
mere figment that many Papists have, to make an half hell, and a
semi-damnation, as if we might be deprived of Gods favor, and not be
positively damned. It is true, here also the Papists are divided; Bellarmine
makes five diverse opinions concerning the state of dying Infants, and he
joyneth with those that hold they have inward sorrow in that eternal death, but
yet not so great as to be called hell fire, or the worm of conscience. For this
end they write and speak so much of a limbus Infantum, a border or fringe as it
were in hell; where Infants are all disposed, being without the Vision of God,
yet not tormented with boddy pain; but there is no Scripture for such a place:
and therefore we leave this limbus to these limbatis pontificiis, who love to
enlarge their limbos, and simbrias, as one says. Lastly, There are others, and
they distinguish of Infants dying: either they are such as are within the
Covenant, and are of believing parents; and of such they conclude their
salvation: for they look upon their federation, as an external sign of their
election; but then for all such as die without the Covenant, the children of
Pagans; they say, that by the Scripture, they cannot conclude of any hope of
salvation for them. Thus you see into how many diverse ways they go, who handle
this Question: I might add another opinion mentioned by Vorstius, (Anti
Bellar. in Qu^rt. Tom. Censur. ad These. Duodes) of some, who affirm Infants do
wholly perish as beasts; but (says he) these are not to be accounted inter
Evangelicos, amongst the Evangelical Churches; yet within a little while after,
he reproves Bellarmine for not touching upon all the opinions of others about
Infants, saying, That there are not wanting some amongst Christians, who think
either some or all Infants are through death wholly abolished, as beasts; whose
Arguments (says he) Bellarmine should have answered, but herein Vorstius
seems to manifest his good will to the Socinian party, and though he
excludes them from the Evangelici, yet he acknowledges them Christiani. All
that I shall speak to it shall be comprehended in these particulars:

First, That concerning Infants, there are many difficulties in Divinity, for
the Scripture speaking for the most part of persons grown up, hence it is that
we cannot so clearly discover the truth about them, as how Infants are
justified, seeing they have no actual faith to lay hold upon Christ; as also
how the Spirit of God does work in them regeneration, and make them new
creatures; for seeing it is plain that of such Infants is the kindome of
heaven, and Gods promise is to the believer, and his seed; it necessarily
follows, that they are justified, and they are sanctified, though we know not
how the Spirit of God does this in them. Thus in the matter of the Resurrection
and the day of Judgment, we must necessarily acknowledge, that Infants will
then be raised with perfect bodies, all imperfections being then to be removed
from glorified bodies, as also that they will be called to Judgment: Though
the judicial process mentioned by the Evangelist instanceth only in actual
sins and duties, we must then be sober in this inquisition, seeing the
Scripture speaks not so expressly of Infants, neither is the Question
necessarily to be known, and therefore if we be over curious in enquiting what
God will them: Let us (...) we deserve not Peter's reproof, Joh. 20. busily
asking about John, What is (...) to thee? follow thou me; so God say, What is
that to thee, how I will (...) of Infants? thou art an adult person, do thou
follow me.

Secondly, We must necessarily make a distinction between such as (...) under
the Covenant, and such whose parents and their seed are strangers (...) it, and
therefore with the Remorstrants to conclude, That all Infants (...) born of
Pagans, are surely saved, is to put no difference between (...) Covenant of
grace, and to be without, which yet the Scripture does; (...) it says of the
children of unbelievers that they are unclean, 1 Cor. 7. and Heathens they are
said to be without; and therefore according to the Rule of the Scripture, we
see no more visible way for the children of Heathens, then for Heathens
themselves to be saved; but yet the Orthodox do add, that they leave these
things to the judgment of God, and content themselves (...) that which Paul
says, 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge those that are without:
although the Apostle does not there speak of a Doctrinal Judgment, but a
Judgment of Jurisdiction, which Church Officers cannot exercise upon those
that are without the Church, though this be so, we must always remember to put
a difference between that general love of God to mankind, and that special
grace of his to his Church, and therefore we must needs be injurious to this
grace of God, if we make children without the Covenant to be partakers of the
same special priveledge which others within do receive, then the Gospel is no
such extrordinary mercy, then the Covenant of grace is no such signal favor,
then believing parents have no such cause to bless God for his merciful
dispensations toward them, if Heathens children are in as prepared a way for
reconciliation with God, as their posterity is.

3. Therefore the fountain and spring head of the salvation of children dying in
their Infancy, is the election of God as well as in grown persons, it holds
in them, as well as in adult persons, that election does obtain, and he has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, election and reprobation is amongst Infants
dying, so as well as of those that are men, though this Doctrine be rejected by
Arminians, yet believing parents who lose their children while in the blossom,
are greatly to comfort their souls concerning their children so early deceased;
for although they are not able to look into the Book of (...) which is in
heaven, and thereby know which child's name is written there, and which not; yet
in that they are externally brought under the Covenant of grace, and so in
proxime capacity to Church Communion; they may well satisfy themselves in
this, as an effect of their election, and that because God has chosen them to
eternal glory, therefore are they in time received into this grace and favor,
as to be of the reputed members of Christ, and in this we must rest, not
doubting but that God does internally go along with the Ordinance; and that if
the child be taken away in its Infancy, it is done both in mercy to the child,
and to the parents: Of this subject it is good to peruse Peter Martyr, Comment.
1 Cor. 7.

Lastly, Therefore in this great business of the salvation of children dying in
Infancy, it is election, and the Covenant of grease that makes the difference,
and not Baptism: This was Austin's mistake of old, and the Popish error in
these latter days, to lay too much upon Baptism, as if that by its very work
done, opere operato, (as they say) did take away original sin, and put us
into a state of grace, from which men by actual impietis might afterward fall
away; so that the errors about Baptism are extreme, either such as think it
only a temporary Ordinance for the initiation of the Church at first, as the
Socinians, or else such as make it to be the efficacious instrument of grace,
and that from the mere work done, though there be no good actual motion, or
stirring of the heart at the time, though administered to an adult person: Hence
it is that by some the Ordinance of Baptism is exalted too much, as if the
outward washing would save a man, not at all looking to the inward grace
represented thereby, and by others it is wholly rejected as not being commanded
us now in these times, or if it be so, is only commemorative of our duty not
seating and obsignative of any grace of God to us, for which cause the
Remonstrants say, That the Doctrine of the Sacraments as it is now delivered by
Protestant Authors, is vehemently suspected by them, but we are to sail between
these two rocks, neither giving it too much or too little, for we may observe
that the Scripture speaks two ways of Sacraments. First when men do rest on
them, never at all attending to that grace they signify, then the Scripture
does debase them, attributes no glory at all to them, making Sacraments to be
no Sacraments, if they be not received in a right manner; Thus the Apostle
says, Circumcision is become uncircumcision to him that keeps not the Law:
and 1 Cor. 11. This is not to eat the Lords Supper, yea unworthy receivers eat
and drink their own salvation: Thus the Scripture when it attends to men's
either resting upon them as if they could save, or the sinful abuse of them, by
not attending to the grace signified does speak in an undervaluing way of them;
But then at other times, when it does respect the institution of Christ, and
the effects thereof, then glorious and great things are spoken of them; yet
though the Scripture commends and commands them as the institution of Christ
for supernatural effects, notwithstanding that old Rule is to be received, that
not the privation, but the contempt of Sacraments does damn; so that the after
ages of the Church which came to idolize Baptism, and to put so much virtue
even in the very external act done, can no ways be justified, yea so greatly
did superstition grow in this kind, that they thought Baptism did also work
some wonderful temporal effects; for whereas there is a traditon, (though it
be justly reckoned among the vulgar errors) that the Jews have by way of
punishment an offensive smell or stink inflicted upon their body, they instance
in Jews baptized, that thereby were cleansed from this filthiness. The Poet
Fortunatus said, Sanct. Comment. in Jer. 31. 29.

Abluitur Judeus odor Baptismate divo. Thus absurd did many grow in their
thoughts about the efficacy of Baptism; but the truth is, That although
Baptism be an Ordinance appointed by God for the sealing of the remission of
original sin, yet it has not this effect in all, neither is the benefit of
Baptism to be limited to that time only, but it extends it self to our whole
life; so that we are daily to make an improvement of it both for duty and
comfort. And thus much may suffice for the deciding of this Question with
sobriety and modesty.

Now if any shall say upon the hearing of this damnable estate that we are
plunged into by sin, as the Disciples in another case, It is good not to
marry; yea that it is good to have no children; it is good to be no Parents,
because our Infants do thus come into the world upon worse terms then the young
ones of bruit beasts, because they are the children of Gods wrath, whereas the
creatures are not the creatures of Gods wrath. To such as shall thus conclude,
I shall propound these ensuing particulars:

First, That it is just and righteous with God, to continue the propagation of
mankind, though man has thus corrupted his nature. Because Adam fell, and so
all his postcrity would be propagated in a damnable estate, shall he therefore
destroy the whele species of men, and raze out every individuum? Seeing then
its Gods will, that men should increase and multiply, that there should be
parents and children; for which end he has instituted marriage, we are to
regard the will of God in this way more than the adherent corruption; and the
rather, because this damnable guilt does adhere to our natures, not from Gods
primitive Institution, but by Adam's voluntary transgression. It being then a
duty to some to marry, it being by God appointed a remedy against sin; for
thee to abstain from that way, and to desire no children under pretense of
original sin, is a mere delusion.

Secondly, You are to know, That though children be born in this defiled and
cursed estate, yet they are in themselves mercies and comforts, which mace our
Savior say, That a woman, because of the joy that a man child is born, she
forgets all her sorrow and pangs that she was in, John 16. 21. So that at
the same time, they may be by nature children of wrath, and yet in another
respect comforts and mercies in themselves; for which end God promises
children as a mercy, and threatens it, as a punishment, to be barren and
childless.

Thirdly, Thou that art a believing parent, and have thy child dying in its
infancy, thou have cause to assure thy self of the mercy of God to thy child,
because he takes parents and children into the same promise. Oh but I know not
that God has elected him; So neither can thou thy own, a priori I you must
begin at the lower round of the ladder, in Gods Election; The effects and
fruits thereof; And now what greater pledge and argument can thou have of his
salvation, then being born under the Covenant of grace? You cannot expect
actual expressions of regeneration and grace from a dying Infant; therefore
thou must run to the Covenant of grace, whereby God does receive such, as his
members; yea thou have cause to admire the goodness of God to thy child, and
his mercy, when so many thousands, and thousands of Pagans children dying, have
no visible way of salvation; we cannot by the Scripture (as you heard) see any
Ark provided for them, as God in mercy has done for thee.

Fourthly, The consideration of Gods just and severe proceedings against Pagans
and their children, may make thee the more admire the grace of God in saving of
thee. For how many Heathens perish in hell, who it may be never committed such
gross and soul sins in their life time, as thou have done? To be sure their
Infants never committed such actual inquities, as thou have done; yet they
appear according to Gods ordinary way of proceedings, to be left in that lost
estate of nature. And therefore that is a good quickening meditation which
Ved^lius (...), (Hilar. cap 3. page 119.) To make a godly man thankful for
Gods grace, seeing by nature we deserve otherwise. Ah quot sunt, erunt in
inferno miselli infantuli, etc. Ah how many little Infants are, and shall be in
hell, who never had the knowledge of good and evil, and might not God have left
thee in the same misery? This (I say) is a pious meditation. Though that
scoffing Remonstrant prefix this expression amongst others in the front of his
Book, as if it were no less then blasphemy, Vedel. Rhapsod.

Fifthly, Thou who art a parent exercised with this temptation about thy
children, it grieveth thee to think thou bring them forth to be Gods
enemies, and the Devils children: Let not this discourage thee, but provoke
thee the more earnestly to be much in prayer for them, and to be more careful
in their education. Let them be the children of thy prayers and tears, the
children of thy care and godly discipline, and thou may comfort thy self
that such shall not perish; however thou have done thy duty, and so art to
leave all to the wise and righteous God, who is not accountable to man for any
of his proceedings.

That the encouragement and hopes of parents are great in the faithful
discharge of their duties, notwithstanding the guilt of original sin, may
further appear, as to the woman, in that famous and noble Text, 1 Timothy 2. 14,
15. But the woman being deceived was in the transgression; Notwithstanding she
shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in the faith etc.

The Apostle having strictly charged, That women should not usurp authority
over the man, for two reasons,

1. From the primitive Creation, even before sin; Adam was first formed, then
Eve: So that in the state of integrity, the wife was to have been subject to
her husband, even as children to parents; but it would have been without that
difficulty and reluctance which sin has now brought upon mankind.

The other reason is, Because the woman was first in the transgression, and
thereby through her original sin infected all. Now lest this should afflict
women too much, and they conceive their estate desperate; the Apostle mingleth
honey with this gall, he informs them of comfortable considerations, even
from that very particular; wherein they see the evident displeasure and wrath
of God; and that is the sorrows and pangs they bring forth children with, She
shall be saved in childbearing.

How this is to be understood seems difficult. For may not maids, or such
married persons that never have children be saved? How shall they do that have
no children, if the woman be saved in childbearing?

To this it is easily answered, That the Apostle does not speak of the
meritorious cause of salvation, which is Christ; for in him all believers are
one; there is neither male or female, Jew or Gentile, married or unmarried,
that do differ, as to justification and salvation through him. Therefore the
Apostle speaks here only of such women, as are married, and have children.
Now because such might be discouraged, because of the curse laid upon the woman
at first, in bringing forth of children, he adds, That notwithstanding this
she shall be saved; Those pangs and sorrows do not exclude her from salvation;
therefore the Greek Preposition (...) for (...), as Romans 2. 27. compared with
29. it does not signify, she is saved by that, as a cause. For how many women
are there, who through their impenitency in wicked ways will be damned, though
they be the mothers of many children? It signifies only the way and means
wherein she may obtain salvation. So that what was at first in it self a curse,
may now be sanctified, and so prove no impediment to their salvation. It is
true, some would have this (...), to be meant of the Virgins bearing of Christ,
as if the meaning were, She shall be saved* by Christ born of a woman. Erasmus
on the place, says, Theophilact mentions this, but rejects it. The late
Annotatour mentions it with approbation; but the Context does no wise agree
with this; for he speaks of every woman in the Church bearing her children;
therefore adds, If they abide in faith and charity; neither can any argument
be put upon the Article (...), as if the Apostle meant that signal and eminent
bearing of a child, when Christ was born; for if this were so, none but the
Virgin Mary, and no other woman could take comfort from this palce. Heinsius by
(...) understands marriage, She shall be saved in the way of marriage, which
is called so (says he) from the end of marriage, which is to have children;
for (as he affirms) the Grecians have not one word to express marriage by,
and therefore in stead thereof they use (...), and so here (...); but this has
no probability: We adhere therefore to the former Exposition; the sense whereof
is, That notwithstanding Eve did through original sin bring a sad curse upon
childbearing, yet to those women that are godly, the curse is taken off; yea
and does become a sanctified means of their salvation; not of it self to every
one (for then no childbearing woman could be damned) but if they do walk in
those ways God has commanded. Therefore it follows, If they abide, etc.
which denotes the necessity of abiding and continuing in all holy duties. Some
indeed refer this to the children, If the children continue in what is good.
And if it be said, When a godly mother does her duty, she may have
notwithstanding wicked and ungodly children, and shall that prejudice her
salvation? To this they answer, That for the most part the wickedness of
children is laid upon the parents neglect; but if it be not, then God will
accept of the mother faithfully discharging her duty, though the children do
wickedly miscarry; but it is far more probable to refer it to the woman.
And though the number be changed into the plural, If they abide, yet that is
ordinary in Scripture, especially when the word is a collective, as in the 5th
Chapter of this Epistle verse. 4. where (...) in the singular number, and (...)
in the plural relates to it. The qualification then that is necessary to all
women, that would find the curse in childbearing taken away, and original
guilt accompanying that sorrow removed, is to abound in all saving graces, and
to continue therein; and then that woman who is a wife and a mother of many
children, let her not torment her self about the state of her children, and the
condition they are born in, but quiet her soul with this Text of Scripture.

The last particular, that may satisfy the souls of such parents who may be
exercised in these particulars about original sin, is to remind themselves,
That the whole matter about original sin in reference to Adam, and all his
posterity, is not without the wise and holy appointment of God, who would never
have suffered this evil to be, could he not have raised out thereby a greater
good. For although it be true, That Adam did sin from his mere internal
liberty, there being no decrees or execution thereof that did necessitate him
to do so; yet all this could not be without the Decree of God permitting, as
also wisely ordering all things for his own glory. No doubt but God could have
confirmed Adam in his holiness; yea he might have so ordered it, that every man
and woman should stand or fall upon their personal account, as the Angels did:
yet such was his will and Covenant, that in Adam all his posterity should be
involved, and the same issue should attend both them and him. This then being
the appointment of a just, wise and merciful God, we ought wholly to
acquiesce, knowing that the business of man's life and death, his salvation and
damnation, could not have been ordered better otherwise, though all the wisdom
of men and Angels had been put together. And therefore when thou who art a
parent, but tempted about the state of thy children thou have brought forth,
art turmoiling thy self in these disputes, shake off these vipers, and
conclude, That God regards his own glory and honor, more then thou can do;
he has taken that way wherein he will magnify his own glorious Attributes.
And truly this should presently silence all thy disputations. For would thou
have God lose part of his glory? Would thou have his honor in any degree
laid in the dust, that thy will and desires may be accomplished? Far be this
from thee. Surely the great and high thoughts we ought to have of Gods wisdom,
goodness and holiness ought to keep us from opening our mouths any more in this
point, saying, As I leave my self, so my children in the hands of God, who
disposes all things according to his own will. And as we say of the nature of
God, he is that Bonum quo nihil melius cogitari potest; The same must we apply
to all his dispensations likewise.

Furthermore we are to remember, That whatsoever the first Adam has brought
upon mankind, the second Adam will totally and fully remove in all that are his
members: Insomuch that at the last, there shall not remain (as it were) an hoof
of any of these calamities. That original corruption within thee shall no
longer tempt thee incessantly like Joseph's Mistress, saying, Come, and lie
with me; we shall then in the issue of all have more cause to rejoice, because
of Christ, and the benefits by him, then ever we were cast down and dejected,
because of the transgression of the first Adam, and the unspeakable evil that
came by him. So that if these particulars be duly considered, every believer
may with comfort and quietness sit down under this truth, while men of
pharisaical and self-justifying spirits rage and revile at these things.

But you will say, Grant that there is such a thing as Original Sin, and that
we have delivered nothing but Scripture truth in this point, yet may we not be
too tragical in exclamations about it? As there are those who err in the
defect, so are there not many that do offend in the excess, that make it more
heinous then it is? This is the last Question, wherewith I shall conclude this
Subject. And

First, All the Popish, Arminian, Socinian party with their adherents, look
upon the Calvinists, as excessive in this point; hence are there several
complaints of them about this matter in all their works. But certainly, if we
do regard the scope of the Scripture, it is wholly to debase man, and exalt
Christ; To discover our incurable and sinful estate, that thereby Christ may
be the more magnified, which is done by nothing so much, as to make known that
horrid pollution, which is upon all by nature. And certainly that one Text,
Genes. 6. 5. affirming, The thoughts of the imagination of a man's heart to be
only evil, and that continually, speaks more emphatically the deplored and
sinful estate of man, then ever any Calvinist has yet expressed. Yet though
this be so, we grant, that some may go too far in their opinions, and
expressions about original sin, though for the most part such is a man's
self-fulness and self-righteousness, that Pelagianism is likelier to poison the
world, then Flacci^^ism. We must know therefore that one Illyricus a Lutheran
in opposition to Victorinus Strigelius a Lutheran also, but a Synergist,
holding the will of man to concur actively with the grace of God to a man's
conversion, and thereby extenuating original sin. This Illyricus (I say) out
of a vehement opposition to that party, and the School-Doctrine about original
sin, making it to be an accident in a man, did fall into another extreme,
saying, That original sin was a substantial evil in a man, and that the very
substantial form of a man was now made sinful. This Illyricus was a man of a
very turbulent and unquiet spirit, a desperate enemy to Melancthon, whose heart
it is said he broke. ( Melch. Adam in vita Illyrici.) At first he was well
reputed of by the Orthodox, and being sadly tempted in his spirit about sin,
and the wrath of God, but afterward delivered from it; it was judged so great
a mercy, that thanks was given to God in the public Congregation for his
behalf; but afterward among other erroneous assertions, he maintained, That
original sin was a substantial evil in a man. We may read his whole opinion
with the declaration of himself and his Arguments, in his Tractate on purpose
concerning this point ( Clavis Script. 2d part Tractat. 6. de originali
peccato.) wherein he has many absurd and monstrous expressions. Although it
must be acknowledged, that with that dung and filth he has, there is also some
gold. Some there are that wholly excuse him, saying, That his words only were
improper, but that his sense was orthodox; and that out of hatred to that
Doctrine, which extenuateth original sin; he would, pretending the Scripture
for his Rule, use substantive expressions, to declare the nature of it. But
whatsoever his end may be, certainly his sense and opinion, as declared in his
words, is justly to be condemned and exploded. For by Adam's fall he makes a
substantial change to be made upon a man; That the Image of God is turned into
the image of the Devil, not accidentally, but substantially; as when wine is
made vinegar, or when the parts of a statue, or house that were built in some
comely harmony, representing some glorious thing, they should be pulled down,
and built into another deformed shape. As suppose the Image of some comely
person should be pulled in pieces, and made the image of an horrible Dragon or
Serpent. He distinguishes of the material substance of a man, and his formal;
He grants, That the matrial substance of a man, still remains our body, and
parts thereof, but the formal substance is altered. As when a vessel that was
once made a vessel of honor, is afterward made a vessel of dishonor; the
material substance is the same, but not the formal. He does no ways endure,
that we should call original sin an accident; for he says, This sin is a
transcendent, and is in all predicaments; it is sometimes a quality, sometimes
an action, etc. sometimes a substance. Neither will he distinguish between the
substance, of a man, and his sin adhering thereto, between the subject and the
privation in it, between the abstract and concrete: God (he says) is angry
with concretes, punishes concretes, not abstracts; and therefore he says,
Those that distinguish between the substance of a man and his sin, do as the
Alchimists separating from the oil, oleity; from a stone, lapideity; so these
from Adam, Adameity. Thus he, and much more. But certainly herein he betrayeth
horrible ignorance in Philosophy and Theology; for both these will necessitate
us to distinguish between the substance of a man, and the sinful privation in
him; otherwise Christ could not have taken the same nature with us upon him,
sin only excepted; and regeneration would be a substantial change, not a
qualitative: Neither by this opinion could the same substantial bodies be said
to be glorified in Heaven. So that as the Leprosy in the body, is not the
body; neither is original sin in man, the nature of man; and therefore when
we read, that the flesh and spirit are opposite, that opposition must be
understood in praedicamento qualitatis, not substantiae. The greatest support
that this man has for this error, is, because the Scripture uses substantive
expressions, it is called an evil heart, a stony heart, etc. But this is
because of the corruption adhering to it: As we say, a rotten tree, or a
poisoned fountain; The heart as it is a fleshly substance is not evil, but as
it is the principle of our motions and actions, not in a physical, but moral
sense. It is true, we say, That through original sin man comes short of his
end: And so as the hand when its dead cannot do the works of an band; or salt,
when it has lost its seasoning is good for nothing: Thus it is with man in
regard of any supernatural actions, yet he has not lost any thing that was
substantial and essential; Only the power of the soul want the primitive
rectitude they once had; and therefore whenever they act, it is with
deordination. Indeed we will grant, That Illyricus his adversary Victorinus
Strigelius, did not fully express original corruption, in the Disputation
between them; who compared a man to a Loadstone, of which (they say) when
rubbed with Garlic, it will not draw iron; but if that be wiped off by Goats
blood, it will be as attractive as before. For this similitude is not full
enough: because original sin does not only hinder the doing of good actions,
but infecteth the very powers and principles of them. It is true, there are
those, (as Contzen in Romans 5.) that say, because the Calvinists hold, That
concupiscence is sin, they cannot avoid Flaccianism but that is a mere
calumny. We always distinguish between the nature and substance of a man; and
the ataxy and disorder that does now accompany it. Neither when we call it an
accident do we thereby extenuate the nature of original sin; for we do not
make it a light superficial one, but which is inbred with us, and does diffuse
it self over all the parts and powers of the soul. Neither do we say, it is a
transient, temporary accident, but that which is fixed and permanent in us.
Thus we see in what sense, there may be excessive expressions about original
sin; otherwise we cannot say enough to affect our hearts with the
loathsomness of it, provided we keep close to the Scripture directions herein.

Thus at last by the good hand of God we are come out of these deeps into the
haven; we have waded through all the several parts of this vast Subject, and
are now come to the shore. It remains as a duty upon every one, to hasten out
of this captivity and bondage, not to stay a day or hour in this damnable
estate, and above all things to take heed of such opinions, that do either
lessen or nullify this sin; for this is to err in the foundation; Christ
and grace, and regeneration can never be built thereupon. This Doctrine has
stood as a firm (...) in all ages, upon which the contrary errors have dashed
and broken themselves; and without this we are never able to perform those two
necessary duties, To know our selves, and to know Christ. This has always
been the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of God. Neither did the Fathers
before Austin's time generally speak otherwise, as late Writers would make us
believe: Even as the Socinians say, the Ancients affirmed otherwise about
Christ, than after Athanasius his time, and the Council of Nice, was usually
done in the Church: Scripture, the Consent of the Church, and every man's own
experience does proclaim this truth, Quis ante prodigiosum di^cipulum Pelagii
Coelestium reatu praevaricationis Adae omne genus humanum negavit astrictum?
Lyr. cont. Haeres. c. 24.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
Actions.
Men's best Actions carnal, page 139 Bad Actions are not justified by good
intentions, 280 The will has not power over all its Actions. 323
Adam.
Adam had full power over himself. 20 Made upright. 23 Yet free and changeable.
ib. 114 He sinned not after the same manner, that we sin, against Socinians,
ib. A common head. 25 His sin was disobedience. 27 His sin imputed to all. ib.
His disobedience makes us sinners by propagation, not by imitation. 28 He had
power to stand. 114 And to repent and believe, while in innocence,
transcendently. ib. Deprived by his fall of more, then was merely supernatural.
118 And of supernaturals also. ib. Had free will to good before his fall, not
after. 119 Had faith. 120, 128 Loved God above all, before his fall. ib. And
delighted in him. 121 Not made in a neutral indifferent state. 123 How original
righteousness was natural to him. 125 What was supernatural to Adam, 127 Had
all graces, either actually, or habitually. 128, 129 Had his affections subject
to his mind. 134 A comparison between the first and second Adam. 181
Affections.
The pollution of them. 325 The nature of them. 327 How variously they may be
considered. 328 Their tyranny over the understanding and will. 329 Sinful in
their first motions. 330 And in their progress and degrees. 331 And in their
duration, and in respect of their objects. 332 And in respect of their end and
use. 333 And in their motion to lawful objects. 334 And in respect of their
opposition to one another. 336 Affections polluted in respect of the conflict
between them and natural conscience. 336 And in their distracting us in duties.
338 And in their contrariety to the example of God. ib. How they are in God.
339 Their dullness toward good. 340 Drawn to holy duties from corrupt motives.
341 Zealously drawn out to false ways. 342 Inlets to all sin. 343 The privacy
of the Affections. 345 The hurtful effects on our own bodies. 346 And others.
347 They readily receive temptations. ib.
All.
All sinful that come of Adam, sinful by nature, though the children of the
most godly. 394 And how absurd to exempt any. 400 God justified for shutting up
All under sin for the sin of Adam. 421
Amyraldus.
Amyraldus and other sense, upon the conflict in Romans 7. examined. 483
Angels.
Angels not generated. 196
Appetite.
Of the threefold Appetite in man. 158
B
Believe.
NO man can Believe by the power of nature. 315
Blasphemies.
What devilish Blasphemies have been received. 219
Body.
Body of man defiled with sin. 372 Is not serviceable to the soul in holy
approaches, but a clog. 376 Does positively affect and defile the soul. 377 Man
acts more according to the inclinations of the Body then the dictates of the
mind. ib. Its a tempter and seducer. 378 Does objectively occasion much sin to
the soul. 381 Its indisposition to serve God. 392 Easily moved by its passions.
384 When sanctified it is the temple of God. 385
C
Children.
CHildren suffer for parents sins 46 Arminians make the Children of Heathens
and believers alike. 67 How soon a Child may commit actual sin. 416
Christ.
Whether upon Christ's death there be a universal removal of the guilt of
original sin. 539
Combat.
Combat between the flesh and the spirit. 474
Conflict.
No spiritual Conflict in the state of integrity. 479 Nor is there sense or
feeling of any such Conflict in a natural man. 480 It Is in all that are
sanctified. 81 Conflict, the several kinds. 500
Conscience.
What Conscience is. 223 Whence quietness of Conscience in unregenerate men. 90
And whence troubles of Conscience in the regenerate. ib. Erroneous Conscience
ought to be obeyed 224 Conscience horribly blind and erroneous by nature. 225
And senseless. 226 The defect of Conscience in its offices and actings. 228 The
corruption of Conscience in accusing and excusing. 230 Of a counterfeit
Conscience. 233 Sinful lust, fancy and imagination, custom and education,
mistaken for Conscience. ib. Conscience severe against other men's sins, blind
about its own. 236 Security of Conscience. 237 The defilement of Conscience
when troubled and awakened. 238 The difference between a troubled and a
regenerate Conscience. 243 Causes of trouble of Conscience without
regeneration. ib. False cure of a wounded Conscience. 245
Consent.
A twofold Consent of the will, express and formal; or interpretative and
virtual. 287
Creation.
Christ had his soul by Creation, and so we have ours. 195
Creature.
Man's bondage to the Creature. 317
D
Damnation.
DAmnation due to all for original sin. 528
Death.
Death not natural to Adam before sin. 31, 115 Death and all other miseries
come from sin. 173
Devil.
The Devil cannot compel us to sin. 15, 114
Difference.
Difference between original and actual sins. 477
Difficulty.
Difficulty of turning to God, whence. 478
Doubtings.
Doubtings, whence. 241
Duties.
Imperfection in the best Duties. 11 Of doing Duties for conscience sake. 234
E
Exorcisms.
EXorcisms used anciently at the Baptism of Infants. 54
F
Faculties.
SOme Faculties and imbred principles left in the soul after the fall. 224 Man's
best Faculties corrupted by sin. 139
Flesh.
Flesh and spirit in every godly man. 11 How the word Flesh is used in
Scripture. 139 Flesh and spirit contrary. ib.
Forgetfulness.
Forgetfulness natural and moral. 257 Forgetfulness of sin. 260 Of useful
examples, and former workings of Gods Spirit. 261 Of our later end, the day and
death, and judgment, and the calamities of the Church. 262
Freedom.
Several kinds of Freedom. 306 Freedom from the dominion of sin, whether it be
by suppression or abolishing part of it. 503
G
Grace.
WHat sanctifying Grace is. 20 Given not so much to curb actual sin, as to cure
the nature. ib. Free Grace exalted by the Apostles. 308 The Doctrine of free
Grace unpleasing to flesh and blood. 310 The necessity of special Grace to help
against temptations. 314
H
Habits.
THe Habits of sin forbidden, and the Habits of grace required by the Law. 45
Heathens.
Heathens, how far ignorant of original sin. 168 Condemn the lustings of the
heart. 169
Heresies. Heretics.
The Heresies of the Gnostics, Carpocratians, Montanists and Donatists. 225
The guilt and craft of Heretics. 303
I
Jesus Christ.
JEsus Christ his conception miraculous. 388 But framed of the substance of the
Virgin. 389 Why called the Son of God. ib. Had a real body. ib. Born holy and
without sin. 390 How he could be true man, and yet free from sin. 392
Ignorance.
A universal Ignorance upon a man's understanding. 178, 210
Image.
Gods Image in Adam not an infused habit or habits, but a natural rectitude, or
connatural perfection to his nature. 19 Why called Gods Image. 21
The Image of God in man.
Reason and understanding one part of it. 113 Holiness and righteousness
another part. ib. Power to persevere in holiness another part. ib. A regular
subordination of the affections to the rule of righteousness, another part. 114
Primitive glory, honor and immortality, another part. 115 Dominion and
superiority another part, yet not the only Image of God, as the Socinians
falsely. ib. How man made in it. 131
Imagination.
Imagination, its nature. 351 Its sinfulness in making Idols and conceits to
please it self. 352 And in its defect from the end of its being. 353 By its
restlesnesse. 355 By their universality, multitude, disorder, their roving and
wandering, their impertinency and unseasonablenesse. 356, 357 It eclipseth and
keeps out the understanding. 358 Conceives for the most part all actual
transgressions. 359 Acts sin with delight when there are no external actings.
360 Its propensity to all evil. 361 Is continually inventing new sins, or
occasions of sin. 362 Vents its sinfulness in reference to the Word, and the
preaching of it. 364 Mind more affected with appearances than realities. 365
And in respect of fear and the workings of conscience. 366 And its acting in
dreams. 367 Is not in subordination to the rational part of man. 368 The
instrument in Austins judgment of conveying sin to the child. 368 Prone to
receive the Devils temptations. 369
Immortal.
How many ways a thing may be said to be Immortal. 509 Of Adams Immortality in
the state of innocence. 513
Impossibility.
Impossibility of man's loosing himself from the creature, and return to God,
371
Infants.
Infants deserve hell. 7 Sinners. 29 Cannot be saved without Christ. 35, 55
Infant-holinesse, what it is. 56 Infants defiled with original sin before born.
62
Judgment.
Whence diversities of Judgment in the things of God. 219
Justification.
Justification by imputed not inherent righteousness. 29
K
Knowing. Known.
CVriosity and affection in all of Knowing what is not to be Known 184 Which
comes from original sin. 212
L
Law.
THe Law impossible to be kept. 10 A Law what. 85 The Law requires habitual
holiness. 130 Forbids lust in the heart. 156
Liberty.
Liberty of will nothing but voluntarinesse or complacency. 132
Lust.
What Lust is. 155 How distinguished. 157 Lust considered according to the
fourfold estate of man. 160 Sinful Lust utterly extirpated in heaven 161
M
Man.
MAn by nature out of Gods favor. 117 Man made to enjoy and glorify God. 132,
133 How sin dissolved the harmony of Man's nature. ib. Man unable to help
himself out of his lost condition. 153 Through sin it is worse with Man than
other creatures. 174 The nobler part of Man inslaved to the inferior. 175 Man
utterly impotent to any spiritual good. 177 By his fall became like the devil.
183
Memory.
The pollution of it. 247 What it is. 250 A twofold weakness of Memory,
natural and sinful. ib. The use and dignity of it. 251 The nature of it. 253
Discoveries of its pollution. 253 Wherein it is polluted. 257 Wherein it fails
in respect of the objects ib. Has much inward vitiosity adhering to it. 263
Subservient to our corrupt hearts. 265
Mind.
Whence the vanity and instability of the Mind. 217
Ministry.
One end of the Ministry. 255
N
Natural.
EVery Natural man is carnal, in the mysteries of Religion, in religious
worship, in religious ordinances, in religious performances. 140, 141 In
spiritual transactions and religious deportment. 142, 143
Necessity.
What Necessity is consistent with freedom 312
O
Original Sin.
THe necessity of knowing it. 1 The term ambiguously used; and how taken in
this Treatise. ib. That there is such a natural concontagion on all. 2 Why
called Original sin. 5 Denial of it, the mother of many errors 6 The cause of
all miseries. 7 Worse than actual. 8 Ignorance thereof the cause why men
understand not the work of conversion. 9 Inseparably adheres to the best. 11 A
natural evil, and how; with the several names it has had. 13 The difilement of
our specifical being. 14 The inward principle of all sinful motions. ib.
Flacius his opinion concerning it. ib. Is always putting it self forth. 16
Nearer to us than actual or habitual sin. 18 What it is. 19, 20 Why compared to
death. 21 Objections answered. 22 Pelagians and Socinians opinion of it. 28
Propagated. ib. Is an internal and natural depravation of the whole man. 32
Adams sin imputed to us, is not all our Original sin. ib. Of that opinion, that
Original sin is vitium, but not peccatum. 33 Truly and properly a sin. 34
Against the Law. 35 How voluntary. 39 Arminius and the Remonstrants disagree
about Original sin. 40 Arminius, Remorstrants, Zuinglius, Papists, Scotists,
and Socinians opinions of it. 40 A sin, a punishment, and a cause of sin. 41
Original inherent sin, and Adams imputed sin are two distinct sins. 43 Against
the Law, and how. 44 45 Acknowledged in Old Testament times 48 Remonstrants
confess it may be proved by two or three places of Scripture. ib. Compared to a
leprosy. 51 Makes us leathsom to God as soon as born. 52 Why called
uncleanness. ib. Should make us vile in our own eyes. ib. Put a man by nature
into worse condition than beasts. 53 Makes us like the Devils. ib. Pollutes our
duties, and makes us unfit and unworthy to draw nigh to God in duties. 54 Makes
us to be in the most immediate contrariety to God that can be. ib. The denial
of it charged upon Calvinists by the Lutherans. 56 Acknowledged by the Rabbis
and Fathers. 62 Meditation thereon, wherein advantageous. 64 Not one universal
thing of general influence, but a particular thing in particular men. 65 To be
bewailed, even by those that are regenerate. ib. A twofold Original sin. 66
The different opinions of men about humiliation for it. 67 In what sense it is
to be repented of. 68 Papists against sorrow for it. 69 Several opinions
concerning the pardon of it. 67, 68, 69 Wherein repentance and the pardon of
Original and actual sin do differ. 70 It is an universal defilement. 71 And an
universal guilt. ib. And the fountain and root of all actual sin. ib. And the
greatest sin. 72 Inseparable from our natures, while we live. 73 Of the
Scripture names of it. 79 Not the essence or substance of the soul ib. Why
called the old man. 80 Improperly called a Law. 83 Why called a Law. 84
Instructs a man in all evil ib. Inclines and provokes to all evil. ib.
Compels to all evil. 85 Why called the inherent or in-dwelling sin. 90 How
it dwells in the regenerate. ib. Active, and ever stirring. 94 Is of an
insinuating and contaminating nature. 95 Depriveth both of power and will to do
good. 97, 98 Inclines the heart to the creature. 98 Resists all profers of
grace. 99 Weakens the principles of grace. 100 Why called a treasure. 102 An
inexhausted stock. 103 The cause of all pleasure in sin. 104 Called a body and
why. 105 107 Shows it self outwardly in all our actions. 107 Cannot be
mortified without pain. ib. A reality, yet not a substance. 108 Not a single
sin, but a lump of all evil. ib. Inclines only to carnal, earthly, and bodily
things. 109 Seth born in Original sin. 110, 111 Deprives of more than
external happiness and immortality, against Socinians. 117 Many Papists deny
the positive part of it. 136 Has infected all men. 137 Positive as well as
privative. 144 And the reasons thereof. 145 Produces positive sinful actions.
146 Sticks closer then vicious habits. ib. Not a pestilential quality in the
body. 149 Is properly concupiscence or lust. 157 And in what sense. 159 And why
so called. 162 It is ignorant also. ib. Defined. 164 The whole man, and the
whole of man the subject thereof. ib. Propagated and communicated to all Adams
posterity. 165 Truly known only by Scripture Light. 167 How far Heathens were
ignorant thereof. 168 The propagation thereof by the souls creation. 199 Has
filled us with error. 211 And with curiosity. 212 And vanity. 213 And folly.
214 Polluting the conscience, how, and wherein. 221 Polluteth the memory. 249
Polluteth the will. 268 The affections. 325 The imagination. 348 The body of a
man 392 And every one of mankind. 387 Not the children of the most godly, or
the Virgin Mary excepted, but only Christ, 387. to 401 Original sin imputed,
the aggravations of it. 405 Inherent; the aggravation of it. 407 It defiles all
the parts of the soul, is the root and cause of all actual sin, is incurable,
takes away all spiritual sense and feeling, is habitual, radicated in the
soul. 407. to 410 Objections against the heinousness of this sin: Every one
has his proper Original sin. 412 Vents it self betimes. 415 Is alike in all.
419 The immediate effects of Original sin are man's propensity to sin. 437. to
455 Is the cause of all other sine. 455 Evil motions not consented unto, and
lusts consented unto. 464 The combat between the flesh and spirit 474 Death.
505 Eternal damnation. 526
P
Pray.
A Natural man cannot Pray. 314
Pride.
Pride the cause of most heresies. 218
Propagation.
Propagation of sin. 397
Punishment.
The same thing may be a Punishment and a sin. 41
R
Redeemer.
THe necessity of a Redeemer demonstrates our thraldom to sin. 319
Reformation.
A carnal man's Reformation is but the avoiding of one sin by another. 318
Regenerate.
A sure difference between a Regenerate and unregenerate man. 9
Regeneration.
Three sorts of mistaken Regeneration. 10
Relics.
Relics of sin. 474
Remember.
Whence is it that we Remember things when we would not. 266
Righteousness.
Original Righteousness not given to Adam as a curb to the inferior faculties.
25 The difficulty of Romans 5. 26 Original Righteousness, the privation of it a
sin. 130 We were deprived of it by Adam. 131 Universally lost. 135 The loss of
it the cause of all temporal losses. ib. The privation of it does necessarily
infer the presence of all sin in a subject susceptible. 202
S
Sacraments.
ONe end of the Sacraments. 255
Sanctification.
Sanctification two fold. 391
Satan.
All by nature in bondage to Satan. 370
Scripture.
Scripture discovers us to our selves better then light of nature or
Philosophy. 161, 168 The end of its being written. 253
Self-knowing.
Self knowing a great duty, and the hinderance of it. 8
Senseless.
We are altogether Senseless as to any spiritual concernment. 176
Sin.
A man naturally can do nothing but sin. 15, 16 The reason why all men do not
commit all Sins, though inclinable thereto. 17 Men lie under a necessity of
sinning, yet this necessity is consistent with voluntarinesse. 18 Sin
delightful to men. 21 How Sin is natural to us. 24 Christ only born without
Sin, and how. 37. 390 Sin, is what sense voluntary. 38 When a punishment, how
from God. 42 One Sin may suddenly and formally deprive the subject of all
grace, yet it does not so always. 58 Three sorts of Sin, original, habitual
and actual. 89 The first motions of the heart, though never so involuntary and
indeliberate, are sinful. 94 All Sin is potentially and seminally in every
man's heart. 103 Every man would commit all Sin, if not restrained. 147 Sin
rightly divided into original and actual. 164 Whence it comes to pass that men
commit known Sins. 227 Why men choose Sin rather than affliction. 283 Every man
lies under a necessity of sinning. 311
Sinners.
To be made a Sinner by Adam is more than to be made subject to death as a
curse. 31 And more than to be obnoxious to eternal wrath. ib. All mad: truly
and properly Sinners by Adam. 31, 34 Every man, Christ excepted. 387, 393
Socinians.
Wherein Socinians do make God the author of sin. 66 Socinians and Papists
blasphemy 114 Socinians deny both original sin, and original righteousness 121
The rocks they stumble at. ib. and 122
Soul.
The arguments of those that hold the Souls traduction. 197 Souls not by
eduction or traduction, but creation and introduction. 191 Soul not generated.
189 Souls created. 194 Origin and Plato's opinion of the Soul. 186 Confuted.
187 The Soul cannot be neutral. 130 Inclined to earthly objects. 175 Souls not
created before the bodies. 187 Souls come not into the world pure and holy. ib.
Souls not perfect substances. 200 The Soul infused by creating, and created by
infusing. 21 How it comes to be infected. 393
T
Tailor.
A Character of Doctor J. Tailor. 30 He is answered in these places. 62, 398,
407, 409, 422, 430, 449, 450, 452, 461, 476, 485, 518 520, 521, 522, 523, 524,
525, 527, 528, 534, 535
V
Vanity.
OF the natural Vanity of our minds 213
Virgin.
Virgin Mary born in original sin. 398
Uncleanness.
A threefold Uncleanness, corporal, ceremonial and moral. 50
Understanding.
Our Understandings very weak in respect of natural things. 179, 219 And
incapable of holy and spiritual things. 212
Voluntariness.
Voluntariness not requisite to every sin. 39
W
Wickedness.
OF the extreme Wickedness of the world. 172
Will. Wills.
No man Wills sin, and damnation, as such. 38 Adams Will, how ours. 39 The
Nature of the Will. 270 The difference between the Will and understanding. 271
Will, taken ambiguonsly. 272 The Will the seat of obedience and disobedience.
273 Good, is the proper object of the Will. ib. The several operations of the
Will. 274 The difference between a wicked man's, and a good man's doing what he
allows not. 88 Free Will, how far we are deprived of it. 116 The corruption of
the Will in volition. 275 And in efficacious Willing a thing. 276 And in
fruition. 277 And in its act of intention. 279 And in election. 282 Whence it
is that the Will is backward to to follow the understanding. 284 The pollution
of the Will in its act of consent. 286 The first motions of the Will are evil.
ib. The pollution of the Will in its affections and properties. 289 The
degeneracy of the Will. 293 The Will wholly perverted about the ultimate end.
ib. The Will naturally inclines to be independent on God. 295 The contumacy
and refractoriness of the Will. 297 The enmity and contrariety of the Will to
Gods will. 298 The rebellion of the Will against the light of the mind, and the
slavery of it to the sensitive part. 299 The mutability and inconstancy of the
Will. 300 The bondage of the Will, and of free will. 302 No man before grace
has free will to good. 305 The Will impotent to spiritual things. 313 Free
will, how called in Scripture. 307 Exalted by erroneous persons. 308 The
different effects of free will and free grace in men's lives. 310 The difficulty
of the question. 311 Demonstrations against it. ib. The definitions and
descriptions of it. 320 Does not consist in an active indifferency to good or
evil. 321
FINIS.
TO THE READER.
A Digressive Epistle concerning Justification by Faith alone, excluding the
Conditionality of Works in that Act, either begun or continued. Tending to a
friendly debate between a Reverend, Learned, and godly Brother, and my self, in
that Point.
THe Doctrine of Original sin, and Justification by Faith alone, are not
altogether heterogeneous: Yea, Stapleton makes the former the Mother, and the
latter the Daughter, as they are avouched in the Protestant way. I shall
therefore here take the occasion to lay down several Propositions, that may
conduce to the further discovery of the Contents of that amicable collation
between my learned Brother and my self in this particular. Not that my purpose
is to vindicate those Arguments I have formerly in a Treatise of Righteousness,
produced against conditionality of Works in the Act of Justification, from the
Exceptions and Answers he has pleased lately to give in unto them; for I shall
venture their credit and strength, (notwithstanding all that he has said to
the contrary) with the intelligent and impartial Readers, till I am advised by
the judicious and Learned, there is a necessity of rescuing them from his
assaults. The generation of Divines which shall arise, that knew Joseph, who
are aquainted with the Doctrine and Spirit of the first Reformers in this
matter; they will not take up their persuasions from one or two English
Writers, in this case. It is true, Aristole says, lib. 1. Rhetor. cap. 11.
that (...) and (...), Contentions are pleasant, and Conqest in them sweet. But
that is true, in reference to the Philosophers and Orators of old, who were
animals of glory, and had a libidinous appetite after applause, (...), being
(...), as Justin Martyr alludeth; and the Orators so insatiable after praise,
that rather then want it, they would hire their Laudicenes to applaud them with
a (...). But in Theological contests, we ought to have more mortified and
sanctified hearts; for when we have watched over our souls with the greatest
diligence we can, yet we have cause to pray, that God would forgive us our
Book-sins, and preserve us from loosing the comfortable sense and enjoyment of
Justification, while we dispute about it. Not therefore from a spirit of
contention or opposition to my learned Brother, whom I highly honor, but love
to that precious and ancient Truth, as I judge it to be, which through
infirmity is opposed by him, happily inclined thereunto by his laudable Zeal
against Antinomian dotages, I proceed to lay down several Propositions; which
when I have done, my thoughts are to say, Ite missa est.

The Reformers in their first Conflicts with the Popish Adversaries about
Justification (among the controversall Points therein) judged this none of the
least; Prop. 1.
The Means or Manner how we are justified. Indeed, Justification being the
heart (as it were) of Religion, a little prick therein is dangerous. It being
the eye of Christianity, a little disease is dangerous. It is easy erring, but
dangerous in this point. Hence this Article did so reign in the hearts of those
Worthies, that they used all diligence to keep this Fountain pure, greatly
fearing the posterity to come, would be negligent herein. Now as for the means
how we are justified; they did not only learn it out of the Scriptures, which
peculiarly appropriate this to Faith, and not to any other particular grace;
but experimentally and practically out of their own hearts; God suffering them
to be greatly exercised, and tempted about his favor, and to be often in the
deepes, not seeing the Sun for many days, that so Justification by Faith
alone, might be the more confirmed unto them, and they have the witness of this
Doctrine in themselves. And although it be true, that the Protestant Writers in
this Controversy, did chiefly militate against the merit and causality of
Works in Justification then asserted by the Papists: Yet it is plain, that
thereby also they did exclude their Conditionality also, as to the Act of
Justification. Cathol. Refor. Controv. 4. Cap. 1.
Hence Perkins (quantus vir?) says, Fides est unicum and solum illud
instrumentum, etc. Faith is the alone and only instrument, wrought by the
Spirit of God in the heart of a man, whereby he lays hold on Christ, applying
his righteousness to himself, which neither Hope or Charity, or any other grace
can do. And whereas he had granted, in the ensuing Discourse, that these graces
were present at Jnstification, but doing nothing to it, but Faith does all: As
the head is present to the eye when it sees, yet it is the eye alone that
sees. Bishop his Adversary by scorn, calls this a worthy piece of
Philosophy, and labors to invalidate it; but the learned Abbot his
Defendant, is large in clearing of this Truth, distinguishing of a separation,
Real and Mental; and that again into Negative and Privative, declaring that
Faith, though not negatively considered, excluding other graces, yet
privatively abstracted from the consideration of them, is said to justify; I
would refer the Reader to those solid and excellent Writers in this point.
Perkins his Reason for Justification by Faith alone, is very pregnant, from
Joh. 3. 14. where believing in Christ for eternal life, is compared to
beholding of the Serpent that Moses lifted up in the Wilderness. Now as it was
mere seeing, and no working that did heal the wounded Israelite, so it is mere
believing, and no other grace that makes us partakers of this Spiritual
Privilege. Exam. Council. Trid. de fide Justific.
Chemnitius also giving Reasons why the Protestants use the word sola, of Faith
in Justification, makes one to be, that merits and dignity may be excluded
from our works, and all attributed to grace only. But another ut ostendatur
medium seu organon applicationis, for not by Works, but Faith alone, is the
Promise received. It is clear then, that our former Divines, though they
principally aimed at the excluding of the merit of Works, yet did also thereby
shut out their conditionality; because they make Faith the only applicativum
medium, and because they deny other graces to have any such receptive power.
For when the Papists urge other graces, as Love, etc. they answer, that these
do consist in extramittendo, Faith in intus recipiendo. And lastly, because
they make them only qualifications of the subjects, and the effects, or
discoveries of true Faith; Insomuch, that we never read in Scripture, or (as I
know of) in any sound Author, that we are justified by repentance, or by love.

Neither is this Justification by Faith alone, Prop. 2.
excluding the Conditionality of Works, to be applied to our Justification at
first only, but as continued; so that from first to last, we are justified all
along by Faith. Although therefore, the learned Brother does often fly to this
Sanctuary (and if this fall to the ground, all his superstructure tumbleth with
it) yet it is clear by Scripture, Justification begun and continued, is by
Faith alone. Hence the Apostle, arguing in this very matter, brings that text:
The just shall live by Faith, Gal. 3. 11. which belongs to the whole course of
our life, respectively to Justification; and when the Apostle says, Romans 5.
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Would it not be irrational,
to limit it only to our Justification at first? Is not the righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith? Romans 1. 17. Not from Faith to Works: Sex.
sessiois. Antidot.
See Calvin proving non minus Justitiae complementum, quam initium fidei
tribuendum esse. So that our Justification is by Faith to Faith, not by Faith
to Works.

If my judgment were for Justification by Works, Prop. 3.
as a condition thereof, as well as Faith, I should think it my duty, both in
Preaching and Printing, as occasion serves, to persuade the forbearing of the
word Sola, when we say Faith Justifies: For if God has appointed Works, as
well as Faith, how dare any man presume to say Faith alone. And thus we must
receive the moderating advice of Cassander, who says; Multis eruditis, and
piis viris satius videtur and in concionibus popularibus vox illa (Sola)
praetermittatur.

I can grant, Prop. 4.
that we are justified by Faith, as it is an instrument appointed by God, and
as it is a condition; provided the conditionality of it be limited to the
receptive Office of Faith, and Gods designment thereunto: But it cannot be an
instrument applying, and a condition in the sense, my Reverend Brother contends
for. When we say, Faith Justifies as an applying means, then Christ and his
Grace, is considered as donum oblatum; Faith being the hand that receives this
Treasure. But when it Justifies as a condition, in the sense asserted, it must
be considered ut opus praestitum; whereby the Covenant is made good to us,
which makes two distinct kinds of Justification; which latter differs from
the Popish way only, ut magis and minus. They make Works merits and Causes: he
Conditions, whereas not only causality, but conditionality, does overthrow the
alone Justification by Faith, and introduces another way of Justification,
then by application alone. Or if the learned Brother, will make Works a
condition of Justification, when Faith alone does begin and continue it, he
will be necessarily involved in a contradiction. In what a sense I make Faith a
Passive Instrument (but supernatural) I have in my former Treatise clearly
explained, and so need not repeat it here again.

It is no Contradiction to exclude Works form a Conditionality, Prop. 5.
as to the Act of Justification, and yet to affirm them requisite necessarily
in the Subject Justified. I wonder at the wilfulness in some, who accuse them
as a contradiction, when Protestant Writers do a thousand times over illustrate
this, by diverse Similitudes. Because Repentance is required as well as Faith,
must their office and work be confounded? Must all they be Conditions?
Certainly, it is not Repentance, but Faith, that receives the pardon: Yet
Repentance qualifieth the Subject, and denotes it capable of it* Is
Sanctification a Condition of Justification, because they are inseparable one
from another?

That distinction of Faith justifying, Prop. 6.
quae viva, but not qua viva, which IS lively and working, but not AS lively
and working; is not trifling as the Remonstrants say, nor is there any cheat in
it. Most of the Fundamentals of Religion, are distinguished from confining
errors, by such distinctions. If a man say, Christus qui Deus mortuus est,
says true; but if he should say, Qua Deus, would he not speak blasphemy? And
this I bring in the rather, because there are some who affect, and glory in a
moderating way, thinking the Papists and Protestants do not so Fundamentally
differ in the Point of Justification, but that they may be reconciled; whereas
our learned Worthies, at first declared, that if the Romanists and we differed
in no other point but this, this were enough to have no Communion with them.
Spalatensis, one of the unhappy Catholic Moderators; writing of the
Protestants, who affirm, that Faith alone Justifies, yet such a Faith as is
lively, and works by love, so that although Faith Justifies, yet other
graces are present, though not proximely attingent of Justification, Ecce
(says he) Formalitates Theologicas; adding that the Romanists may grant to the
Reformed, that the dispositions to Justification are not merits. And again, the
Reformed grant to the Romanists, that by these dispositions, being joined with
Faith, Justification is acquired not from merit, but Divine mercy alone. It is
true, he declares his own notion, how Faith Justifies alone, viz. Absque
necessitate ullius alterius humanae positivae actionis, non tamen absque
negativa illa dispositione non faciendi quicquam quod sit a Deo vetitum. But in
the protract of his Discourse, he makes our differences herein to be pura
quaedam metaphysicalia ad salutem nihil necessaria, Spalat. de Repub. Eccl.
lib. 7. cap 11.
sed Galaticamur plane fratres, as Tertullian of old. There is a propensity in
all to Galatize, to join Faith and Works under some notion or other, as to our
Justification; whereas the Apostle makes an immediatie opposition between
them; not in the person Justified, but as to the manner of Justification. The
learned Brother alleges a place out of Doctor Twisse, in the title page, with
a signal accent upon it. The words are ( Verum in diverso genere ad justitiam
Dei refertur Christi satisfactio, and fides nostra; Christi satisfactio ad
eandem refertur per modum meriti and condignitatis; nostra vero fides ad eandem
refertur per modum congruae dispositionis.) Who would not think by this
passage, thus barely quoted, that the Doctor was speaking of Justification,
that Christ's satisfaction is meritorious of it, and our Faith a congruous
disposition to it. But my Brothers oversight is very great in this allegation;
for the learned Twisse is there speaking, of Gods Justice and Mercy, tempered
together in Election; taken terminative, as it effectually comprehends
Salvation. Therefore he said before, Vindic. Great. lib. 1. pars tertia. vol.
May. page 218.
Electionem ad salutem non fieri sine intuitu miseriae nostrae and
satisfactionis Christi, and fidei nostrae, and resipiscentiae, etc. So that his
words oppose Doctor Hammond, and Mr Pierce, with others who odiously charge the
Calvinists, as if they held irrespective Decrees in Election and Reprobation,
either to sin or holiness: Whereas the excellent Doctor shows, that
Salvation, the terminus of Election, is not accomplished without the
satisfaction of Christ, and our Faith and Repentance, as fit dispositions to
Salvation; he does not say to Justification.

The Doctrine of Justification has been greatly polluted of old, Prop. 7.
by Platonicall and Aristoteticall Philosophy: and we must take heed we do not
defile it in a new way, by running to the Civil Law, and deductions from it.
What are Bartolus and Baldus in this point? As Justification is a mercy wholly
revealed in Scripture, and supernaturally vouchsafed, so the Words and Phrases
are observed by the Learned, to be peculiar; as, (...). So that the Scripture
expressions being compared together, will best discover the manner how we are
justified; for it is wholly at Gods appointment, what way he will take therein,
and from them we shall only discover a righteousness of Faith; not of Love, or
any other particular grace. It was the ruin of Socinus; to conclude of the
Truths of Divinity, according to principles of the Civil Law, this made him
deny Christ's satisfaction.

The Discourse of the Apostle James concerning Justification by Works, Prop. 8.
does not at all patrocinate the Reverend Brothers Opinion. For first, It is to
be observed, that the Apostle does not mention any particular grace, but Works
in the general, as externally and visibly practiced. Had the Apostle said,
Abraham was justified not only by Faith, but love, then there had been some
color for his Assertion. And secondly, The expressions used by the Apostle
concerning Justification by Works, comply not with a conditio sine qua non: For
ver. 26. he says, As the body without the spirit is dead, so is faith without
Works. Is the soul a conditio sine qua non of life? Again, ver. 22. By Abraham's
Works, his Faith was made perfect; and his Works did (...) with his Faith. Does
a condition sine qua non (...)? I urge not this as owning the Papists
Expositions of Causality of Works and Merit, only they make not for a conditio
sine qua non. We must take Justification and Faith in another sense, then the
Papists do. When the learned Brother, explicateth that passage of the Apostle,
Faith is dead being alone, after this manner: That Faith is dead, as to the use
and purpose of Justifying; for in it self, it has life according to its
quality still. Aphorisms of Justification page 300.
Adding afterward, that (Works make Faith alive, as to the attainment of its
end of Justification.) Can this be applied to a conditio sine qua non? But the
Discourse swells too big: I have done what I thought sufficient in this
matter. The good Spirit of the Lord so lead us into his Truth, that we may
serve him with one heart, and one way; and wherein we have not yet attained,
reveal such Truths unto us.

A CATALOGUE Of the Chiefest of those Books, as are Printed FOR THOMAS
UNDERHILL.
By Col. Edw. Leigh Esquire.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in Five Books.

The Saints Encouragement in Evil Times.

Critica Sacra, or Observations on all the Radiees or Primitive Hebrew words of
the old Testament, in order Alphabetical.

Critica Sacra, or, Philological and Theological Observations upon all Greek
words of the New Testament, in order Alphabetical.

By Samuel Got Esquire.
Nova Solymae, Librisex, Sive Institutio Christiani.

1. De Pueritia.

2. De Creatione Mundi.

3. De Juventute.

4. De Peccato.

5. De Virili Aetate.

6. De Redemptione Hominis.

Essays concerning Man's true Happiness.

Parabolae Evangelicae Litine redditae Carmine Paraphrastico varii generis.

Morton. His Touchstone of Conversion.

Mr Hezekiah Woodward.
Of Education of Youth, or, The Child's Patrimony.

The Lives and Acts of the good and bad Kings of Judah.

A Treatise of Fear.

A-Thank-offering.

Mr Samuel Fisher.
A Love-Token for Mourners, being two Funeral Sermons with Meditations
preparatory to his own expected Death, in a time and place of great Mortality.

Mr Herbert Palmer and Mr Daniel Cawdry.
A Treatise of the Sabbath, in 4 parts.

Memorials of Godliness and Christianity, in seven Treatises.

1. Of making Religion ones Business, With an Appendix applied to the Calling
of a Minister.

2. The Character of a Christian in Paradoxes.

3. The Character of visible Godliness.

4. Considerations to excite to Watchfulness, and to shake of spiritual
Drowsiness.

5. Remedies against Carelessness.

6. The Soul of Fasting.

7. Brief Rules for daily Conversation, and particular Directions for the
Lord's Day.

His Sermon entitled, The Glass of Gods Providence toward his faithful ones.

His Sermon entitled, The duty and Honors of Church-Rest.

Mr William Barton.
His Psalms.

His Catalogue of Sins and Duties, implied in each Commandment, in verse. Mr
Vicars Chronicle in four parts.

Mr Samuel Clark.
A general Martyrology, or, A History of all the great Persecutions that have
been in the world to this time. Together with the Lives of many eminent Modern
Divines.

His Sermon at the Warwickshire men's Feast, entitled, Christian God fellowship.

Mr Kings Marriage of the Lamb.

Mr Shorts Theological Poems.

The French Alphabet.

Jus Divinum Ministerii, by the Provincial-Assemly of London.

Mr Thomas Blake.
His Answer to Blackwood, of Baptism.

Birth-Priviledge.

Mr Cook His Font uncovered.

Dr John Wallis His explanation of the Assemblies Catechism.

(...) Austin's Catechism.

(...) Vicar's Catechism.

Mr John Pagit's Defense of Church Government, by Presbyterial, Classical and
Synodal Assemblies.

Mr Tho Paget, A Demonstration of Family Duties.

Mr Anthony Burgess.
Vindiciae Legis, or, A Vindication of the Law and Covenants, from the Errors
of Papists, Socinians and Antinomians.

A Treatise of Justification, in two Parts.

Spiritual Refining* Part 1. or, A Treatise of Grace and Assurance? Hand^ling
the Doctrine of Assurance, the Use of Signs in Self examination; how true
Graces may be distinguished from counterfeit, several true Signs of Grace, and
many false ones; The Nature of Grace under diverse Scripture Notions, viz.
Regeneration, the New Creature, the Heart of Flesh, Vocation, Sanctification,
etc.

Spiritual Refining, the Second Part, or, A Treatise of Sin, with its Causes,
Differences, Mitigations, and Aggravations, specially of the Deceitfulness of
the Heart, of Presumptious and Reigning Sins, and of Hypocrisy and Formality
in Religion. All tending to unmask Counterfeit Christians, Terrify the
ungodly, Comfort doubting Saints, Humble man, and Exalt the Grace of God.

His CXLV. Sermons upon the whole 17th Chapter of St John, being Christ's Prayer
before his Passion.

The Difficulty of, and Encourage^^^^ to Reformation, a Sermon upon Mark. 1.
verse. 2, 4. before the House of Commons.

A Sermon before the Court Marshal. Psalm. 106 30, 31.

The Magistrates Commission, upon Romans 13. 4. at the Election of a Lord Mayor.

Romes Cruelty and Apostasy, upon Revel. 19. 2. preached before the House of
Commons on the 5th of November.

The Reformation of the Church to be endeavored more then the Commonwealth,
upon Judge. 6. 27. 28, 29. preached before the House of Lords.

Public Affections, pressed upon Numb. 11. 12. before the House of Commons.

Self judging, in order to the Sacrament, with a Sermon of the Day of Judgment.

A Treatise of Original Sin.

Mr Richard Baxter.
Plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism.

The Right Method for getting and keeping Spiritual Peace and Comfort.

The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in four Parts.

1. The Spirits Intrinsic witness to the truth of Christianity, with a
Determination of this Question, Whether the Miracles of Christ and hic Apostles
do oblige those to believe, who never saw them?

2. The Spirits Internal witness of the truth of Christianity.

3. A Treatise of the Sin against the holy Ghost.

4. The Arrogance of Reason against Divine Revelation repressed.

The Christian-Concord, or, The Agreement of the Associated Ministers of
Worcestershire, with Mr Baxters Explication of it.

A Defense of the Worcestershire Petition for the Ministry and Maintenace.

The Quakers Catechism.

An Apology against Mr Blake, Dr Kendal, Mr Lodovicus Molineus, Mr Aires, and
Mr Crandon.

His Confession of Faith.

The Saints Everlasting Rest.

The safe Religion, a piece against Popery.

Hi^ ^^esent Thoughts about Perseveran^*

(...) Practice of Godliness.

Mr Langly.
His Catechi^^ (...)

A Treatise (...)

Dr Teate. His (...) at the Funeral of Sr. Charles Coo^.

Mr Dury. The desires of foreign Divines, of a Body of Divinity from English
Divines, with an Essay of a Model.


