THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT OVT OF ENGLAND TO AN AMBASSADOR in FRANCE for the
KING of SPAIN, declaring the State of ENGLAND contrary to the opinion of Don
Bernardin, and of all his partisans Spaniards and others.

Whereunto are adjoined certain Advertisements, concerning the losses and
distresses happened to the Spanish Navy, as well in fight with the English
Navy in the narrow Seas of England; as also by tempests and contrary winds,
upon the West and North coasts of Ireland, in their return from the Northern
Isles beyond Scotland.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller dwelling in Blackfriars. 1641.

The Printer to the Reader.
ALthough it be well known, that neither the first writers of these Letters now
by me printed, nor yet the Spaniard Don Bernardin to whom they are directed had
any desire to hear of any good success to the State of England: as may
appear in the writer, by showing himself grieved, to make any good report of
England, other then of mere necessity he was urged: And in Don Bernardin, who
was so impudent, or at the least, so blindly rash, as to disperse in print,
both in French, Italian and Spanish, most false reports of a victory had by the
Spaniards, even when the victory was notable on the part of England, and the
Spanish vanquished; yet whilst I was occupied in the printing heerof, a good
time after the Letters were sent into France, there came to this City certain
knowledge, to all our great comfort, of sundry happy Accidents, to the
diminution of our mortal enemies in their famous Fleet, that was driven out of
our Seas about the last of July, 1588 toward the farthermost North parts of
Scotland. Wherefore I have thought it not amiss to join the same to this
Letter of Don Bernardin, that he may beware not to be so hasty of himself, nor
yet to permit one Capella, who is his common sower of reports to write these
false things for truths.

The particularities whereof are these. The Fleet was by tempest driven beyond
the Isles of Orknay, about the first of August, 1588. the place being above
threescore degrees from the North Pole: an unaccustomed place for the young
Gallants of Spain, that never had felt storms on the Sea, or cold weather in
August. And about those North Islands, their Mariners and Soldiers died daily
by multitudes; as by their bodies cast on land did appear. And after twenty
days or more, having spent their time in miseries, they being desirous to
return home to Spain, sailed very far Southwestward into the Ocean to
recover Spain. But the Almighty God, who always avengeth the cause of his
afflicted people which put their confidence in him, and brings down his
enemies that exalt themselves with pride to the Heavens, ordered the winds to
be so violently contrarious to this proud Navy, as it was with force
dissevered on the high Seas West upon Ireland: and so a great number of them,
driven into sundry dangerous bays, and upon rocks, all along the West and
North parts of Ireland, in sundry places distant above an hundred miles
asunder, and there cast away, some sunk, some broken, some run on sands, some
burned by the Spaniards themselves.

As in the North part of Ireland toward Scotland, betwixt the two rivers of
Loughfo^le and Lough Swilley, nine were driven to land, and many of them
broken, and the Spaniards forced to come to land for succor amongst the wild
Irish.

In another place, twenty miles South-west from thence, in a Bay called
Calbeggy, three other ships driven also upon rocks. In another place
Southward, being a Bay called the Borreys, twenty miles North from G^llowey
belonging to the Earl of Ormond, one special great Ship of a thousand tun,
with fifty brass pieces and four Cannons was sunk, and all the people
drowned saving sixteen: who by their apparel, as it is advertised out of
Ireland, seem to be persons of great estimation.

Then to come more to the Southward, thirty miles upon the coasts of Thomond,
North from the river Shennan, two or three more perished, whereof one was burned
by the Spaniards themselves and so driven to the shore: another was of S.
Sebastians, wherein were three hundred men, who were also all drowned saving
threescore. A third Ship with all her lading was cast away at a place called
Breckan.

In another place before Sir Tirlogh Obrynes house, there was also another great
Ship lost, supposed to be a Galliasse These losses above mentioned, were
betwixt the fifth and tenth of September, as was advertised from sundry places
out of Ireland: so as by account, from the one and twentieth of July, when this
Navy was first beaten with the Navy of England, until the tenth of September,
being the space of seven weeks and more, it is most likely that the said Navy
had never good day nor night

Of the rest of the Navy, report is also made that many of them have been
seen, lying of and on upon the coast of Ireland, tossed with the winds, in
such sort as it is also doubted, that many of them shall hardly recover Spain,
if they be so weakened with lack of victuals and Mariners, as part of their
companies that were left on land do lamentably report. These accidents I
thought good to add to the printed Copies of the Letters of Don Bernardin,
that he may see how God does favor the just cause of that gracious Queen, in
showing his anger toward those proud boasting enemies of Christian peace, as
the whole world, from Rome to the uttermost parts of Christendom may see, that
she and her Realm, professing the Gospel of his son Christ were kept and
defended, as the words of the Psalm are, Under the shadow of his wings from
the face of the wicked that sought to afflict her, and compass her round about
to take away her soul: Which I doubt not, by thankfulness yielded by her
Majesty and her whole Realm, will always continue.

The 9. of October. 1588.
The Copy of a Letter sent out of ENGLAND to an Ambassador in FRANCE for the
Kings of SPAIN.
MY Lord Ambassador, though at the time of my last large writing to you of the
state of this country, and of our long desired expectation of succors
promised, I did not think to have had such a sorrowful occasion of any second
writing, as now I have of alamentable change of matters of estate here; yet I
cannot forbear (though it be with as many sighs as lines) to advertise you of
the truth of our miserable condition, as now to me and others of our party the
same appears to be, That by comparing of all things past in hope, with the
present now in despair, your L. who have had the principal mannaging hitherto
of all our causes of long time both here and there in France, betwixt the King
Catholic assisted with the Potentates of the holy League, and all our
country men which have professed obedience to the Church of Rome may now fall
into some new and better consideration, how our state both for our selves at
home, and our brethren abroad, now at this present fallen (as it were) into
utter despair, may be revived and restored to some new hope, with better
assurance of success then has happened hitherto: In what terms England
stands in the opinion of the Catholics.
For which purpose I have thought it necessary to advertise you in what terms
this country now stands, far otherwise then of late, both we at home, and
others abroad did make account of. You know how we have depended in firm hope
of a change of the state of this country by the means of the devout and
earnest incitations of the Popes Holiness, of the King Catholiqve, and of
other Potentates of the Holy League, to take upon them the invasion and
conquest of this Realm, and by your assurances, and firm promises, we were
now of a long season past persuaded, that the King Catholic had taken upon
him the same glorious Act, and thereof from year to year we looked for the
execution, being continually fed and nourished from you to continue our hope,
and sundry times solicited by your earnest requests and persuasions to
encourage our party at home not to waver, as many were disposed by sight of
continual delays, but to be ready to join with the outward forces that
should come for this invasion. Nevertheless the delays and prolongations of
times appointed for the coming of the Kings forces, specially by sea, have
been so many, as until this last spring we were in despair: at what time you
advertised us with great assurance that all the Kings preparations, The Spanish
preparation 3 years in making.
which had bin in making ready these 3 or 4 years together, were now in full
perfection, and without fail would this Summer come into our Seas with such
mighty strength, as no Navy of England, or of Christendom could resist and
abide their force; and for more surety, and for avoiding of all doubts, to make
the intended conquest sure, the same should also have joined to it, the mighty
army which the Duke of Parma had made ready, and kept in readiness in the low
countries all this year past, The Duke of Parmas army in Flanders.
wherewith he should land, and so both by sea and land, this Realm should be
invaded, and a speedy conquest made thereof, to the which were always added
sundry reasons: Whereupon was gathered, that neither by sea, nor by land, there
would be any great resistance found here, No foreign force could invade
England, without a strong party in England. Hope of victory by the Spanish army
with assistance of a party in England this Summer.
but a strong party in this Realm to join with the foreign force. For
otherwise then with such helps to be assuredly had from hence, I know, it was
always doubted that no foreign force could prevail against this Realm, being
(as it is) environed by sea, and notably replenished with more mighty and
stronger people then any country in Christendom. But with the hope of the
landing of these great armies and our assistance in taking part, we here
continued all this year past in assured hope of a full victory, until this
last month. But alas and with a deadly sorrow, we must all at home and abroad,
lament our sudden fall from an immeasurable high joy, to an unmeasurable deep
despair, and that so hastily fallen out, as I may say, we have seen in the
space of eight or nine days in this last month of July, All Spanish hope
fallen in nine days.
which was from the appearance of the Catholic great Navy upon the coast of
England, until it was forced to fly from the coast of Flanders near Callice,
toward the unknown parts of the cold North, all our hopes, all our buildings,
as it now appears but upon an imagined conquest, utterly overthrown, and as
it were with an earthquake, all our castles of Comfort brought to the ground,
which now (it seems) were builded but in the air, or upon waves of the sea,
for they are all perished, all vanished away even from our thoughts.

And herewith I am astonished what I may best think of such a work so long
time in framing, to be so suddenly overthrown, as by no reason could proceed of
man, The Catholics doubt of their cause, seeing the hand of God is against
the army.
or of any earthly power, but only of God. And if so it be (as no body can
otherwise impute this late change and fall from our expected fortune, but to
God Almighty) then surely our case is either dangerous, or doubtful how to
judge thereof, whether we have been these many years in the right or not. Many
English Catholics mislike of the Popes reformation by force.
For I do find, and know that many good and wise men, which of long time have
secretly continued in most earnest devotion to the Popes authority, begin now
to stagger in their minds, and to conceive that this way of reformation
intended by the Popes Holiness is not allowable in the sight of God, by
leaving the ancient course of the Church by Excommunication, which was the
exercise of the spiritual sword, and in place thereof to take the temporal
sword, and put it into a Monarchs hand to invade this Realm with force and
Arms, yea to destroy the Queen thereof, and all her people addicted to her*
which are in very truth now seen by great proof this year, to be in a sort
infinite and invincible, so as some begin to say that this purpose by violence,
by blood, by slaughter, and by conquest, agrees not with Christ's doctrine, nor
the doctrine of S. Peter, or S. Paul. And to tell your Lordship truly, I find
presently a great number of wise and devout people, though they continue in
their former Religion, yet do they secretly condemn this intended reformation
by blood and force. Insomuch as I heard a good divine allege a text of S.
Gregory in these words, Quid de Episcopis qui verberibus timeri volunt Canones
dicunt been paternitas vestra novit, pastores sumus non percussores. Nova enim
est praedicatio, quae verberibus exigit fidem. This sentence I obtained of him,
because it seems to be charitably written. But leaving this authority among
Doctors, I must needs say that in very truth no one thing has done at this
time more hurt to the action, The (...)
then the untimely hasty publishing abroad in this Realm, before this Army of
Spain was ready to come forth to the seas, of sundry things written, and put
in print, and sent into this Realm, to notify to the people, that all the
Realm should be invaded and conquered, that the Queen should be destroyed, all
the Nobility and men of reputation, of honor, and wealth that did obey her,
and would defend her, The hearts of all (...) of people inflamed against the
Spaniards vaunting to conquer the land
or that would withstand the invasion, should be with all their families rooted
out, and their places, their honors, their houses and lands bestowed upon the
conquerors: things universally so odiously taken, as the hearts of all sorts of
people were inflamed; some with ire, some with fear, but all sorts almost
without exception, resolved to venture their lives for the withstanding of all
manner of conquest, wherewith every body can say this Realm was not threatened
these five hundred years and more.

These reports were brought to this Realm with good credit, not in secret but
in public writings and printings, and took deep root in all kind of people of
this land; and indeed was of the more credit, The untimely publication of the
Popes Bull did (...) to the common cause.
first by reason of a new Bull lately published at Rome by the Popes Holiness
(which I have seen) with more severity then others of his predecessors, whereby
the Queen here was accursed, and pronounced to be deprived of her Crown, and
the invasion and conquest of the Realm committed by the Pope, to the king
Catholic, to execute the same with his armies both by sea and land, and to
take the Crown to himself, or to limit it to such a Potentate as the Pope and
he should name. And secondly, there followed a large explanation of this Bull,
by sending hither a number of English books printed in Antwerp, even when the
Navy of Spain was daily looked for, Cardinal Allens books have done much hurt
to the intended invasion and conquest.
the original whereof was written by the reverend father Cardinal Allen in
April last, called in his own writing the Cardinal of England, which book
was so violently, sharply, and bitterly written, yea (say the adversaries) so
arrogantly, falsely, and scandalously, against the person of the Queen, against
her father King Henry the eight, against all her Nobility, and Council, as in
very truth I was heartily sorry to perceive so many good men of our own
Religion offended therewith, in that there should be found in one accounted a
Father of the Church, who was also a born subject of this Crown (though by the
adversaries reported to be very basely borne) such soul, vile, irreverent, and
violent speeches, such irefull and bloody threatenings, of a Queen, of a
Nobility, yea of the whole people of his own nation.

Sorry, The Cardinals rash and violent writing misliked by the Catholics.
and most sorry I am to report the general evil conceit of these unordinate
and unadvised proceedings of this Cardinal, of whose rash choice to such a
place, the world speakerh strangely, as though he came to it through corruption
of the Popes Sister, without liking of the College of Cardinals, where
otherwise the blessed intention of our holy Father, and the desire also of the
said Cardinal, might without such fatal bloody premonitions, and threatenings
of future invasions and conquests by the Catholic Kings noble forces, have
taken better place.

There was also to add the more credit to these terrible prognestications, The
multitude of books published to show the greatness of the Spanish Navy, did
also hurt.
such kind of other books printed in Spain and translated into French (as it
is said by your Lordship) containing particular long descriptions, and
catalogues of Armados of Castile, of Andalouzia, of Biscaye, of Guipusque, of
Portingall, of Naples, of Sicil, of Ragusa, and other countries of the Levant,
with a mass of all kind of provisions, beyond measure, for the said Armados,
sufficient in estimation, to be able to make conquest of many kingdoms or
countries. And one great Argument is published by the adversaries to stir up
the minds of the Nobility of England against the Spaniards, which is very
maliciously invented, to show the intention of the conquest, not only of
England, but of the whole Isle of Britain, moving all men specially to mark
by the description of the Armado, that there are specially named such a number
of Noblemen, as Princes, Marquises, Condes, and Dons, that are called
Adventurers, without any office or pay, and such another number also of men
with great titles of honor, and many of them named Captains and, Alferez,
without office, but yet in sold, and therefore called Entertenidos, as all those
being for no service in the Armada may be well presumed (say they) to have come
to have possessed the rooms of all the Noblemen in England and Scotland, and
this fiction has taken more place then it is worth. And though these armies
were indeed exceeding great and mighty, yet they were so amplified beyond all
measure in these books, as in no preparation of Christendom in former times
against the Sarracins or Turks could be greater. ^he fore warnings of the (...)
greatness caused the Queen to put all her Realm in force beyond all (...).
By this means this Queen and her Realm, being thus forewarned and
terrified, took occasion with the aid of her people, being not only firmly (as
she was persuaded) devoted to her, but thoroughly irritated, to stir up their
whole forces for their defense against such prognosticated conquests, as in a
very short time all her whole Realm and every corner were speedily furnished
with armed people on horseback, and on foot, and those continually trained,
exercised, and put into bands, in warlike manner, as in no age ever was before
in this Realm. Here was no soaring of money to provide horse, armor, weapon,
powder, and all necessaries, no not want of provision of Pyoners, carriages,
and victuals in every County of the Realm, without exception, to attend upon
the Armies. And to this general furniture every man voluntarily offered, very
many their service personally without wages, others money for armor and
weapons, and to wage soldiers, a matter strange and never the like heard of in
this Realm or else where. And this general reason moved all men to large
contributions, that to withstand a conquest where all should be lost, there was
no time to spare a portion.

The numbers made ready in the Realm I cannot affirm of mine own knowledge,
but I have heard it reported, when I was grieved to think the same to be so
true, that there was through England no quarter, The armies made ready in
England in every quarter of the Realm.
East, West, North and South, but all concurred in one mind to be in readiness
to serve for the Realm: And that some one country was able to make a
sufficient army of twenty thousand men fit to fight, and fifteen thousand of
them well armed and weaponed; and in some countries the number of forty
thousand able men.

The maritine countries from Cornowall, The maritine Counties provided at
landing pl^ces with 20000 men
all along the Southside of England, to Kent, and from Kent Eastward, by Essex,
Suffolk, and Norfolk to Lincolne-shire (which countries with their havens
were well described unto you in perfect Plots, when Francis Throgmorton first
did treat with your L. about the same) were so furnished of men of war, both of
themselves, and with resort of aid from their next Shires, as there was no
place to be doubted for landing of any foreign forces, but there were within
eight and forty hours to come to the place above twenty thousand fighting men
on horseback and on foot, with field ordinance, victuals, pioners and
carriages, and all those governed by the principal Noblemen of the countries,
and reduced under Captains of knowledge.

And one thing I heard of, that was very politiquely ordered and executed at
this time, as of many late years was not used; that as the leaders and
officers of the particular Bands were men of experience in the wars: so to
make the Bands strong and constant, All the bands were under the principal
Knights of the Realm, compounded of the most mighty men being their tenant,
and servants.
choice was made of the principal Knights of all countries to bring their
tenants to the field, being men of strength, and landed, and of wealth: whereby
all the forces so compounded were of a resolute disposition to stick to their
Lords and Chieftaines, and the Chieftaines to trust to their own tenants. And
to remember one strange speech that I heard spoken may be marvelled at, but it
was avowed to me for a truth, A strange report of the wealth of a hand of
soldiers.
that one gentleman in Kent had a band of 150 footmen, which were worth in
goods above 150000 pounds sterling, besides their lands: such men would fight
stoutly before they would have lost their goods, and by likelihood at this
time, many other bands were made of such principal men, both of wealth and
strength. Of these things I am sorry to have cause to write in this sort; but
because you may see how heretofore you have been deceived with advertisements
of many, which had no proof to know the truth thereof, and so I confess my
self in some things to have erred, namely, in imagining that whenever any
foreign power should be seen ready to land in any part of this Realm, there
would have bin found but a small number resolute to withstand the same, or to
defend the Queen; but that the same would have been very unable for the (...),
untrained, raw, and ignorant in all warlike actions, without (...) armor and
weapons; and that also the Noblemen and (...) that were in this Realm of our
religion, (...) you know we made account when you were here in England of (...)
(...)
although many of them be dead since that time, but at this time there are not
so many tens, as we accounted hundreds, whom we thought would have showed (...)
like men of courage for our common cause, and would have suddenly surprised the
houses, families, and strength of the heretics and adversaries.

But now, such is our calamity, that it has pleased God, as I think, for our
sins, or else for confounding of our bold opinions, and presumptions of our
own strength, to put in the hearts of all persons here, one like mind and
courage to withstand the intended invasion, as well in such as we accounted
Catholics, as also in the heretics: so as it has appeared manifestly that
for all earnest proceeding for arming, and for contributions of money, and for
all other warlike actions, there was no difference to be seen betwixt the
Catholic and the heretic. A consent and concurrence of Papist andProtestant
to withstand the conquest.
But in this case to withstand the threatened conquest, yea to defend the
person of the Queen, there appeared such a sympathy, concourse, and consent of
all sorts of persons, without respect of Religion, as they all appeared to be
ready to fight against all strangers, as it were with one heart and one body.
And though some few principal Gentlemen, of whom heretofore you have had the
names in such Catalogues of Catholics as you have bin acquainted withal,
were lately upon the report of the coming out of the army to the seas, sent to
the Isle of Ely, there to remain restrained of their former liberty during the
expectation of this intended invasion; yet it has appeared that they were not
so restrained for any doubt that they would with their powers have assisted our
army, but only thereby to make it known to all our friends and contrymen
in Spain and Handers, yea even to your self (for so I heard it spoken, as
accounting you to have bin the most principal Author and perswader of this
action) that there should be no hope to have any of them, or of their friends,
to assist these great armies. And in very truth, I see now whosoever of our
friends in Spain, or in Handers, or elsewhere, made any such account of any
aid against the queen, or against her party here, The gentlemen Recus^^ in
(...) offer to adventure their lives against all invasions whatsover, without
respect of Pope or other Potentate.
they should have bin deceived if the army had offered to have landed. For I my
self have heard that the best of those that were sent to Ely did make offers,
yea by their letters to the Council here, signed with their hands, that they
would adventure their lives in defense of the queen, whom they named their
undoubted Sovereign Lady and Queen, against all foreign forces, though the
same were sent from the Pope, or by his commandment: Yea diverse of them did
offer that in this quarrel of invading of the Realm with strangers they would
present their own bodies in the foremost ranks with their contrymen
against all strangers. Whereupon I heard also by a secret friend of mine in the
Court, that it was once in some towardness of resolution amongst the
Counselors, that they should have bin returned and put to their former
liberty. But the heat of the war being kindled with the knowledge of the Kings
Armado, being at that time come to the Groigne, and the Duke of Parmas
readiness with so great an army and shipping in Handers, daily looked for to
land in England, yea to come to London, and a general murmur of the people
against all such Recusants of reputation, was the cause of the staying of these
Gentlemen at Ely, notwithstanding their offers of their service to the Queen:
And so they do remain in the Bishops palace there, with fruition of large
walks about the same, altogether without any imprisonment, other then that they
are not suffered to depart into the town or country; and yet for their
Religion, The Recusants are not put in danger of their lives for their
Religion, but are fined at sums of money.
I think surely they do, and will remain constant to the obedience of the
Church of Rome; for the which nevertheless they are not impeached to any
danger of their lives, but only charged with a penalty of money, because they
will not come to the Churches, whereby, by the law., a portion of their revenue
is allotted to the Queen, and the rest left to the maintenance of them, their
wives and children.

By which kind of proceedings our adversaries here do pretend that both these
Gentlemen, and all other of their qualities are favorably used, that they are
not pursued to death for their Religion, as they say it was used in Queen
Mary's time, and as it is daily used (is they say) most rigorously and
barbarously in Spain against the Englishmen that come thither, only in trade
of merchandise. And yet I and others sometimes privately speaking with such our
adversaries, as we think are not maliciously bent to have men prosecuted to
death only for their Religion (for to say the truth, and as the proverb is,
not to belie the Devil, very many of our Contraries are in that point not
uncharitable) we do object to them the executions by cruel torments, and
deaths of very many, both here about London, and other parts of the Realm,
whom we account as Martyrs, in that they do witness by their death their
obedience to the Pope, and the Catholic Church of Rome.

To which, The Jesuits are not executed for Religion but for treasons.
these our adversaries, pretending some small drops of charity do answer us,
That no execution has bin of any, to their knowledge, for their Religion, or
for profession thereof; but for that they which have been executed, have bin
found to have wandered in the Realm secretly, and in a disguised manner, which
the adversaries scornfully term as ruffians, The Seminaries for the most part
come disguised like Russians.
with feathers and all ornaments of light colored apparel, like to the
fashion of Courtiers, and do use many means to entice all people, with whom
they dare adventure to speak, not only to be reconciled to the Pope, and
Church of Rome, but to induce them by vows and oaths to renounce their
obedience to the Queen; to deny her to be their Sovereign, and themselves to
be discharged of their Allegiance; and to repute all Magistrates under her to
be unlawful, and in conscience not to be obeyed, with many more such matters
(which I nevertheless count to be very vain calumniations) tending to make the
facts of all such holy Priests as are sent with Commission to win men's souls,
to be direct treasons against the Queen and the state of the Realm.

These Defenders of these judgments and executions, contend, and do most
earnestly maintain, that all such Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries and others, so
persuading the people against the Queen, the Laws, and the Government, and
state of the Realm, and all others that are so persuaded by them, are manifest
traitors; and so they say that their enditemonts, and all process of law
extended and pursued against them, do manifestly declare the same. Wherein
these our adversaries do sometimes for maintenance of their arguments, show
the very copies of their enditements and judgments, wherein there is no
mention made of charging them with their Religion, but that they have attempted
to persuade the Queens subjects to forsake their Allegiance, and consequently
to be rebels to their Queen and Sovereign.

In this sort, these men for their advantage, do at all times, with these and
many like earnest arguments maintain their proceedings against the holy
Priests and Jesuits that have suffered death for their conscience, as just and
necessary. And though, where I and others may reply without peril to our
selves (as surely in some small companies we may, using modest words) we object
the confession of the Catholic faith by the parties at their death, and that
with great constancy, which our adversaries cannot deny, Babington suffered for
his treasons voluntarily confessed not for Religion, though at his death he
professed the Roman Religion.
so as it may seem they dye for their Religion; yet is it on the other part
against us alleged, and maintained, that they are neither endited, condemned,
nor executed for their Religion, or for offering of themselves to die for their
Religion, but only for their former treasons in conspiring against the Queen
and state of the Realm: no otherwise then of late time Babington and all his
Accomplices, who were condemned for their attempt to have raised war in the
Realm, and to have murdered the Queen, and to have set up the Q. of Scots, all
which the said Babington and all his accomplices voluntarily confessed, and were
condemned and executed, only for those their great treasons; and yet diverse of
them at the place of their execution, did in like manner (as these Priests and
Jesuits use to do) make confession of their Catholic faith, with offer to
dye for the same; and yet (say our adversaries) it ought not to be affirmed,
that Babington and his accomplices were put to death for Religion, but for their
treasons.

And for further maintenance of the colored arguments wherewith I, and others
my good, faithful, and Catholic brethren are often troubled how to answer
them, it is alleged that the great number of gentlemen, and gentlewomen, ye,
some of honorable calling, and of other meaner degrees, are known manifestly
to be of a contrary Religion to the Laws of the Realm, A multitude of
gentlemen suspected to be Papists, yet never endangered of their lives.
both near the Court and far often, and yet they are never pursued by any form
of Law to put their lives in danger, or questioned, or imprisoned, for their
opinions in Religion, whereby to bring them in any danger. Only such as are
presented or complained of by the Parishioners where they dwell, for never
coming to any Church by the space of certain months in a whole year, are
thereof indicted, and afterward being called to answer thereto, if they can show
no such lawful excuse as the Law has provided, they are then condemned to pay
a penalty out of their goods and lands, if they have any, and not otherwise
punished, nor yet by inquisition any of them examined of their faith. But yet
say these defendors, if they show themselves by their open deeds and facts to
be reconciled from their allegiance and obedience to the queen, and that they
will therein persist, then they are therewith charged and punished according to
the Laws therefore provided.

These arguments in their defense I do not repeat as allowing of them, but
yet surely they do move me, and some others that are wife, to think, that
indeed the rashness of diverse coming secretly into the Realm, and professing
themselves to be Priests, Many of the Priests that are sent into the Realm,
are young rash, and of lewd life.
many of them being both very young, unlearned, and of light behavior, has
done great harm to the goodness of our common cause; and if they and such
others could have temperately and secretly instructed the people, and used more
circumspection in their own living and behavior, there would have bin a
greater increase of numbers persuaded in conscience to have joined with us in
our profession. Whereof I am the bolder to write to you my Lord, that you may
confer with our contrymen, that have access unto you, and that they also
may deal with the Fathers of the Jesuits, that more care and choice be had of
such English men as are hereafter to be sent into England, and not to send
every young man that has more boldness, then learning and temperance, for such
a function.

In the former part of this my declaration to you of the universal concurrence
of all men of value, wealth and strength, in the body of the Realm, to serve
and defend the Queen and the Realm. A great strength of the English Navy, by
the ships of the Port Towns that did serve without wages.
I forgot to report unto you the great numbers of Ships of the subjects of the
Realm; as of London, and other Port Towns, and Cities, that voluntarily this
year were armed, able to make a full Navy of themselves for an army, and all
at the proper costs of the Burgesses, for certain months, with men, victual,
and munition, which did join with the Queens own Navy all this Summer, a
thing never in any former age heard of, otherwise then that such ships were
always hired, waged, and victualled by the Kings of the Realm, which argued to
the grief of me and some others a most vehement and unaccustomed affection and
devotion in the Cities and Port Towns, such as they showed themselves therein
ready to fight, as it had been, pro aris and focis.

Of the number and strength of the Queens own ships of war, I think you have
been sufficiently informed many times heretofore. But yet I will make you a
true report of the state of them this present Summer, what I have credibly
heard thereof, because I have been very sorry to hear how you and others have
been therein abused: And that not only in this matter of the Queens ships, but
in some other things also of late, whereof some part has been here by very
many, maliciously, and in common speeches imputed to your own invention and
publication, whereof in a few words I will make some digression before I shall
show the estate of the Queens Navy.

In this Summer past, Two notable lies printed in Paris, and imputed to Don
Bernardia Mendoza.
there was printed in Paris by your direction (as it was reported) a notable
untruth, which I did see and read, That the King of Scots had besieged
Barwicke, and had won it by assault, and possessed it quietly, whereof no part
was true, nor any cause to imagine the same, though I wish it had so been; but
not for any good will that I now bear to that King, but for the trouble to
this Queen. For in truth there is no good for us to be hoped for from the King
of Scots, howsoever the Scottish Bishops in France have sought to make you
believe otherwise, who is so rooted in the Calvinists Religion, as there is
never hope that he can be recovered to the Church of Rome; and so I think you
are of late duly informed, and by his violent actions against diverse
Catholics, and against all that favor the Spaniards, may certainly appear.

And likewise another great untruth was lately printed (as your enemies say) by
your direction also in Paris, A most manifest lie printed in Paris, of a
Spanish victory, when it was altogether an English victory.
that now in July last when the Spanish Fleet and English had met and fought
betwixt France and England, the Spaniards had then a great victory, wherein
they had sunk the Lord Admiral of England, with sixteen of the Queens great
ships into the bottom of the Seas, and that all the rest were driven to fly
with the Vice Admiral Francis Drake. Upon these two so notable untruths, which
the adversaries spightfully called Don Bernardin Mendozas mendacia, Mendacia of
Mendoza.
many who honor you, were right sorry, that you should give so hasty credit to
publish the same as (your enemies say) you did: though I have to my power for
clearing of your honor given it out, that these and such like have proceeded
of the lightness of the French, who commonly print more lies then truths, in
such doubtful times; and not of you, whose honor and wisdom I thought would
not be justly touched with so great untruths and lies, considering always, a
small time will discover things that are in facts reported untruly, and
brings the Authors to discredit and infamy. There has been a speech also
reported here, to have proceeded from you in France, that has caused a great
misliking of you in Scotland; which is, that you should in open assembly, and
in a bravery say, that the young King of Scots (whom you called in your
language a boy) had deceived the K. your master; but if the Kings Navy might
prosper against England, the K. of Scots should lose his Crown; and of this
the King of Scots has been advertised out of France, and uses very evil
language of you, which I will not report.

But now to leave this digression, and to return to let you know the truth of
the state of the Queens Navy this Summer. The state of the Navy of England this
Summer.
The same was in the beginning of the year, when the brute was brought of the
readiness of the Kings Armado in Lisbone, and of the army by land upon the
Seacoasts in Flanders, with their shipping, divided into three companies; the
greatest under the charge of Charles L. Haward high Admiral of England, L.
Haward. L. Admiral.
whose father, grandfather, uncles, great unckles, and other of his house,
being of the noble house of the Dukes of Norfolk, had also been high Admirals
before him, whereof both France and Scotland have had proof.

Another company were appointed to remain with the L. Henry Seymour second son
to the Duke of Somerset that was Protector in King Edwards time, L. Hen.
Seymour.
and brother to the Earl of Hartford; and these companies for a time continued
in the narrow seas betwixt England and Flanders, under the charge of the said
high Admiral, to attend on the Duke of Parmas actions.

A third company were armed in the West part of England toward Spain under the
conduct of Sir Francis Drake, Sir Francis Drake
a man by name, and fame known too too well to all Spam, and to the Kings
Indias, and of great reputation in England; and this was compounded, partly of
some of the Queens own ships, and partly of the ships of the West parts.

But after that it was certainly understood that the great Navy of Spain was
ready to come out from Lisbone, and that the fame thereof was blown abroad in
Christendom to be invincible, and so published by books in print: The Queen
and all her Council I am sure (whatsoever good countenance they made) were not
a little perplexed, as looking certainly for a dangerous fight upon the Seas,
and after that for a landing and invasion. Whereupon the Lord Admiral was
commanded to sail with the greatest ships to the West of England toward
Spain to join with Drake, whom he made Vice Admiral, and to continue in the
Seas betwixt France and England, to stop the landing of the Navy of Spain. And
with the Lord Admiral went in certain of the Queens ships, L. Tho. Haward. L.
Sheffeld.
the Lord Thomas Haward second son to the last Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord
Sheffeld, son to the Admirals sister, who is wife to the Queens Ambassador
in France, with a great number of Knights of great livelihood. And at that time
the Lord Henry Seymour was left with a good number of ships in the narrow Seas,
upon the coast of Flanders to attend on the Duke of Parma.

Whilst these two Navies were thus divided, I confess to you that I and others
of our part secrerly made a full account that none of all these English ships
durst abide the sight of the Armado of Spain; or if they would abide any
sight, yet they should all be sunk at the first encounter, For such constant
opinion we had conceived by the reports of the world, that the greatness and
the number of the ships, and the army of Spain, being the chosen vessel of
all the Kings Dominions, was so excessive monstrous, beyond all the Navies that
ever had been seen in Christendom (not excepting the Armado at Lepanto) that
no power could abide in their way. But how far deceived we were therein, a very
short time, even the first day, did manifestly to the great dishonor of Spain
discover* For when the Catholic army came to the coast of England, which
indeed the English confess did seem far greater then they looked for, and
that they were astonished with the sight of them, The fight of the English Navy
with the Spanish.
yet the Lord Admiral and Drake, having but only fifty of the English ships
out of the haven of Plimmouth, where the rest remained for a new revictualling,
without tarrying for the rest of the Navy that was in Plimmouth, they did offer
present sight, and furiously pursued the whole Navy of Spain, being above 160
ships: so as the same, with the furious and continual shot of the English one
whole day, The flying away of the Spanish Navy.
fled without any returning. And after, the English Navy being increased to an
hundred great and small, renewed their fight with terrible great shot all the
whole day, gaining always the wind of the Spanish Navy. And as I am sorry to
remember the particularities, which the English have largely written to their
own praise: so to speak all in one word, for nine days together they still
forced them to fly, and destroyed, sunk, and took in three days fight
diverse of the greatest ships, out of which, especially out of the principal
great ship of Andaluzia, and out of the Admiranta of Guipusque, and thirdly out
of the principal great Galliasse of Naples great numbers were brought (beside
many more killed and drowned) to London, and to sundry other Ports of the
Realm, to the great dishonor of Spain, amongst which prisoners were a great
number of Captains both for land and sea. And besides that, which deeply
blemisheth the honor of Spain, The Spaniard prisoners say, that Christ showed
himself a Lutheran in this Summer voyage of the Spanish Navy.
and vexes me at my heart, to consider the inequality of fortune, it is
vaunted by our adversaries, that in all the time of these fights so many days,
the Spaniards did never take, or sink any English ship or boat, or break any
mast, or took any one man prisoner. A matter that indeed these Spaniards which
are taken do marvel at greatly, and chafe thereat: so as some of them in
their anguish of mind let not to say, that in all these fights Christ showed
himself a Lutheran.

And though such speeches be unadvised, and not to be regarded, yet surely it
is most manifest, God showed no favor to the Spanish Navy from the beginning
to the ending.
that in all this voyage from the coming of the Navy out of Lisbone even to
this hour, God did show no favor to ours any one day, as he did continually
to these Lutherans; which, percase, may be done for our good, to correct us, as
putting our trust wholly in our worldly strength, and to the confusion
hereafter of the Lutherans, by putting them up, being his enemies, with
prosperity for a time, to be afterward the cause of their ruin. And amongst
other things reported to the dishonor of the Duke of Medina, who it is said,
was lodged in the bottom of his ship for safety, and to a great touch to the
Commanders of the Spanish Navy, that they never would turn their ships, nor
stay them, to defend any of their own ships that were forced to tarry behind;
Don Pedro de Valdez, Captain General of the Armado of Andaluzia. Hugo de
Moncada, General of the Galliasses of Naples. Diego de Pimentelli, Captain of
the Galleon, named St Matthew.
but suffered diverse to perish, as are good witnesses thereof the three great
vessels: One wherein Don Pedro de Valdez was taken; another Galleon of
Guipusque that was spoiled with fire; and the noble Galliasse wherein Hugo de
Moncada was slain: Of which lack of care by the Duke of Medina, these
Spaniards that are taken give very ill report. The like is said in Zeland by
the Spaniards there, that were saved with Diego de Pimentelli, though the
Galleon wherein he was being beaten with the English shot, and not succored by
the Navy of Spain, did there perish in their coming to Flushing, and so also
did another likewise perish for lack of succor before Ostend.

And now I must needs think that you are stricken with some grief of mind,
or rather with some anger toward me, to hear from me so much of those averse
things, although they are too true; and therefore I also imagine you may be
desirous for your better contentation, to understand what opinions we that are
here have, being thus frustrate of our expected delivery, by the defeat of this
enterprise: whether we do comfort our selves with a conceit that this Action
may be, by any probability, once again renewed this next year, for the
recovery of our lost hope this year, famously spoken of by the number of 88.
and so verified to the loss of all Catholics. Wherein surely for our own
parts, I consider him
as by secret conference I find with many with whom I have secretly of late
upon this unfortunate accident conferred, we cannot judge of any likelihood of
good success for any long time; and if there should any be hoped for, surely
the Sea-forces of the King Catholic must of necessity be more increased, and
better also governed then they were this year. For this we here do consider
that this enterprise of invasion and conquest, was always principally grounded
upon many probable opinions of the evil state of the Realm.

First, 1.
of the weakness of the English Navy; for so you know you were diverse ways
this last year advertised from hence, The three hopes conceived against
England, are now all frustrated.
and so also many of us here did conceive the same, wherein we see by all this
years service with these ships, we did all notably err.

Next, 2.
of a supposed evil contentment of a number of people in this land to serve
the Queen, and her Government, against her enemies.

Lastly, 3.
and most principally, of a great strong party that would be found here in the
favor of us for the Catholic Religion, that should take arms against the
Queen upon the first sight of the Catholic Navy on the coasts of England. Of
all which opinions, settled in good men's minds in manner of judgments, we know
that none in the world did more constantly assure the King thereof then you;
which, as the matters have evil succeeded, may I fear, bring you in danger of
his indignation, although I know you meant very well therein.

And as these three opinions have all failed this year, so I assure you,
though some of ours on that side the Seas may persist in their former opinions
against the experience lately seen (as it is likely they may be forced to do,
to maintain themselves in credit, for continuing their necessary relief from
the Pope, and the King, having no other means to keep them from starving or
begging) yet because I would not have you further deceived by them, who have
not been present in the Realm to see such contrary proofs against all their
conceits, as I and others have done* I will show you a great number of manifest
Arguments, though I am sorry at my heart to remember them, whereby you in your
wisdom (if you be not blinded by others) shall see it most certain, that
these former opinions, for comfort to be had from hence, will prove the next
year as strong against us, and in some part more strong then they proved this
year, if any account shall be made thereof.

First, for the Navy of England, which has this year to the sight of the
world proved to be of great force and value for those Seas, and able to
overmatch in their manner of sight, double to their number of the great
Gallions, Carikes, Galliasses, or Galleys, it is certain that it will be
greatly increased this next year: For I know that within these few days,
bargains are already made, The English Navy will be stronger the next year.
and Impressed of money delivered, and certain sent into the Eastlands, for
great store of all maritine provisions. And as for the increase of the number
of good ships for the Queens proper use, there is already a great quantity of
timber ready, and order given to fell more in November and December next, in
the countries near both to the Sea, and to Thames, to build a number of ships
of war, equal to these whose service was seen this year to have overmatched
the great Armados, and Castles of Spain and Italy. And furthermore, to join
with the Navy of England this year following, not only the Hollanders and
Zelanders, but also ships of Denmark, and other parts of Eastland, will
certainly be had in great numbers, whereof there was none at all required this
year past to ioyn with the Navy of England. Offer of Hollanders and Zelanders
to join with the English Navy.
Only certain Hollanders and Zelanders offered their service (according as
they are bound) in the end of this Summer, since the conflict near Callice, to
join with some of the English Navy in the narrow Seas, to defend the issuing
of the Duke of Parma out of the Ports of Flanders; and in that service at this
time there are above forty and six good ships of war, Justinian Nassan
Admiral of Holland, with 46. ships of war joined to the English Navy, against
the Duke of Parma.
with the Vice Admiral, Justinian of Nassau, a man that agrees too well with
the English Nation, and is a sworn enemy to all Spaniards and Catholics: And
as it is reported for certain, there are sixty more coming out of
North-Holland to the Seas for the same purpose: so as it is to be doubted that
this Realm, this next year, will be double as strong as it was this last
year.

As to the second branch of our hope, Arguments to prove no miscontentment of
the people toward the Queen.
depending upon opinion of some great miscontentment of sundry persons against
the Queen, the proof of the contrary so appeared this year, both of her
actions to maintain the liking of all her people, and of the general earnest
devotion showed to her by all estates, noble and mean, rich and poor, as I
think no Prince christened ever had greater cause of comfort in her people,
which I may judge to breed a pride in her. And to recompense the same, she did
most notably show her self in this time, even when most danger was threatened,
in all her actions toward her people, as careful for their weal, and for the
safety of her Realm, without any special or particular provision, or regard
to her own person, as ever any Prince could do. First, to let her people
understand what care she had to make her Realm strong against in^asion, The
providence of the Queen to make her Realm strong.
she politikely, yea most carefully, by her own frequent directions, caused
her whole Realm to be put in arms, she took account thereof her self by
monthly certificate from such as were made her Lievtenants in every shire of
her Realm; she caused armor, powder, weapon, to be sent to all countries, and
ordnance to all maritine countries: There were also sundry armies described, to
defend every coast of the Sea; and as I heard it reported by some that did know
the secrets of the Court, was importunate with her Council to leave no day
unoccupied, to bring these services to effect, and yet she did still continue
her Commissioners in the Low Countries to treat of peace, which surely she
desired to have obtained, so that she might have had the same with certain
conditions. So as to content her people, she did both treat and desire peace,
and did not in the mean time neglect to make her Realm strong for defense, if
peace could not be gotten. But in the end, when her demands were wholly refused
(whereof we and all Catholics were most glad) and that she understood very
certainly, that the army of the Duke of Parma should come first to destroy the
City of London, she revoked her Commissioners, approached London in person, and
did lie (as it were) in the Suburbs of the same: whereby they of the City took
great comfort, having daily in show and muster of their own ten thousand men
armed, and trained of very able men of the City, and in readiness thirty
thousand more able to fight.

She caused also an army to be brought to incamp near the Sea side, The Queen
being in the army in Essex when most danger was threatened by the enemies in
landing.
upon the river of Thames, betwixt the Sea and the City, 20 miles beneath the
City; and after the army was come thither, she would not by any advise be
stayed, but for comfort of her people, and to show her own magnanimity of
heart (as she said, she would so do though she was a woman) she went to that
army lying betwixt the City and the Sea) under the charge of the Earl of
Leicester, placing her self betwixt the enemy and her City, and there viewed
her army, and passed through it diverse times, lodged in the borders of it,
returned again, and dined in the army: And first, saw the people as they were,
by their countries, lodged and quartered in their several camps, which she
viewed from place to place. Afterward, when they were all reduced into battles,
ready (as it were) to fight with any enemy, she rode round about them, and did
view them curiously, being accompanied only but with the General, and three
or four others attending on her: But yet to show her state, I well marked it,
she had the sword carried before her by the Earl of Ormond.

There she was generally saluted with cries, with shouts, with all tokens of
love, of obedience, of readiness and willingness to fight for her, The
nottable applause of the people to the Queen for her presence in the camp.
as seldom has been seen in a camp and army, considering she was a Queen,
and all tended to show a mavelous concord, in a mutual love betwixt a Queen
and her subjects; and of reverence, and obedience of subjects to a Sovereign:
All which she acquitted with very princely thanks, and good speeches. I could
enlarge this description with many more particularities of mine own sight, for
thither I went, as many others did; and all that day, wandering from place to
place, I never heard any word spoken of her, but in praising her for her
stately person, and princely behavior; and in praying for her life and safety,
and cursing of all her enemies, both traitors, and all Papists, with earnest
desire to venture their lives for her safety.

And besides such particular acclamations, The singing of Psalms by the
English army in the camp.
the whole army in every quarter, did devoutely at certain times sing in her
hearing, in very tunable manner, diverse Psalms put into form of Prayers in
praise of Almighty God, no ways to be misliked, which she greatly commended,
and with very earnest speech thanked God with them. This that I write, you may
be sure, I do not with any comfort but to give you these manifest arguments,
that neither this Queen does discontent her people, nor her people do show
any discontentation in any thing that they be commanded to do for her service,
as heretofore has been imagined. An army provided for the Queen, beside the
army ready to withstand the landing of the enemy.
She had also an army of about forty thousand footmen, and of six thousand
horsemen, under the charge of the Lord Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain, as Lieutenant
of that army, made ready from the Inland parts of the Realm, to be about her
own person, without disarming the maritine counties: so as many marched out of
sundry countries toward her, at the very time that she was in the camp; some
came to the suburbs and towns near London, whom she remaunded to their
countries, because their harvest was at hand, and many of them would not be
countermanded, but still approached onward on their own charges (as they said)
to see her person, and to fight with them that boasted to conquer the Realm.
But though the greatest number of the said soldiers were compelled to return,
yet the Captains, Leaders, and the principal Knights and Gentlemen came to the
Court to offer their service, and those were graciously accepted of her with
many thanks, and are now for the more part returned with a full determination
and firm promise, to continue their Bands in such readiness, as upon a few
hours warning they will assuredly return with them in good array.

Beside these foresaid arguments, to disprove the opinion of coffeehouse of
the people, which heretofore has been thought a great furtherance to this
honorable action, I will also remember you some other more notable actions, to
prove both contentation and readiness, in all the Nobility of the Realm at
this time, that were not tied to abide in their countries by reason of their
offices, as Lieutenants and Governors there for martial services I or as
soon as it was heard that the Queen was come near London, Great power of
horsemen brought by the Nobility to attend on the Queens person.
and that the armies were in gathering to come out of the countries, for
defense of all Invasions, and reports brought from the sea coasts of the
appearance of the Spanish Navy; all the Noblemen in the Realm, from East and
West, from North and South, excepting only such great Lords as had special
Governments in countries, that might not lawfully be absent from their charge,
and some few that were not able to make forces according to their desire, came
to the Queen, bringing with them according to their degrees, and to the
uttermost of their powers, goodly bands of horsemen, both lances, light
horsemen, and such other as are termed Carabins or Argeletiers, lodging their
bands round about London, and maintaining them in pay at their own charges all
the time, until the Navy of Spain was certainly known to be passed beyond
Scotland. And of these Noblemen many showed their bands of their horsemen,
before the Queen even in the fields before her own gate, to the great marvel
of men of good judgment (as I heard reported) for that the number of them was
so great, and so well armed and horsed, as knowing that they were no parcel of
the numbers of horsemen limited in every country, and put into bands with the
armies described, it was thought before they were seen, that there had not been
so many spare horses of such valor in the whole Realm, excepting the North
part of England toward Scotland, whose forces consist chiefly of horsemen.

The first showed his bands to the Queen, The Viscount Mountagues show of
horsemen was the first.
was that noble, virtuous, honorable man, the Viscount Mountague, who howsoever
men do judge of him for opinion in Religion, yet to tell you the truth, he is
reported always to have professed, as now also at this time he did profess
and protest solemnly, both to the Queen, and to all her Court, in open
assemblies, that he now came, though he was very sickly, and in age, with a
full resolution to live and dye in defense of the Queen, and of his country,
against all invaders, whether it were Pope, King or Potentate whatsoever, and
in that quarrel he would hazard his life, his children, his lands and goods:
And to show his mind agreeable thereto, he came personally himself before the
Queen, with his band of horsemen being almost two hundred: the same being led
by his own sons, and with them a young child very comely seated on hors-back,
being the heir of his house, that is, the eldest son to his son and heir: a
matter much noted of many, whom I heard to commend the same, to see a
grandfather, father and son, at one time on hors-back before a Queen for her
service, though in truth I was sorry to see our Adversaries so greatly pleased
therewith. But I cannot conceal it from your Lordships knowledge, because I
think this Nobleman is known unto you, having bin used as an Ambassador to the
King Catholic many years past by this Queen (as I have heard) to require
confirmation of the treaties of amity, betwixt both their Fathers. And of this
Noblemans conditions, I think there be some others, of whom there is no
account to be made that they will give favor to any attempt against the Queen,
or to any invasion of the Realm.

There were also many at the same time that made shows of great numbers of
serviceable horses, A number of great Lords showed their horsemen.
where of though it be no comfort to you to hear, yet it is good that you be
not abused for lack of knowledge, how the present state is here: that you may
better judge hereafter what may be done to recover this late loss and
dishonor. Earl of Lincoln. L. Windesor.
At this time the Earl of Lincoln and the Lord Windesore, with some Knights
and Gentlemen with them showed their Bands, as the Lord Mountague had done: and
after them the Lord Chancelour showed goodly Bands of L. Chancelour.
horsemen and footmen at his own house, Earl of Warwick
very many and strong. And within one or two days after, L. Treasurer.
the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Burghley Lord Treasurer, L. Compton
the Lord Compton, and in the end of the day the Earl of Leicester, Earl of
Leycester L. Rich.
and the Lord Rich, besides sundry Knights of the Realm, S. Walt: Mildmay
showed every of them several strong bands of horsemen, S. Hen. Cromwell
to the great liking of the Queen, and of all the people that were there, S.
John Points.
being many thousands. And within two days after that the Earl of Essex being
Master of the Queens horse, Earl of Essex with a great band of hors-men and
footmen aforethe Queen at St. James.
with certain principal Gentlemen his servants, friends and followers, showed
before the Queen above three hundred horses of all service, and a great number
of Carabins, and a fair Band of footmen all Musketeers.

This show exceeded in number any other particular Band, and the Earl himself
with a great number of Lances, horsed and armed, did run very many courses,
and specially with the Earl of Cumberland, Course at the field.
as they call it, the Course of the field, which I had never seen before: and
did also himself, and his company Tourney on hors-back a very long time,
Tourney.
and caused also his Carabines, and his footmen to make many skirmishes there,
to the great liking of the Queen and of the multitude of people, which were
many thousands. Amongst whom I heard many vehement speeches against all English
Papists, calling them all Traitors, wishing also that the Spaniards had bin
there in that field with treble the number, to make proof of the value of
Englishmen: all which I heard to my great grief, with many curses against all
their countrymen, saying that they as arrant traitors to their native country
had villanously sold, as far as in them did lie, the liberty of their country
to Spaniards and other Papists. It behoved me not there to have contraried any
of them, for surely if I had, their rancour was so stirred up, by the comfort
of these fair shows of hors-men, as they would there in the field in their rage
have killed me, and cut me in a thousand pieces.

Besides these Lords above named, Earl of Worcester.
there were brought to the town, other fair Bands by the Earl of Worcester,
the Earl of Hertford, Earl of Hertford
the Lord Audeley, Lord Morley, Lord Darcy, Lord Lomely, L. Audley.
Lord Mountjoy, Lord Sturton, L. Morley.
Lord Darcy, Lord Sands, Lord Mordant, L. Dacres.
and by every one that were of the privy Council; so as by estimation, L.
Lomeley.
there were about London at that time, L. Moun^joy.
above five thousand horses ready to serve the Queen, besides all the horsemen
that were raised in all other Countries L. Sturton.
for the Armies and the Sea coasts. L. Darcy.
And besides these, I heard in a very good place, L. Sands.
where I was silent, that there was by account twice as many in readiness with
the Noblemen that L. Mordant.
were absent, Marquis of Winchester.
attending on their charges in their several Lieutenancies. As the Marquis of
Winchester, one counted to be the strongest man of his own furniture for Horse
and armor, Earl of Sussex.
who is Lieutenant of Hampshire, with the Earl of Sussex Captain of
Portesmouth, and Lieutenant also of Dorcetshire. Next to him is in account the
Earl of Shrowsbury Earl Marshall of England, Earl of Shrowsbury.
Lieutenant of a great number of Countries, and of great power of his own, L.
Talbot.
both for horsemen and footmen, beside the power of the Lord Talbot his son. The
Earl of Darby also, though he was in Flanders, from whence he came lately, yet
his son the Lord Strange, Earl of Darby. L. Strange.
Lieutenant of Lancashire and Cheshire in his fathers absence, is said to have
raised a great power of hors-men. And to show the popular affection to this
Earl in his country, I heard it for certain reported, that when the Earl
continued longer in Flanders then they liked, and doubting of his return, for
that they supposed that the Duke of Parma would stay him and the other
Commissioners there, the people of his Country in a generality did amongst
themselves determine, that the Lord Strange the Earls son, and all the manhood
of Lancashire and Cheshire would go over the Seas and fetch the Earl home. A
matter for no purpose to be spoken of, but to note the force of the love which
the people do bear to the Earl, who with his son is firmly bent against the
Pope.

The Earl of Bath also Lieutenant of Devonshire, Earl of Bath.
had as is said, great forces of his own ready to have impeached the landing of
any strangers in Devonshire. Earl of Pembroks noble offer.
The Earl of Pembrooke also being Lieutenant of Somersetshire and Wiltshire,
and Lord President of all Wales, was ready to have come to the Queen with three
hundred horsemen, and five hundred footmen all of his own retinue, leaving all
the Countries under his charge fully furnished.

I omit here to speak of the Bands of hors-men, Earl of Northumberland.
belonging to the Earls of Northumberland and Cumberland, Earl of Cumberland.
which though they were ready to have bin showed at the same time; yet the
Earls hearing of the Spanish Army approaching, went voluntarily to the Sea side
in all have, and came to the Queens Navy before the sight before Callice. Where
they being in several ships of the Queens, did with their own persons valiant
services against the Kings Armado. And to show the great readiness in a
generality of sundry others at the same time, to adventure their lives in the
said service; there went to the Seas at the same time diverse Gentlemen of good
reputation, who voluntarily without any charge, and without knowledge of the
Queen, put themselves into the Queens Navy in sundry ships, wherein they served
at the fight before Callice; of which number being very great, I remember that
the names of some of them were these, M. Henry Brook.
M. Henry Brook son and heir to the Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Cecil son and heir
to the Lord Treasurer, Sir tho Cecil.
Sir William Hatton heir to the Lord Chancellor, Sir Will. Hatton.
Sir Horatio Pallavicino a Knight of Genua, Sir Horatio Pallavicino.
Master Robert Carry son to the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Charles Blunt, M. Robert Carry.
brother to the Lord Mountjoy. Sir Charles Blunt
But much speech is of two Gentlemen of the Court that went to the Navy at the
same time, M. Tho Gerard.
whose names are Thomas Gerard and William Hervy, M. Will. Hervy.
to me not known, but now here about London spoken of with great same. These
two adventured out of ship boat to scale the great Galliasse wherein Moncada
was, and entered the same only with their Rapiers; a matter commonly spoken,
that never the like was hazarded before, considering the height of the Galliasse
compared to a ship boat.

And yet to make it more manifest, how earnest all sorts of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, Earl of Oxford
were to adventure their lives in this service, it is reported that the Earl
of Oxford, who is one of the most ancient Earls of this land, went also to the
Sea, to serve in the Queens Army. There went also for the same purpose, a
second son of the Lord Treasurer, called as I can remember Robert Cecil; M.
Robert Cecil.
there went also about that time to the Seas, the Lord Dudley an ancient Baron
of the Realm, L. Dudley.
and Sir Walter Rawlegh a Gentleman of the Queens privy Chamber, S. Wall.
Rawlegh.
and in his company a great number of young Gentlemen, amongst whom I remember
the names of the heir of Sir Thomas Cecil, M. Will. Cecil.
called William Cecil, M. Edward Darcy
of Edward Darcy, Arthur Gorge, and such others: M. Arthur Gorge.
with the rehearsal of whom I do not comfort my self, but only to show you,
how far we have bin deceived, to think that we should have had a party here
for us, when as you see both by land and by Sea, all sorts of men were so ready
of their own charges, without either commandment or entertainment, to adventure
their lives in defense of the Queen and the Realm.

And for the Earl of Huntingtons forces, Earl of Huntington.
being Lieutenant General in the North, it is reported, that he has put in
readiness for an Army in Yorkshire, and other countries commonly limited to
serve against Scotland, to the number of forty thousand well armed footmen,
and near hand ten thousand horsemen to come to him if any occasion of Invasion
should be in the North parts: to whom are joined with their forces 3 Lords in
the North, L. Scroope. L. Darcy. L. Evers.
the Lord Scroop, Lord Darcy, and Lord Evers.

There are also diverse other Lords that are Lieutenants of countries, that have
in readiness of their proper charges good numbers of horsemen. As the Earl of
Kent, Lieutenant of Bedford-shire, the L. Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain,
Lieutenant of Norfolk and Suffolk; Earl of Kent. L. Hunsdon. L. Cobham. L.
Grave. L. North. L. Chandos. L. St. John. L. Buckhurst.
the L. Cobbam, Lieutenant of Kent; the L. Gray of Buckingham-shire; the L.
North of Cambridge-shire; L. Chandos of Gloucestershire; L.S. John of
Huntington-shire; L. Buckhurst of Sussex: And so by this particular recital
not unmeet for your knowledge, it is to be noted what disposition the Nobility
of the Realm had at this time to have withstood all invasion. And if percase
you shall peruse your ordinary Catalogue of the great Lords of the Realm, you
shall find that these are the substance of all the great Lords, saving three
young Earls within age, Earl of Rutland. Earl of South-hampton Earl of
Bedford.
Rutland, South-hampton, and Bedford: all three brought up in perverse
Religion. And so remains to be spoken of, the Earl of Arundell, who is in
the Tower for attempting to have fled out of the Realm by provocation of him,
that now is Cardinal Allen; who, howsoever he may be affected to the
Catholic Religion, yet I hear most certainly that he offers his life in
defense of the Queen against all the world.

And where account was made to have a party in this Realm, which by these
former relations appear could nor be possible, the whole Nobility being
assured to the Queen, and the force of the people not violently bent that way.
In this very time was offered to the Queen as great a party for her, to come
to her service, and defense of the Realm, as out of all Christendom she could
not have to all respects a stronger. Which was the King of Scots, who hearing
of the intended invasion of the Realm, Offer of the King of Scots to the (...)
of England.
sent a Gentleman to the Queen, with his letter, as I credibly heard, to offer
her all the power that he had to defend her and her Realm; and if she so
would, he would come in his own person, and hazard his own life, to defend this
Realm against all invaders for Religion, or any other pretense whatsoever. So
by this you may see what account may be made of any vain promises made in the
name of this King. And because you shall perceive that I have good means to
have intelligence of any other forces of the Realm for defense thereof, Bands
of horsemen and footmen erected by the Bish^ps.
it is most certain as I hear, and I have seen a List or Roll of a great
number both of horsemen and footmen, which the Bishops of the Realm have of
their own charges, with the contribution of the Clergy, raised up in bands of
horsemen and footmen, which are to be led by noble Gentlemen at the Queens
nomination; and these bands must be vainly termed, Milites Sacri. The third and
last hope which the Catholics had of a party in the realm, was all frustrate.


As to the last point of the three foundations of the principal hope
conceived, whereupon the invasion was chiefly grounded and taken in hand, which
was most certainly and generally believed, that there should be found here in
the realm a strong party of Catholics, against the Queen to join and assist
the invaders, upon the appearing of the Spanish Navy. By my former relations of
the general great and fervent love of the people toward the Queen, and of
the great offers of service now made by the whole Nobility of the Realm, this
their foundation may appear to have been wrong laid, only by imaginations, as
it were upon a quick-sand, or rather as flying in the air. The Spanish
prisoners condemn the Kings purpose, as being abused by the exiled
Catholics, whom the Spaniards call traitors to their country.
And yet it appears very truly that no small account was made hereof by the
K. of Spain, and by his principal Ministers; for there is nothing at this
present more universally, with one lamentable voice spoken of, by all the
multitude of the Spaniards, now here prisoners; yea by the chiefest of them,
then that they now evidently see, that the King their Master was with such
informations greatly abused, yea rather betrayed. For they say there was no man
of value in all this army, but he heard it constantly affirmed, and so
delivered for comfort of all that served therein, before they were shipped,
that they should not be afraid of any resistance to land in England, for tha^
there was good assurance given to the King, that they should find a strong
army of Catholics ready in their favor, as soon as ever their Navy should be
seen upon the Seacoast, No possibility to invade and conquer a Realm, without
favor of a party inward.
and so they all here say, they were encouraged to come to this journey;
otherwise, many of them swear they would never have come on ship-boord: so
unlikely they say it was, and against all reason, to invade a Realm, with
opinion to conquer it, without both some title of right, and a party also; but
specially without a good sure party.

And therefore now finding this report very false, many of these prisoners do
by name curse you, as being the Kings Ambassador; as him, The Spanish
prisoners condemn the enterprise and course of Don Bernardin of Mendoza.
they say, who upon the opinion of the knowledge which you had gotten in
England, was therein more credited then any other, and had these many years
together tempted the King their Master, upon hope, and other such like
persuasions, to attempt such a matter as this was, being utterly in all
wisdom to have been condemned, without some certainty of this latter part,
specially to have had a strong party here. They also curse all such Englishmen
as have sled out of this country, whom they spare not to call arrant traitors,
for offering the sale of their country to the Pope and the King of Spain. And
these prisoners add also, that they were borne in hand, that this country was
so open to march in, and so weak to withstand any force, and the people so
miserable, as they thought the conquest thereof had been of no more difficulty
then the overcomming of a number of naked Indians was at the beginning of the
conquest thereof by King Ferdinand.

And now for strength of this country and people, many of these prisoners
having bin brought from the Seacoasts hither to London, whereby they have
observed the country and the people, do speak marvellously thereof, counting
the same invincible, otherwise then by treason of some great party within the
Realm. But whether all these speeches which are commonly reported of them
proceed from their hearts, or that they speak thus to please the English,
because they are well used by them, who also are easily deceived with flattery,
I know not; but sure I am they do thus speak daily, withoutward show of great
passions against such as have been perswaders to the King for this journey.
Diverse of them also which are of good judgment, and have heard of such of the
English banished men, as have bin in Spain, and have known some of them there
(as of long time Sir Francis Englefield, Sir Francis Euglefield. Lord Paget.
and of late the L. Paget and his brother) have curiously enquired of what
power they were, and credit here to have a party. They also enquired of the
Earl of Westmerland, Earl of Westmerland.
although of him they confess he is a man but of small government. But our
adversaries here have so abased these and all the rest to have been of no
credit, to carry any numbers of men, but by the Queens authority when they
were at their best: As the prisoners wonder how the king could be so deceived
to give them pensions, otherwise then for charity, because of their Religion.
But they confess they have often heard in Spain, how the King was once
notably deceived, when one Tho. Thomas Stukele yes abusing of the King of
Spain, and the Pope, newly remembered by the Spaniards.
Stukely a private English man, that fled out of Ireland for debt, and other
lewd actions into Spain, and not being worth one penny, his debts being paid,
but the second son of a mean Gentleman, pretended, and was believed in Spain,
so (by entituling of himself) to be a Duke, a Marquess, and an Earl of
Ireland; and so was a long time entertained, as a man that could do great
service against the Q. of England, until at length the King understood his
falsehood, and so banished him out of Spain; and repairing to Rome, he was by
the Pope also maintained for a time, until he was discovered even by some good
Catholics, that could not endure the Popes holiness to be so grossly
mocked; of whom some of the prisoners using merry speeches, how both the
Emperor Charles, and afterward this King and the Pope, were so notably deceived
by this Stukely, do conclude merely, that they think some of these English
that have thus abused the King, have followed Stukelyes steps. And in very
truth, I and many others have bin very often ashamed to hear so broad speeches
of the King and the Pope, yea of the Emperor Charles, whom such a companion as
Stukeley was, could so notably deceive; and the more to be marvelled it was,
how he could deceive the King Catholic, considering he was known to many of
his Council, at the Kings being in England, to have bin but a vaunting beggar,
and a Ruffian, and afterward a pyrat against the Spaniards.

Now my Lord Ambassador, A conclusion by the writer, to persuade another
course, not by violence.
by these my large relations of the things evil past, and of the opinions of
such as I have lately dealt withal, with mine own conceit also, which I do
not vainly imagine, your Lordship may see in the first part, our present
calamity, and miserable estate: In the second part, the state of this Queen,
her Realm, her people, their minds, their strength, so far contrary to the
expectation of the Popes Holiness, the King Catholic, and specially of you
(my Lord) and all others, that have been in hand these many years with this
action, as I know not what course shall, or may be thought meet to take, seeing
it is seen by experience, that by force our cause cannot be relieved. Neither
will any change amend the matter when this Queen shall end her days (as all
Princes are mortal) for both the universalitie of the people through the
Realm, are so firmly and desperately bent against our Religion, as nothing
can prevail against their united forces. And whosoever shall by right succeed
to this Crown after the Queen (who is likely to live as long as any King in
Christendom) if the Crown should come to the K. No hope for furtherance of
the Popes authority by any now living that may succeed the Queen in the line
Royal.
of Scots, or to any other of the blood royal, as there are very many within
this Realm descended both of the Royal houses of York and Lancaster. There is
no account to be made, but every one of them that now live at this day, are
known to be as vehemently disposed to withstand the authority of the Pope, as
any of the most earnest Protestant or heretic in the world. A conclusion what
is best to maintain the Catholic Religion in England.
So as to conclude, after all circumstances well considered, for the present I
know no other way, but to commit the cause to Almighty God, and to all the
Saints in heaven, with our continual prayers; and in earth to the holy
Counsels of the Pope, and his Cardinals, with our supplications to relieve the
afflicted number of our exiled brethren, and to send into the Realm, discreet,
holy, and learned men, that may only in secret manner without in intermedling
in matters of estate, by teaching us, confirm us in our faith, and gain with
charitable instruction, others that are not rooted in heresy.

And for relief of such has are forced to pay yearly great sums of money out of
their revenue, because they forbear to come to the Church, A tolleration from
the Pope for the Recasants in England
it were to be charitably considered, whether there might not be some
dispensation from the Popes holiness, for some few years, to tolerate their
coming to the Church without changing of their faith, considering a great
number do stand therein, not for any thing (as they say) used in this Church,
that is directly contrary to Gods Law; but for that the Rites and prayers
(though they are collected out of the body of the Scripture) are not allowed by
the Catholic Church, and the head thereof, which is the Popes Holiness: And
for that cause lastly, all true Catholics account this Church to be
schismatic. By which remedy of tolleration, a great number of such as will
be perpetually Catholics, might enjoy their livings and liberty, and in
process of time the Catholic Religion (by Gods goodness) might with more
surety be increased, to the honor of God, then ever it can be by any force
whatsoever. For so did all Christian Religion at the first begin, and spread it
self over the world; not by force, but only by teaching, and example of
holiness in the teachers, against all humane forces. And so I will end my long
letters with the sentence which K. David used four times in one of his
Psalms: Et clamaverunt ad Dominum in tribulatione eorum, and de angustia little
liberavit eos. And so must we make that for our foundation to lay our hope
upon, for all other hopes are vain and false.

At London the of August, 1588.
AFter that I had made an end of this my letter, which I f^und by perusal
thereof to have bin at more length then I looked for, although the matters
therein contained did draw me thereto, and that I had made choice of a friend
of mine who had more knowledge in the French tongue then I, to turn the same
into French My mishap was, that when he had done some part thereof, he fell
sick of a burning fever, whereby my letter remained with him upon hope of
recovery for ten or twelve days, and seeing no hope thereof, I entreated
another very trusty and a sound Catholic, having perfect knowledge in the
French tongue, who took upon him to put it into French, wherein was also longer
time spent: so as my letter being written in the midst of August, I am forced
to end it in September. And thereupon I thought good, whiles my former letter
was in translating, to add some things happened in the mean time meet for your
knowledge.

About the seventh of August, the L. Admiral returned with the Navy, having
followed the Spanish Navy (as they reported) as far as the 55 degree
Northwards; the Spanish Navy taking a course either to the furthest parts of
Norwey, or to the Orcades beyond Scotland; which if they did, then it was here
judged that they would go about Scotland and Ireland; but if they could
recover provisions of masts, whereof the English Navy had made great spoil,
they might return. But I for my part wished them a prosperous wind to pass
home about Ireland, considering I despaired of their return for many respects,
both of their wants, which could not be furnished in Norwey, and of the lack
of the Duke of Parmas ability to bring his army on the Sea for want of
mariners. Nevertheless, upon knowledge from Scotland that they were beyond the
Orcades, Order taken by the K of Scots in favor of the English.
and that the King of Scots had given strict commandment upon all the
Seacoasts, that the Spaniards should not be suffered to land in any part, but
that the English might land and be relieved of any wants: order was given to
discharge all the Navy, saving twenty ships that were under the L. Henry
Seymours charge, to attend upon the Duke of Parmas attempts, either toward
England, which was most unlikely, or toward Zeland, which began to be doubted.
But within three or four days after this, suddenly there came report to the
Court, that the Spanish Navy had refreshed it self in the Islands beyond the
Orcades, both with water plentifully, and with bread, fish and flesh, as for
their money they could get, and would return hither once again, to attend on
the Duke of Parmas army, to conduct it by Sea into England. Whereupon grew some
new business here, wherewith I know the Queen and her Council was not a little
perplexed what to do; but in the end, order was given to stay the disarming of
her Navy, and so the whole Navy was very speedily made ready again, only upon
the former reports: wherewith I and many others were very glad, to see them
thus newly troubled, and upon every light report put to great charges. But this
lasted not past eight or ten days, for upon more certain knowledge by two or
three Pinnaces, that were sent to discover where the Spanish fleet was, which
certified that they were beyond the Orcades, sailing toward the West, in very
evil case, having many of their people dead in those North parts, and in great
distress for lack of masts, and also of mariners. A new commandment was
given to dissolve the Navy, saving that which should attend on the Duke of
Parma; and so the Lord Admiral returned with the L. Thomas Haward, the L.
Henry Seymour, L. Sheffeld, Sir Francis Drake, with all the Captains to the
Court, saving such as had charge of the Fleet, that was under the L. Henry. And
upon the return of these Seamen to the City, there are spread such reports,
to move the Noblemen, Great murmurs of all sorts against the Spaniards.
Gentlemen, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and all other vulgar people of all sorts, into
a mortal hatred of the Spaniards, as the poor Spanish prisoners were greatly
afraid, to have bin all massacred; for that it was published, and of many
believed, that the Lords of Spain that were in the Navy, had made a special
division amongst themselves, of all the Noblemens houses in England by their
names, and had in a sort quartered England among themselves, and had determined
of sundry manners of cruel death, both of the Nobility, and the rest of the
people. The Ladies, Women, and Maidens were also destined to all villainy; the
rich Merchants houses in London were put into a Register by their very names,
and limited to the companies of the Squadrons of the Navy for their spoil.
Report of the horrible cruelty intended by the Spaniards.
And to increase more hatred, it was reported that there were a great number of
halters brought in the Spanish Navy, to strangle the vulgar people, and
certain Irons graven with marks, to be heated for the marking of all children
in their faces, being under seven years of age, that they might be known
hereafter to have been the children of the conquered Nation. These were
commonly reported by those that came from the English Navy, as having heard the
Spaniards confess the same: so as for a time there was a general murmr,
that those Spanish prisoners ought not to be suffered to live, as they did, but
to be killed, as they had purposed to have done the English. But the wiser sort
of men, and such as had the charge of the prisoners, having no commandment
from the Council, did straightly look to the safety of the prisoners, as a
matter not to be so rashly suffered. But to content the people with some other
matter, there was upon Sunday last, at the request of the Major and his
brethren, a great number of Banners, Banners, Streamers and Ensigns of the
Spaniards showed to the people.
Streamers, and Ensigns, which were won from the Spanish Navy, brought to
Paul's Churchyard, and there showed openly in the Sermon time, to the great
rejoicing of all the people. And afterward they were carried to the cross in
Cheap, and afterward to London bridge: whereby the former rage of the people
was greatly assuaged, the fury generally converted into triumph, by boasting in
every place, that this was the act of God, who had heard the fervent prayers of
the people, and was pleased with their former prayers and fastings; to have
such Banners and Streamers, which the Spaniards meant to have brought and set
up in all places of the City, as monuments of their triumphs, by his good
providence in punishing the pride of the Spaniards, now to be erected by the
English, as monuments of their victories, and perpetual shame to the
Spaniards. Daily prayers.
Upon these shows great rejoicing followed: And as in June and July past, all
Churches were filled daily with people exercised with prayers, and shows of
repentance, and petitions to God for defense against their enemies: And in many
Churches continually thrice in the week exercises of prayers, sermons, and
fastings all the day long from morning to evening, with great admiration to see
such general devotion (which I and others did judge to proceed more of fear
then of devotion) so now, since the English Navy is returned, and the Spanish
Navy defeated, and intelligence brought of the disorders in Flanders; of the
dissentions betwixt the Spaniards and the other soldiers; of the contempt of
the Duke of Parma by the Spaniards, being thereto maintained by a Duke called
the Duke of Pastraw, the King Catholics bastard; and of the departure and
running away of the Dukes mariners, here is a like concourse of the people to
Sermons in all Churches: wherein is remembered the great goodness of God
toward England, Public prayers and giving of thanks.
by the delivery thereof from the threatened Conquest, and prayers also
publicly to give thanks to God for the same.

At London this of September, 1588.
FINIS.
WILLIAM CECIL Baron of Burgleigh and Lord Treasurer of England. He dyed Anno
1598. Aged 77 years.

W. Marshall sculp:



ROBERTUS DUDLEUS. COMES LEYCESTRIAE. BARO DENBIG. GUBERNATOR BELGARUM.






