A SERMON PREACHED at OWBVRNE IN BVCKINGHAMSHIRE AT The Funeral of the Right
Worshipful, and truly Religious Gentlewoman, Mris MARGARET ELMES. On the
twenty-seaventh of July. 1641.

By GEORGE BURCHES Batchlour of Divinity.

REVEL. 2.20. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, An. Dom. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE AND TRVLY VIRTUOUS Mris JANE GOODWIN Wife to the Right
Worshipful ARTHUR GOODWIN Esquire.
Worthy Mistress,
I KNOW it is an unwelcome message to be the Herald of ill news. Such tidings
are like the Amalekites to David; or Jonah's Sermon to the Ninivites
administering nothing but sorrow. But when withal I apprehend your goodness
and wisdom, how it can make the best use of the loss of your nearest friends,
J am the more emboldened to present these unwelcome and unworthy lines to your
kind acceptance. It is an unalterable law like that of the Medes and Persians:
Serius aut sitius m^tam properamus ad unam.
sooner or later we all hasten to the same end. Man's days are numbered, his
period of time appointed, and his bound he cannot pass. David and Jonathan
must part, Jacob and Rachell must be separated, and though Ruth and Naomi be
never so endeered friends, yet death will divide them. All flesh is grass, and
all the glory of man as the flower of the field. The grass withers, the
flower fades, and so must the rarest pieces of nature return to dust. It Is
true, you have lost a most loving sister in law, the Church a gracious Saint,
the poor a dear friend: yet must all rest contented seeing it is by the
determinate hand of God. It had been a great happiness that so glorious a
star might have longer shined (if God had so pleased) in the Orb where once
she gave such a comely luster. But seeing now we are deprived of her light, I
mean that comfort and sweet society which was enjoyed in her presence, we must
rest contented, and labor to see the hand of God in it; whose will is the rule
of his actions, and is therefore pleased to add one member unto the head to
live for ever with himself. As those that would inhabit the land of Canaan,
were to wade through the banks and streams of the river Jordan with Josuah. So
they that will arive at that Canaan which is above must wade first through the
river Lethe here with their guide and forerunner Jesus. Let it therefore
comfort you that she is with her Savior, and now nothing remains but her
virtues as lively monuments of her eternal worth. In which Catalogue J will
mention but one, Humilitas virtus Christianorum 1a, 2a, 3a. Aug. Epist.
which was her Humility, rarely to be found in persons of her rank. Her
goodness having learned that this grace is the first, second, and third stayre
of true Christian nobility. By this she has now ascended to happiness. For
the high and lofty one (as the Prophet speaks,) that inhabiteth eternity,
delighting to reside in an humble soul, has eternized her worth; and
therefore would suffer her no longer to dwell in so unworthy a country, but
thinking her more fit for a greater honor, and a better place has crowned her
in his own kingdom. May it please you therefore to give leave to publish to
the world under the Convoy of your worthy name, this mean, but faithful
testimony of my dutiful affection and unfeigned estimation of those saving
graces, which (J am persuaded) were lodged in her noble Breast. This is the
first time that ever I set to sea in this public manner, that ever my name
came into the Printers stocks. And had it not been out of conscience of my
thankfulness to my blessed friend of everdeare memory, rather to enliven her
worth then to spread my own. J would still have kept my own private way, and
never have rode in the common dust. But so abounding was her goodness, that I
could not rest contented to bury her fame in my own breast, but must endeavor
to erect a monument of her in paper to all the world. And first to you most
virtuous Mris, whom I humbly crave to lodge these pocre endeavors in your good
opinion and the rather for her sake whose goodness yet sparkles in your eyes.
And the Image of whose virtues is in this little Codicill represented to you;
so shall you oblige me who am

Your most humble Servant GEOR. BURCHES.

2. TIM. 4.7, 8. 7. J have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith.

8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.


TO omit the context which is obvious to them that will but read the precedent
verses. Herein is comprised and commended to our consideration, the happy
consequence and good success which will follow upon the painful endeavors
the faithful undergo in their spiritual warfare. Howsoever in contending for
earthly things, it oftentimes falls out that some beat the bush and others
catch the Birds, some break the bone and others eat the marrow: in a word some
take the pains and others attain the prize. Yet in the christian combat and
spiritual conflict betwixt the sons and servants of God it is not so; for be
they endurers of the sweat they shall be enjoyers of the sweet; God out of his
mercy has promised, and out of his truth will see performed, that they shall
be sure to enjoy an ample and glorious reward. For when the thread of their
days is spunne, and their souls brought to a joyful catastrophe, then shall
they inherit what here is promised a Crown of righteousness. Which makes them
with S. Paul to conclude with this heavenly expression, I have fought etc.

Which text I find expressed by two several Metaphors.

The former drawn from Fighters, the latter from Runners.

In the former is employed, 1. The soldiers who are to fight, the faithful,
intimated in the expression of S. Paul, J have fought. 2. Their weapons, which
though all be not expressed yet is the chief one mentioned, which is the shield
of faith, I have kept the faith. 3. Their valor, they are not faint-hearted
but stand to their colors till they finish their course. 4. The prize which
they obtain by fighting, and that is no less then a Crown of righteousness.


In the latter is set forth, 1. the runners, intimated in this particle I, the
faithful. 2ly. Their race, which is the true profession of the faith. 3ly.
Their round or continuance of it, they are neither fainting nor breathles, but
go on stoutly till they have finished their course.


Lastly, the reward they obtain by running, which is encouragement enough for
their constancy, a Crown of righteousness.

All which particulars let us sum up into three maine conclusions worthy our
best consideration.

1. Faithful men are military men. 2. As they are military so they are
mortal. 3. If they fight courageously their endeavors shall not be frustrated
but amply rewarded, they shall receive a Crown of righteousness.
To begin with the first, faithful men are military men. Thus did the
wrestling of Israel prefigure, which makes S. Paul oft-times to give it in
charge to stand fast like valiant soldiers, 1. Cor. 16.13.
and quit our selves like men and be strong. As the Israelites fought many a
dreadful battle and encountered with the great Anakims before they could set
foot in Canaan. So those which are the true Israel of God are still up in
arms, and in danger of many a dreadful and doleful skirmish, whiles they are
marching forwards toward that Canaan which is above. Hence not unfitly that
saying of holy Job may be applied in this place: The life of man is a warfare
upon earth. Put the case there were a man that had some great reward proposed
unto him, but with this condition: That first he must subdue some tyrants,
overthrow some monster, or vanquish some huge and hideous Giant. As we read of
Theseus, and as the Poets do relate of Hercules, could not these otherwise be
attained unto, then by some conflict or bloody combat. Mutato nomine de te
fabula narratur. Change but the name, this is true of every faithful
christian. God in heaven has proposed a reward to him though resident upon
earth, in attaining whereunto he has most puissant and powerful enemies to
encounter with, most direful and dreadful monsters which are up in arms and
daily add battle to him. So tyrannical are they, that without intermission
they labor to captivate him, and bring him from blessed freedom to slavish and
hellish thraldom. The champions in which combat we meet with, are chiefly these
three. The flesh, the world, the devil, which have entered into league and
joined their forces together that like a threefold cord they cannot easily be
broken. The flesh like an inbred and domestickenimy is always swelling, and
rebellious against the spirit; striving and struggling for sovereignty and
superiority. This great Goliath does still bid battle to little David. Always
fighting against the spirit, and never failing to oppose it as appears by the
words of S. Gal. 5.17.
Paul. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against
the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. the truth hereof the
Apostle finding daily by experience in himself breaks forth into this
patheticall Epiphonema. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death. In subdueing whereof there is so much the harder fight, by
how much the more danger it is to encounter with a familiar, then an open
enemy. The world does challenge a christian into the open field, sometime by
violence as by crosses and persecution, by open actions and evil speeches: and
sometimes by deceitful policies, Judas like pretending kisses when she
propounds destruction; under her alluring pleasures she shrowdes her deadly
poison. Like another Eve always egging, like another Dalilah always tempting,
and by her Syrene sweet notes of profits, and of pleasures, labors to drown
the soul in the full sea of perdition. The devil is no less ready to assay
and assault him; 1. Pet. 5.8.
For he goes about (as S. Peter speaks) like a roaring Lion seking whom he may
devour. Luke 4.13.
Who as he would not suffer our Savior to be at rest, but did set upon him
the 1, 2, and 3. time. No more will he permit those, who are members of that
body whereof Christ is the head, who are branches of that vine whereof Christ
is the root, who are sheep of that sheepfold whereof Christ is the sheapheard;
in a word, who are subjects of that kingdom whereof Christ Jesus is the king
to be in quiet; but rather then he shall be free from encounters;
Proteus-like, he will by changing himself into many shapes, and turning
himself into an Angel of light, give them cause continually to look and to
lay about them. As Christ was, so must we be in this world. No sooner was he
consecrated by his solemn Baptism to the work of a Mediator, but presently
was assaulted by the tempter. And no sooner does any one give up his name to
Christ and break forth out of that hellish power under which He was kept; but
forthwith Pharaoh and his hosts, Satan and his confederates pursue him with
deadly fury, and power forth floods of malice and rage against him. Nunquam
bella boni^ nunquam dissidia cessant. Et quae cum certet men's pia semper habet.
Prosper.
Hell and death are at truce with wicked men; there is a covenant and an
agreement betwixt them, Satan holds his possession in peace; but when a
stronger then he comes and overcommeth: from that time there is implacable
venom and hostility against such a soul. The power and policy of that grand
enemy the devil, the lusts and vanity, the frowns and flattery of this
sinful world: in a word, the affections, inclinations, and deceits of our
fleshly hearts, will ever ply the soul of a christian and force it to
perpetual combats. It was not therefore without good cause that S. Ephesians. 6.10.
Paul Ephesians. 6.10. did classicum canere strike up an Alarm unto his battle,
wishing the Ephesians and in them all the faithful, to be strong in the Lord
and in the power of his might, to put on the whole armor of God, to gird our
loins with verity, to have on the breast plate of righteousness, to be shodde
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, to take up the shield of faith
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is the word of God.
Thereby plainly giving us to understand that a christian is still in danger,
ready to enter into lists and to descend into the combat.

Use 1. The consideration whereof may serve in the 1. place to discountenance
that fond conceit of wicked men: who think it an easy matter to be a sound and
faithful christian. They lie down in their beds of Ivory, they drink wine in
bowls, they eat of the lambs of the flock and the calves of the stall (as the
scripture speaks) they suffer themselves to be lulled in the lap, and muzzled
in the bosom of all carnal delights, without any striving or struggling
against these professed enemies of God and goodness. Nay by rushling into
uncleanness, and laying of the reins loose into all manner of profaneness:
they give plain evividence both to God and man, that they have entered pay, are
reckoned amongst the soldiers, and fight under the banner of sin and Satan.
And yet notwithstanding they are as good christians and as sound professors as
the best. But alas! alas! these men put themselves into a fools paradise, they
are not as they think they are, for then they would not be at league with
sin, but in arms against it. Nay on the contrary they rather show
themselves, to become true traitors, to God and to themselves, who in the midst
of such grand-enemies, (as the flesh, the world, and the devil) have such
peace without contending, such truce without opposing so quiet and calm a
league without all manner of resistance. Marvel not then ye monsters of sin
though sometimes ye see poor christians look with a sad countenance, or
sorrowful carriage. It is not an easy task to give Satan the foil: his darts
are fiery consumeing the spirits. How is it possible on a sudden to make
havocke of a man's natural corruption? or to destroy that life of sin which
for so long continuance has had being in our souls? Delude not then your
selves any longer in crying peace, for you see christians are fighters. And
they that will be warriers in Christ's camp, shall have dreadful dreams,
fearful visions, troubles without, terrors within, and now and then the
Arrows of the Almighty to stick into and drink up their spirits. Acquaint thy
self with Job, demand of David what wounds they received in this warfare, and
what it is to be a faithful soldier, such can tell thee. Yet if thou would
know by experience, leave off thy wicked associates, change the course of thy
lewd life, and fight the battailer of thy God, and then thou shall find thy
thoughts to be many; thy heart heavy, thy grief great and thy fear terrible.

Use. 2. This may serve in the second place to comfort the godly who have
bickerings with the flesh, skirmishes with the world, and always war with
the devil: yea the very bitterness of assaults encountering with them let
them not be daunted or dismayed; for this is no other thing then that which is
incident unto the profession of those that fight under the colors of Christ.
Does the flesh entice thee, the world allure thee, the devil tempt thee, yea
and his instruments molest thee. Let this then refresh thee that it is no other
evil then which did befall the dearest of Gods children. The case is common
with them. For when the strong man keeps the house all is at peace at home, but
go about to dispossess him then will he rage and tear. If Nehemiah begins
to repair the walls of Jerusalem, Sanballet shall oppose him; Paul to preach
the Gospel, his own contrymen will persecute him. Satan when his kingdom
shakes will rouse up himself, arm all his Agents to act their parts least
Babell be confounded and overturned. Let not these things seem strange to thee,
for no combat, no christian. When the devil does assault thee, the body of
corruption lies heavy upon thee, and death with his many Ghostly forms
terrifies thee, then conclude thou either art or shall be a right resolute
heavenly warrior: For these are foes to all them that fight for the Lord or
the land of life.

Use. 3. Seeing that faithful men are military men; let us then in the last
place labor to stand upon our guard: like traine-souldiers let our armor be
always in readiness; for the place wherein we are (which is the Church) is
militant, our calling Military, not one minute can plead a privilege fom an
encounter. If the case were thus with our bodies that we were still in danger
to be set upon by our enemy, and knew not when he would fall upon us we would
be careful to be well provided. Thus is it with our souls; and therefore by
how much the more excellent the one is then the other, and by how much the more
puissant and powerful the spiritual enemy is then the corporal, by so much
the higher it concern us to stand upon our guard. Now that we may quit
ourselves like heavenly warriors; let us have these four weapons always in
readiness.

First knowledge; this is like unto Sampsons eyes who for the want of them
could not find the pillars of the house: no more can we the principles of faith
unless knowledge guide us. For without this we will often foil our friends, when
we should wound our foes, and range beyond our ranks, when we should keep
within our files. Thus it was with Paul before he did receive Christ's
presse-mony, through ignorance he made havoc of the Church of God, and Peter
on the same ground did promise what he was not able to perform. Without
knowledge the mind is not good, and blind men are not fit to fight, except
under the Prince of darkness, and therefore we must labor in the first place
to be armed with knowledge.

2ly Courage, what heroical spirit has that man need to have who is to
wrestle with principalities and powers, with an heavy burden of sin and
strong body of corruption, he had not need to be a puleing babe, affrighted
with the power of his adversaries. But as little David was not dismayed either
at the threats of his enemy that great Giant at Gath, or the greatness of his
looks, or the strength of his hands, but did with the greatest valor overcome
him, so must we do, arm our selves against Satan's forces not flying back when
he seeks to assault us, but meet him most stoutly, opposing courageously both
his power and policy, until we have won the victory, who otherwise would
have prevayled had we not been armed with courage.

3ly. Love; This weapon will stir up our spirits, and add life unto all our
actions, when we our selves grow feeble and weak; the Apostle tells us it is
of a lasting nature, that when all other weapons fail, yet this will endure.
Let Satan be enraged never so much against us, and raise up his instruments to
molest and hurt us; yet love will make us stand to our ground, resist unto
blood. And though death it self supprise us as the strongest dart, yet love to
our captain the Lord Jesus has taken away her sting, so that our enemies
cannot mortally wound us: they may only bruise us in the heel they shall never
break our heads, nor give us a deadly stroke.

4ly. Power; The Prophet David being an old soldier prays for it. Psalm.
51.2. S. Paul a worthy warrior often commends it. Ephesians. 6.10. A christian
should be like that Leviathan Job speaks of, Job. 4^.
his heart firm as stone, his bones as brass, he accounts Iron as straw, and
esteems steel as stubble, no arrow can make him flee, nor spear turn him
from the battle. Want of power makes us a prey to our enemies: and then we
are most in danger to loose the field when we are not able to fight; Let us be
armed therefore with power. He that has knowledge without power is like a
soldier that has his eyes but wants his arms. He that has knowledge, and
power, is like a soldier that has his eyes and arms but without courage
wants his heart. He that has knowledge, power, and courage, is like a
soldier, that has his eyes, his arms, his heart; yet without love he lacks
his lims. For power can war, but without courage dares not; power, courage
can, and dare, but without love will not; power, courage, love, can, dare, and
will, yet if knowledge direct not, there will be no good event in the combat.
Wherefore get knowledge that will direct thee, get courage that will embolden
thee, get love that will constrain thee, get power that will enable thee. For
he that wants any of these shall never be crowned, except with shame and
endless confusion. Arm then thy self with these be valiant till thou be
victorious, so that in the conclusion of thy days thou may confess here
with S. Paul I have fought a good fight etc.

And so I have done with man's Military condition wherein you have seen how he
becomes a fighter. I am now to speak of the last act or part which he plays
on the stage of this world. The finishing of his course. Hence I collected that.

Doct. 2d. As his condition is military so is it mortal.

God puts an end to all his encounters; so that his life is nothing else but a
marching to death. As soon as we be borne we begin to draw to an end, as if
the whole scope of our desires were to hasten to the grave. The clearest day is
covered by the clouds of the night, the longest sentence must have it is period,
and there is no life on earth but has it is death. As if death were the mark
which the vanity of humane endeavors runs at. All men, yea all inferior
things are freed by an end. And as the Philosopher answered the news of his
sons death; Scio me genuisse mortalem, I have gotten a man that is mortal. So
God the Father may say of every man living, Scio me creasse mortalem. I have
made man that has made himself mortal. Per nativitatem vivet in carne, per
juventutem candescit in flore, per mortem aret in pulvere. Greg.
Hence is that saying of an ancient setting forth man's frail estate, By birth
a man is borne green in his flesh, by youth he is white in his blossom, by
death he is withered in the dust. It is a law enacted by the king of heaven;
Statutum est omnibus semelmori. It is appointed for all once to dye. It is
appointed, and that by him whose decrees are like those of the Medes and
Persians which cannot be altered. Death like the fisherman encloses all kind
of fish in his net, old and young, good and bad, small and great. All is
caught by death. Which thing the Poets insinuate in the fable of Death, and
Cupid who lodging at a time both in one Inn enterchanged each others arrows,
and so from that time to this it comes to pass that old men dote and young men
dye. If they that have brought us into the world are gone out of it before us,
we may conclude our own following. There is not one in the whole cluster of
mankind but eodem modo and nodo vinctus and victus, is liable to the common
and equal law of death. Man's body so well as Ice expounds that ridle. The
mother begets the daughter. Dust begets the body, Gignit filia matrem.
and the body begets dust. Our life is like a game at chesse wherein men supply
different places, one is a king, another a Queen, another a Bishop, another a
Knight, another a pawn, but when the game is ended, and they shuffled into one
bag all is alike. So death makes no distinction betwixt Prince and people,
Sovereign and subjects, the robes of the one so well as the rags of the other
shall not escape her ruin. When Alcibiades brags of his lands Socrates reaches
him a Map, bids him demonstrate where they lie. Alas he could not find, nor
scarce discern Athens it self, it was so small a point in respect of the
world. Ecce vix totam Hercules implerit urnam.
The dust of mighty Hercules can scarce fill a pitcher. The Philosopher said of
Alexander, yesterday the world did not content him, now ten cubits can contain
him. It Is worthy our consideration that had we as much land as ever the devil
showed Christ, yet we can call no more ours but the grave. This is the estate
of the best that when they have devoured the most delicate creatures, the
worms shall devour them. A fat corpse is but a fat supper for the worms. It
is neither birth nor bravery, riches nor royalty, that can stop us from
finishing of our course or running of our race until all be concluded by death.

Use 1. Seeing we are mortal, let this then instruct us to reflect upon our
selves. It is the folly of miserable man to be too much unmindful of the day of
death. And indeed the fashion of secure wretches when they have been forgetful
of any thing to say they thought no more of it then of the day of their death.
Intimating hereby however they think of other things, yet the thoughts of death
are far from them. These are not apprehensive of their common condition,
hence unawares they are supprized and sent packing to hell in the midst of
their wretched security. Oh consider this you that are unmindfull of your end,
putting far from you the evil day the time of your dissolution. Remember that
as the tree falls so it lies, as death leaves thee so shall judgment find
thee. As thou sowest here so thou must reap hereafter. If thou have been a
swearer, a curser, a profane wretch; look for such a crop as this seed will
bring forth, which without repentance is no less then everlasting horror with
devils and damned spirits in a lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Be
then counseled forthwith to be mindful of thy end. And for thy better
proceeding consider these motives.

1. The uncertainty of it; Nil certius morte, hora mortis nihil incertius.
we see by daily experience though strong bodies may perhaps hold out many fits
unexpectedly they are forced to yield to the necessity of nature. Our bodies
are made of elements, weak and fluid principles; and therefore sooner resolve
to their first materials. Do we not see that though some be suffered like
ripe fruit to remain on the tree till the fall, to live till they be old; yet
how many be cudgeld from the tree, snatched away by death in the very prime of
their days. Was not Herod wounded deadly in the midst of his pomp and pride by
this messenger. Surely had he then been a painting of himself as many of our
Ladies do, death would soon have spoiled all his colors. How soon did that
covetous muck worm in the Gospel? Luke 12, 10.
that thought by his wealth to purchase heaven on earth, hear that sad knell
ringing in his ears; this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. His day of
pleasure is ended, and the night of everlasting sorrow supprizes him. Extremum
gau^ij luctus occupat.
Vexation treads on the heels of vanity. That when pleasure like the sun has
run her course she sets (unawares) oft-times in a dismal night of pain. Let
the uncertainty therefore of our ends cause us to be prepared for them. We
know not how soon the great Judge will appear in the clouds to call us to a
reckoning, let us take heed of being found wrapped in a cloud of dark ignorance
and blind security. We must know that cloud will dissolve ours, and lay us
open with our sins to the view of men and Angels. Let us be careful to make
all now even with God. And as Alcibiades told Pericles when he was troubled
with studying how to give his accounts, that if he would be ruled by him he
should rather study how to give no account at all. So say I, let thy whole
endeavor be now employed in advancing the honor of thy God, that hereafter he
cannot call thee to an account, because here thou have his acquaintance given
thee which will fully satisfy his demands hereafter.

2ly. The hazard and danger we are liable unto in being unmindfull of death;
Which is no less then to be tumbled into eternity of torment, A quolibet
monento pendet aeternitas.
with devils and damned reprobates. For upon every moment of time depends
eternity, either our everlasting woe, or everlasting welfare; and if we should
be swept away before we thought on our ends, what horror and vengeance would
supprize us. Yea we should then undergo both the punishment of loss, and
sense, and be banished from the glorious presence of our gracious God, and
cast into unquenchable fire; there to feel nothing but continual cruelty
exercised both against body and soul, by malicious devils without the
smallest intermission or ease. As therefore we tender the good of our souls,
so let the danger we are liable to by being unmindfull of our mortality
prevayle with us to prepare for our latter end.

3ly. The happiness we shall enjoy in being mindful of our mortality; we shall
hereby become to be placed in the highest honor, even to set with Kings and
Princes, to live in the largest kingdom, even the kingdom of heaven, to
inherit the durablest riches where neither moth nor rust can corrupt nor
thieves break through nor steal. when once we arrive here we shall hunger no
more, nor thirst no more; neither grief nor sorrow shall possess our souls,
but all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, all fears taken from our hearts;
and nothing but joy and peace, but love and goodness shall encompasse us, and
that not for a day, or an hour, or an year, but for eternity. The sense of
this happiness shall never have an end. But after that we have finished our
course and kept the faith, we shall be crowned with righteousness which is the
ample reward of our holy endeavors. And brings me now briefly to the last
conclusion namely

Doct. 3d. That if we sight courageously our endeavors shall not be
frustrated. God will give us a crown of righteousness.

In the services of men it oft-times falls out that many for the good
endeavors and careful employments in their masters businesses are so far
from being rewarded according to their demerits as that they are not regarded
by them. They fish fair but in the end catch nothing worth acceptance; they
have their labor for their pains. But it is not thus in the service of God,
he is so far from not regarding his servants as that he does most liberally
extend his hands of bounty toward them far beyond, shall I say their
deserts? (I know they have none at all; their well-doings extend not to him,
Psalm. 16.
as David speaks, do what they can, they are unprofitable servants) but far
beyond their desires, for such things which neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, neither can it enter into man's heart to conceive what God has prepared
for them that fear him* which point is both pregnantly and clearly proved in
scripture. The tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God is
promised to Ephesus. To eat the Mannah that is hid, and a white stone, and in
that white stone a new name written in it which no man knows save him that
receives it, is promised to Pergamus. Power over nations is promise dto
Thyatira. while Arras is promised to Sardis, to be a pillar in the Temple of
God is promised to Philadelphia if they remain constant in their profession.
And if Smirna be faithful unto death she shall be sure to have a crown of
life. As Joseph said of Pharoah's dreams, both Pharoah's dreams are one. So
it may be said of these promises they are one, pointing out unto us one and the
same thing, the ample and gracious goodness of God both in respecting and
rewarding the painful labors of his children. A parallel hereof is that of
Solomon Prove. 11.18. The wicked works a deceitful work, but to him that sows
righteousness shall be a sure reward. Hence this came to be a concluded point
and out of question in S. Paul's divinity. That when the sun of his life was
at the point of setting, he does upon consideration hereof comfort himself in
this chapter: yea when he was ready to be offered (as he speaks) and the time
of his departing drew nigh at hand; This was his Swan-like song, I have fought
a good fight I have finished my course. etc.

Use. 1. This may serve in the first place to comfort the faithful, and
courage them in all their proceedings, who endeavor to fear the Lord in all
sincerity and truth. They may from hence collect unspeakeable comfort to
themselves, there is not one prayer they make, not one chapter they read, not
one Sermon they hear, but sets them forward for heaven, and enlarges their
future happiness. What should more comfort them then to enjoy a crown; to
which they being as heirs must needs transport their thoughts beyond all
admiration. It is reputed among men no small honor to be called to the royal
race any way, either by consanguinity, or affinity. Hence is that of David 1.
Sam. 18.23. seems it to you a light thing to be a Kings son in law. How
much more then should it comfort the faithful, that they are of a kingly race
and a royal kindred. God himself who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
he is their father and they his sons, and so are thereby become heirs to
this crown of righteousness which S. Paul here speaks of. Comfort then your
selves ye beloved of the Lord, let nothing daunt or dismay you, neither the
forces of the world, nor the frowns of the wicked, the policy of the devil,
or the fear of death; but know that if you sight valiantly and keep the faith,
there is comfort enough to recompense all your labors in this crown of
righteousness.

Use. 2d. Let this then exhort us not to be weary in well-doing, but with that
good woman of Canaan cry and continue in crying, be steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, seeing your reward is so great if
ye continue to the end. Be not like him who in his devotions was wont to say
the first day Gloria patri, the second filio, the third spiritui sancto.
Doubling over his Orisons, and no whit further he was at the years end then at
the beginning; but labor to go forward in the ways of obedience. If here you
faint your loss will prove great, for you loose no less then a crown. Which
is not a voluptuous crown of Roses as wisdom speaks, nor a crown of pride to
which a woe belongs, as Esaias. 28. Nor such a crown which is set upon the
heads of Dragons and beasts in the Revelation, and so Corona vitiosa ruinosa as
one speaks, nor yet as the Poets crowns of Laurel and Ivy little better then
weeds which wrapped about Ionah's head, trash of no value. And as our Savior
said that his kingdom was not of this world, so these crowns are none of his
crowns, but a crown where death has no claim, a crown where danger is not
incident, a crown not encompassed with crosses, but a crown enriched with
everlasting comforts. O labor then to fight valiantly for it, be not
faint-hearted.

In Gideons army all faint-hearted soldiers were commanded to stay at home. No
cowards shall ever obtain this crown. It is a strange thing to consider how
inconstant christians are in seeking this crown of righteousness, some are of
many minds, many moods, now forward, then backward, full of motions and
commotions, ebbing and flowing like Euripus seven times a day. Some are
neither forward nor backward neither ebb nor flow like Mare mortuum, but are
betwixt the religious and irreligious just standing water. But these like
cowards go back, fall off in the day of battle. I mean at the day of death
when Satan does double his forces. As the king of Assyria charged his captains
to fight neither with small nor great save only with the King of Israel. 1.
Kings. 22.
So the Prince of darkness commands the leader of his troops, and those that
stand at the head of his company, his master-temptations not so fight against
any virtue small or great; but continuance in goodness quam solum novit
coronari. Upon whose head he knows the crown must fall. Then he bestirres
himself not only because he knows his own time is but short: but because he
perceives ours to be so. Therefore he doubles his forcss as if he still means
to make the last conflict the sorest, resolving to set all at the stake and
either now to win or sit down with loss and despair. Oh how should we now
labor then to procure a true faith; and having got it to keep it: that so our
common enemy may not beat off our constancy in fighting under his colors who
in the end will surely crown us. We know eternal life is not given to all,
for then we would all presume; nor to none, for then we would despair. But
vincenti dabitur, to him that overcomes, he that fights the good fight of
faith, as S. Paul did in the text: and as our gracious sister this renowned
Gentlewoman has done: whom you now see to have finished her course, and whom
as hereafter I shall declare has kept the faith. Let this then teach thee to
be valiant unto the last minute. The eye of the captain the Lord Jesus is upon
thee if thou faint to cheer thee, if thou fight to second thee, if thou
conquer to crown the, as he did S. Paul in the text who being confident of the
same did thus conclude with himself, I have fought etc. And so I am come from
the text to the occasion.

The death of man in general is able to make our sorrows run, what pity is
it, that he that even now was Monarch of the air, to breath where he listed,
should suddenly have his lungs stopped with dust, and be locked up well-nigh for
ever in the breathless earth. That he that kept the best company with men,
should forthwith have no better companions then worms. Certainly if we could
blow up this powder into our heads it might awake our souls from sleeping in
security; especially if we take up this consideration withal; that the same
death that slew our worthy sister here may next tread upon our own heels.

But above all things me thinks this should prevayle most with us, the death of
the faithful Saints of God. Which as it is precious in Gods eyes so the more
pittyfull for us to behold. When an ordinary person breaks rank and dies
there falls a vapor, but when a godly person dies there falls a stare. When
the Israelites shook of Egypt and departed, they robbed the Egyptians; and
when a good person shakes of the world she robbes the world. Such was the death
of this thrice worthy and ever renowned gentlewoman, whom death too soon for
us, though too late for her self has with an Habeas corpus removed into
another world. I know it is an usual custom upon such solemn occafions as
this, to receive the worth of such persons as we know both in life and death
to be truly commendable. And to warrant our actions, we have Gods word to
second us; who as he would have the name of the wicked to rot, so he would have
that the memorial of the righteous should remain for ever. On which ground I
am the more bold to blaze her worth, the commemoration whereof as it is
profitable to posterity, so is it likewise acceptable and pleasing to God, who
in the fame of his Saints is chiefly honored as the sole Author of every good
and perfect gift. I^m. 1.17.
Their lives are as lines by which we may lead our own. Polyb. hist. lib. 1.
And as Polybius wisely observes; there is not a more expedite way to instruct
us and to stir us up unto a good life, then by observing the sincere piety of
faithful persons whom the Almighty has been pleased to gather to himself. Vt
qui praeceptis non accendimur saltem exemplis incitemur. Greg Mor. l. 9. cap. 3.
We are not easily moved by precepts, examples are more prevalent, practice
having proved that facile in performance, which to our sluggish dispositions,
by precept only, seemed very difficult. therefore,

That God may have praise and we reap the profit of an excellent pattern, I
shall adventure as well as I can to show forth Her honor whom I know to be
every way truly honorable. But before I make my words good, let your belief
go along with me to remove all prejudicial conceits. For I do sincerely
confess, I shall not out of private affection prejudice the truth. For though
Her memory be dear to me (as the relics of our loving friend are wont to
be,) yet truth must still be dearer, 1. Cor. 13.6.
and love it self rejoices in the truth. Let others if they please imitate
bad lawyers, who for their fees will plead and commend any cause. For my own
part, my conscience is not of so large a size, neither will I extend it further
then her worth and goodness shall bind me.

We will begin therefore in the first place from whence she took her
beginning, at her birth and pedigree. She was cut out of no mean quarry. It
was a custom amongst the Indians, says Phylostratus, after the death of any
worthy person to inscribe his acts upon the doors of his house for the
ennobling of his issue. So it was ever esteemd no mean blessing to be well
descended. And surely if I should take upon me here the part of an Herald, and
in imitation of them write upon the doors of her house her descent both by
father and mother, I could easily derive her (as you know better then my felfe)
descending from Honorable, Right Honorable, and truly noble blood. But what
is greatness without grace, or honor without goodness, but as the Cabanet
which wants the Jewel; or the Casket that is empty of gold. It is the greatest
infamy to be like unto hills, the higher the barrener; when we should be as
Diamonds, the bigger, the better. But such was not this virtuous gentlewoman I
may say of her truly in the words of the Apostle, she was fruitful in good
works. These shined in her devout soul like heaps of Diamonds in rings of
gold: being the Characters of true nobility did declare to the world her
descent from the royallest blood, the great King of heaven. It is Godliness that
makes us truly great, and though we be never so much honored amongst men on
earth, yet if we be not Gods favorites we dye in infamy, and our very names
shall rot. But enough of her birth which we all know was honorable.

Let us come in the next place to her life, she had (as we all now have) A
course to finish, but this is her happiness, her journey is at an end, our
misery, we are still a travailing toward it. She has that in fruition which
we only yet hope for, even this crown of righteousness in the text. Now if the
world enquire how she has got it, or the way she took to obtain it. I answer
in the words of S. Paul, by fighting a good fight and keeping the faith. She
was a right constant heavenly warrior, that at the conclusion of her days,
not three hours before that last one of her death, I found her to have her
weapons in readiness. Knowledge, Courage, Love, and Power.

First Knowledge, which by continual practice from daily reading of the word
she had procured. She did not like Martha* encomber her self with wordly
business, but with Mary, did choose the better part. And this did her daily
practice declare, whose constant course was four times in the day to set her
self a part for the service of her God. So that I may say of her, as it is
spoken of devout S. Hierome, she lived every day as her last day. And thus
laboring to increase in knowledge she did attain to no small measure of it;
for a little before her death when I began to tell her of Satan's wiles to beat
us off from being confident of Gods favor when we were in the weakest state
to resist him: with much confidence she returns me answer in that comfortable
expression of S. Paul's, Romans 8. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, Romans 8.38.39
nor principalities nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate me from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus word for word as strong
as she was able a little before her dissolution expressed her self. Neither was
this persuasion grounded on a general knowledge which is a common gift, but
on a practical, experimental, and saving knowledge, which none are enricht
with but such for whom God has laid up a crown of righteousness. There are
indeed a generation of men and women that pretend much knowledge, but in her it
was real, not in pretense. She was none of those talking Ladies, whose
Religion appears only in the tongue. But she was more for good works then
words. Much like unto that worthy woman the mother of S. Greg: Nazianzen of
whom it is said, that had she an Ocean of wealth she would have emptyed it
all into the bellies of the poor. So I may say of this virtuous Ge^tlewoma^,
there was an Ocean of pity enclosed within the compass of her heart, and when
any poor neighbor stood in need of her bounty, she gave most liberally to
them. And all this did arise from her knowledge, who knowing that the smallest
releife given to the distressed members of Christ, should not pass unrewarded
at the last day.

2ly. As she did abound in knowledge, so with Courage, for though death, which
to nature and sense is said to be the most terrible of terribles, yet the
thought of it did not any way daunt her spirits. She could with boldness look
death in the face, which when she was put in mind of the approaching hour, thus
heavenly expressed her self, that howsoever God was pleased to dispose of her,
whether for life or death, like a courageous christian she concluded she
should be the Lords. Resolving like Job to undergo affliction patiently, and
with S. Paul to suffer death willingly, if the Lord be so pleased or has
appointed it. Now would you know the reason of this courage? It was that holy
practice of her life: whereby continual purging and embracing all gracious
opportunities of hearing the word preached, she did so daily renew her
covenant with her God, as that hereby the sting of death being taken away it
could not any way affright her. A rare pattern for the greatest Ladies to
follow, whose life if they did but seriously consider, would confine themselves
more unto their closets to meditate on God and goodness, then now they loose
time in their chambers, in contriving of fashions and following the vanities of
this sinful world. Oh remember you great ones of the world, that you are but
dust, and you know not how soon you may be resolved to your first principle
which is dust. Now if in the midst of your worldly pomp and honor you should
see death appear unexpectedly, as Belthazar's handwriting did on the wall,
before you had made your peace with your God, how would it make your joints to
tremble; how would it fill you with horror and amazement? especially to think
that you have served no other God but your pleasures, you never sought after
that which would have made you truly honorable. Surely if these serious
thoughts could but possess your souls with this virtuous Gentlewoman, you
would turn your times of playing into praying; and by making the word of God
your delight, would endeavor (with this now glorious Saint,) to procure the
assurance which at the finishing of your course would make you more then
Conquerors through the Lord Jesus Christ that loved us.

3ly. She was armed with Love; in respect of which virtue I may say of her, as
Solomon speaks of the good woman Prove. 31.2. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou surpassest them all. Her goodness in this particular was
in the superlative degree before many others of her quality; which will amply
appear in the several streams of affection which flowed from that fountain
of love in her heart. For first if you will view it as it appeared toward her
her husband, and so you shall find it stream forth in abundance. Being as most
real so most discreet, hence in the whole course of their lives, so long as
they lived together, they so loved that the smallest discontent was not found
to prejudice each others affection. A rare president for most married women,
who through their indiscretion it oftentimes falls out that small jarres break
forth into great quarrels, yea I had almost said to the separation of
conjugall affection. Let such remember here is a wife worthy their imitation,
who by the sweetness of her disposition, the amiablenesse of her person, the
meaknesse of her behavior, the resplendant virtues that she was adorned with,
did so comply with her husbands disposition, that she may shine as a rare
pattern to light others in the like way to practice. 2ly. if you will view her
Love as it streamed forth toward Gods ministers: and here it appeared very
great. For of Her, herein I may truly say with S. Paul, she did highly esteem
of them for their works sake. She was none of those proud Ladies, that love to
see Gods Ministers stand at a distance from them; least they melt the paint of
their faces with the heat of reproof. But so meek and humble was she, and so
willing to give care to heavenly instructions, that now she reaps the fruits of
those celestial comforts which are conveyed unto the soul by the word of
grace. 3ly. If you view Her Love as it ran forth to relieve the members of
Jesus Christ it here appears great also. She was in this particular like
another Dorcas toward them, full of good works, feeding not only their
bellies, but also clothing their backs, releiving them bountifully,
maintaining them liberally. So that by Her love they were enabled to live of
themselves, who before were not able to maintain their own charge. So
abounding in good works was this woman, that though Her death be Her own
greatest gain, yet to many objects of pity will prove the greatest loss.
Lastly. I may not forget that stream of Love, which did most nobly supply the
necessity of Her old servants. It Is a thing little thought upon by many great
persons, who out of conscience should consider, and provide for their old and
faithful servants. We may not wonder to see young serving-me^ to become old
beggars; when they meet with such unconscionable masters, who oftentimes
instead of rewarding them will take occasion to cashiere them; and well may
they then beg, who are not able to work for themselves. But this virtuous
person was never of this temper, but as ever, so especially at Her death did
liberally provide for them. And gave them several Legacies to augment their
stock they had gotten in Her service. Who as herein they shall have cause to
remember Her Love, so especially Gods goodness in placing them under so
gracious a Mistress. Thus you see what an Ocea^ of Love possessed this virtuous
foul. And as she was armed with Love, so in the last place with Power. God
being infinitely gracious to her, in enabling Her to resist, yea overcome the
enemies of Her salvation. Trampling the world underfoot, as unwilling or give
any thoughts thereof the smallest entertainment.

Her affections were placed according to the (...) of the soul, only on
things above. Though (...) might labor to tempt and move Her to distrust (...)
thoughts, yet all was in vain. For God had (...) enricht Her soul with the
assurance of his favor that the gates of Hell could not prevail agai^^ Her, so
infinitely filled was Her divine soul w^^^ heavenly ravishments, that whiles
she was al^ to speak, uttered nothing but celestial ejaculation (...) and
when she was deprived of that benefit, lifted (...) Her hands, which were the
Indexes of Her con^^^^^ praying; and thus having fought a good fight, and
finished her course, kept the faith, she is now an (...) tainer of that Crown
of righteousness which S. (...) here speaks of, which crown the Lord of his
in^^nite mercy give us for his son our Savior (...) Christ his sake, by whom
alone we are more (...) Conquerours. And to whom with the Father and the
Eternal spirit; Three persons, one immort^^ and everlivng God, be ascribed as
is most due, all honor, and glory, power, praise, might, majesty, and
dominion, now and for evermore AMEN.

FINIS.

