The Sure Way to Wealth. INFALLIBLE DIRECTIONS To get and keep Sufficient
RICHES; Even while Taxes Rise, and Trades Sink. By DANIEL BURGESS, Pastor of a
Church near Covent Garden, London.

This is the Way, walk ye in it, Isa. 30.21. My God shall supply all your Need,
Phil. 4.19. London, Printed for Andrew Bell and Jonas Luntley at the Pestle and
Mortar, over against the Horse-shoe-Tavern in Chancery Lane. MDCXCIII.

To my dear Brothers and Sisters; Mr. OBADIAH BURGESS, Mr. WILLIAM BURGESS,
Mrs. MARY HAUSE, Mrs. SARAH PLUMMER, Mrs. HANNAH LEWIS, Mrs. ELIZABETH HARRISON:
With their faithful Consorts.
THIS Branch of Directions has been thought likely to bear good Fruit; and the
more, because it puts forth in so ill Times. Ill Ones, as they are called by
those through whose Means they are so made.

I have taken the Weather-side of them; and made their worst Winds to blow good
unto my Arguments. Which are more than a little strengthened, by the Decays of
our Foreign and Home-trade, and their consumptive Effects.

Vexation, the Hebrews say, gives Understanding. And Oppression is known to
have made mad Men wise, as well as wise Men mad. Who dares say, that there is
no place for our hope of the Experiment? It was in a howling Wilderness, that
Israel was taught the Law; it may be, in this howling and murmuring state of
ours, we shall be better taught the Gospel.

Being persuaded to make public this Essay, it liked me jointly to salute you
in this Entry. So expressing my dutiful Regard to your Souls, in my
ministration unto others; wherein I cannot own my self short, when it has not
been thus expressed. An eldest Brother should be as a Father, said one; unto
whom I assent. And having inscribed another small Writing to your Nephew and
Nieces, I resolved to mete like Measure, and inscribe this to your selves: Who
are as truly dear unto me, and from whom I am as undivided in Joys and Sorrows,
as from those Apples of my Eyes.

You will all join with me in the Doxology, to which I am carried by the
thoughts of you. Good is the Lord, whose we are, and whom we serve. Let our
Father's House say, His Mercy endures for ever. For,

In his good Pleasure and rare Mercy, we, the Children of his Servants do
continue, every one of us. We continue in the Land of the Living, and in the
House of God. None buried, none dead while he lives, or Excommunicated. None
is gone down to the Dust, in the sense of the Psalmist, (Psalm. 22.29.) not one
sunk into ignominious Poverty. As on the other hand, no one is of the very Fat
of the Earth; no one has his House full of Silver and Gold. God has chosen
for all, what Agur chose for himself, neither Poverty nor Riches. Not one Name
infamously stained; not one Body deformed; not one Limb or Sense disabled. Unto
every one is a Help-meet; a Covering of the Eyes, Genesis 20.16. Ezekiel. 24.26.
that is the desire of them.

We are Children so beloved for our Father's sake, and Mother's: For sake of
the Covenant made with them by their God: Who has brought upon us, that which
he promised them for us. There fails not ought of any good thing which the
Lord spoke unto them, and for which they trusted him.

Signally illustriously trusted him; Choosing rather to suffer Afflictions with
the People of God, and to make us partakers of their Sufferings at Malborough,
than to enjoy the Opulence of Collingburn-ducis for a Season: To name no more,
well known in Wiltshire.

Let our Seal be set, God is true! The Just Man walks in his Integrity, and his
Children are blessed after him!

And let this Vote pass into an Act; He is our God, we and our Houses will
serve him; He is our Father's God, and we will exalt him.

So shall we do, if these Rules be followed. I mean, with these Cautions taken;
viz. That God's Glory be the highest End of our Obedience; and we do not obey
ultimately for Self Ends. That our Reward which we dutifully expect, be not
looked for as our Merit; but we still acknowledge that our Services deserve not
a drop of Water, while we conclude that Grace will follow them with the Rivers
of God's Pleasure.

My Prayers ascend incessantly for you and your little Ones. Nor has our God
greater Blessings, than those that I ask him for you. And of you all, chiefly
for that Family which Providence has placed most remotely from us, in another
Kingdom. Unto which we all owe peculiar Offices of Love, whereto I must hope
none will ever be difficult, but all continue most forward.

I am, Your most affectionate Brother, and Servant in Love, Daniel Burgess.

S. Woodford in Paraphrase on Psalm. 37, and 34.
IN War good Men are kept, in Famine fed:
In the worst Times, blush not, nor be afraid;
God, who is their Shield, himself does find them Bread;
And only makes their Enemies dismayed.
Sinners, like Fat of Lambs, shall waste,
And only leave a Smoke behind,
To be the Triumph of the Wind;
Their Goods ill gotten shall not last,
But like their sudden Growth, their End shall come as fast.
Say, Lord, this poor Man to thee cried,
And thou heardst him; why then am I denied?
I who no less am thy great Care,
Since equally round both encamped thine Angels are.
Try God but thus, and thou shall know
Thy Joy as certain, as my Joys are now:
How good God is, how happy they,
Who make his Power their Hope, his Love their Stay!
Dread him! for if he has thy Fear,
Thou may be confident thy Wants shall have his Ear.
He Will be himself thy mighty Store,
When savage Lions shall for Hunger roar:
While those that glory in their Gold,
And in his own Chains would the Prisoner hold,
Spoilers themselves are Captives made,
And into sudden Want, which they least feared, betrayed.
The sure Way to Wealth. Infallible DIRECTIONS to get Riches enough, while
Trades sink, and Taxes rise.
OUtcries of Poverty do fill the City and Country; If not in Truth, yet in
common Fame, it comes on us like an armed Man, irresistably. Men's Hearts fail
them for Fear; it is every where said, We shall all be Undone. From the Court
to the Mill, this is the Complaint; nor ever from my Childhood, have I heard it
so vexatiously uttered as at this Day, or so universally.

For even they that fear God, seem but little more than others to trust him.
Believers on his Son for the Salvation of their Souls, do tormentingly fear
what will become of their Bodies. Men that have his Spirit, are saying as the
old Israelites did, Who shall give us Flesh to eat? They that are satisfied
with his Word for the Life to come, show plainly that they cannot rest thereon
for the Life that now is.

So much Absurdity cleaves to our Wisdom. We trust for a Crown of Glory, and
distrust for a Crumb of Bread. As though holy Faith were the substance of
Things hoped for in Heaven only, and not in the Way to it: The Evidence of
Things therein not yet seen, and not of Things on our way thither. As though
Godliness had not Promises of this Life; which is untrue. As though we duly
trusted in the living God, while we distrusted him for our least and lowest
Life; which is impossible.

In short; good Clothes and good Estates, be such as are neither so narrow as
to pinch and straiten us, nor so wide as to cumber us. Agur very well
understood good Living. Defects and Excesses break its Rules with us. The word
Riches signifies two things: A sufficiency for ones real Occasions, and just
Contentment therewith. Without these, Kings and Queens are very poor People;
but with them we are as rich as they; We have as much Wealth, though less Gold.
We have Enough; that is (at least) as good as their Feast. And as many as walk
by these Rules, shall not fail of this enough: Shall be rich, above the
control of Stars, Wars and Taxes.

Direction I. Trust your Guardians. I suppose you to be true Christians; and if
so, the Father, Son and Spirit are your Guardians. They have promised to care
for you, in Temporals as in Spirituals; have they not? 1 Pet. 5.7. The Lord who
cares for you. And you have chose God for your Guardian, have you not? 2 Cor.
8.5. They first gave their own selves to the Lord; themselves, and all they
had. God has promised, He will never leave nor forsake you, Heb. 13.5. unless
you forsake him. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you are with him; if
you seek him, he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake
you. He has not promised to take care of your Souls, and left you to shift for
your selves in things that concern your Bodies. It is Christ's word, Take you
no thought for your Life. Say not you, What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? Matthew. 5.25, 31. And it is Christ's
Command, that you cast all your Care upon him who cares for you: All your Care
for your bodily Concernments. Wherefore depend upon his Care, and you shall
have Success, Support, and Maintenance. Your Cottage shall be a Court. But if
you rely not on him, marvel not if your Court sink to a Cottage; If your
Abundance be brought to Nothing: For nothing is safe but what he keeps; there
is no Ensuring-Office below Heaven. There indeed is one that deserves well the
Name. By your own and your Friends careful thought, you cannot to your Stature
add a Cubit; nor to your Substance a Groat. It is God that makes Rich and
Poor: As little as you think of it, you dare not deny it. The Income of
Christians, is according to their Behavior toward their Guardians. Thou shall
never have an undoing Loss, if thou do commit thy Way unto the Lord, Psalm.
37.5.

Direct. II. Go to School to the Ants. Learn Diligence with your Trust. God
does not sell his Bread to us for our Pains; nor does he promise it to us in
our Sloth. He gives Food, but requires Sweat; true Labor in our Calling.

It Is by the diligent Hand that he makes poor Men rich, Prove. 10.4. to stand
before Princes, Prove. 22.29. and to bear Rule, Prove. 12.24. And it is for
Sloth, and by it, that the Rich are made Poor. Prove. 23.21. Drowziness shall
clothe a Man with Rags. Prove. 20.4. The Sluggard shall beg in Harvest, and have
nothing. Prove. 12.24. The slothful shall be under Tribute, in a base underling
Condition. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. This we commanded, (from the Lord) if any Man would
not work, neither should he eat. It seems God's Will, that we be laborious as
Ants, or poor as Snakes. And it is certain, that Fire and Sword make not so many
Beggars, as Sloth. Plant and water, God will give Increase. You shall be little
troubled with Poverty, if you but keep from the little Sleep, the little
Slumber, the little folding of the Hands to sleep, Prove. 24.33.

Why should Drones eat the Honey of Bees? or the Earth feed its unprofitable
Burdens? It may not be expected; and where it is permitted, it is always accursed.

Truly happy Kings be Day-labourers; and blessed Courts be very VVorkhouses.
Could Idleness invade Heaven, it would make a Famine there. Cherubims and
Seraphims have Wings and Feet, and do use them. Angels Food is not the Bread of
Idleness; they eat no such Poison.

Direct. III. Lean upon no Reeds. Earthly Gods be but mortal Men; it is a wonder
they should be trusted in by any rational Ones. But generally they are so; nor
does any thing more hinder use of our Diligence, and trust to Divine
Providence, than trust in Man. Great Expectations from Parents, and rich
Friends, are such a Snare; and thereby the Means of infamous Poverty unto many.
Few think so; but unerring Wisdom tells us, Men of high Degree are a Lie, Psalm.
62.9. And unspotted Justice passes this Sentence, Cursed be the Man that
trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the
Lord, Jer. 17.5. Papists rely on Angels and Saints above; but they, and
Protestants also, lean too hard on Men below. Beware hereof, and know this;
Trust in the Rich makes many Poor; but he shall be well provided for, who
hearkneth to the Prophet, Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from Man whose Breath is in his
Nostrils; For wherein is he to be accounted of? If Creatures must be
Accessories, I pray let God still be Principal.

A great Man used to say, That his Memory never deceived him; for this very
good Reason, because he never trusted it. Do by all Creatures, as he did by his
Memory; use them, but not trust them, and they shall serve you and not deceive
you. This is the Way, walk in it.

Direct. IV. Serve but one Master. You have but one Soul, and that cannot serve
God and Mammon. It may be a Slave to the Devil's Lusts, and a Subject of God's
Wrath; but it cannot be a Servant to so contrary Masters, Mat. 2.24. Of God it
is written, Him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4.10. And that he, and none
beside him, is God, and the Rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11.6.

But the very first Commandment, is of all the most broken one; who can say, I
have no other God beside him? My Estate, my Name, my Child, my Pleasure, is no
God of mine. Most of those that have the true God in their Mouths, have these
strange Gods in their Hearts: And therefore are their Sorrows multiplied,
because they hasten after other Gods, Psalm 16.4. Therefore it is, that they
want any good thing, because they have more Gods than one, Psalm. 34.9. And what
wonder if they be abased by the true God, that set up false Ones? Let the true
God have all your Hearts; and let the Shame be mine if he does not supply all
your Wants. Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your Need, according to his
Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus.

He is a true Master; and he has promised, that if we seek first his Kingdom
and its Righteousness, we shall not have that only, but a good Substance with
it, Mat. 6.33. All these things shall be added.

He is a wise Master also; too wise to send Servants in his Message, and cut
off their Feet: I say their Feet, for this World's Blessings be as requisite to
his Worship, as our Feet be to our Walk. And he knows it well enough, Mat.
6.32. Your heavenly Father knows that you have need of these things. He knows
that if he will employ us, he must maintain us on this Earth; we cannot live by
the Air.

He is a good Master too; He delights in Mercy. But there were small sign of
it, if he fed Ravens and Lions, and starved those that loved him above their
Lives; especially, being that he has in his House Bread enough and to spare,
Luke 15.17. Known and wilful Sins, (that is, Aversions from God, and
Conversions unto Creatures) will bring the Moth and the Lion. Sometimes a Moth
that eats out an Estate slowly, and silently, no body knows how. Sometimes a
Lion, that makes open and quick work with it, Hosea 5.12, 14. Hear O ye Rich,
hear it O ye Poor; partial Religion brings this sad Moth and Lion. Most Men
have some Religion, but few have All.

Naaman was a Captain, and was a Favorite, and was much more; but he was a
Leper. One and another of you is a just Man, a charitable, a Sermon-hearer, and
a great deal more; but he is a neglecter of the Lord's Supper: Never renewed
his holy baptismal Covenant at God's Table. It may be he understands it not; at
least he has his But, and his Leprosy; he acts not some Grace, he indulges some
Lust. Some Duty he does not perform, some Ordinance he does not attend. Hence,
hence comes the Wrath of God, who hates to be served by halves. Follow the Lord
fully, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3.

Direct. V. Wear your Master's Livery. Humility is the supreme King's Livery.
And his Servants are shamefully naked, when they are any otherwise clothed. St.
Peter's words which we read, Be ye clothed with Humility, are thought fit to be
thus read; Be ye clothed with Humility, as your Badg and Livery. [Humilitatem
induite ut (...), quale viles servi gestarent, Heinsius in 1 Pet. 5.5.] You may
not therefore look to be fed with God's Bread, if you cast off his Badg. Alas,
that it should be so grown out of fashion in our Days. But wot ye, there is no
Garment of richer Praise. Our Blessed Savior never put it off; and he
commanded us to learn from him the perpetual Use of it, Matthew. 11.28. He knew
and taught the gratefulness of it unto God. Its being, as is said of the
Violet, of sweetest Scent, though of lowest Place. For your Lives then, keep on
this Livery; and, hold this Violet in your Bosoms. A Flower, without which the
highest Angels would stink in God's Nostrils. And, with it, the worst Sinner
has a way into his Favor.

In God is no Pride at all; He does not think himself, nor desires he to be
thought better than he is. Unto his Soul, Pride is the most abominable Sin of
all; He resists, stands in Battel-array against it, James 4.6. It Is an
Abomination to him, Prove. 16.5. What brings Men low? It Is Pride, Prove. 29.23.
What brings Shame? It Is Pride, Prove. 11.2. What destroys Families? It Is
Pride, Prove. 15.25. The House of the Proud shall be destroyed. It brought
Vzzias the Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26.27. It cost David the Lives of seventy thousand
Men, 1 Chronicles. 21.14. It brought Wrath upon Hezekiah, and all Judah and
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. [Tremble old England, whose Pride takes Blessings
with Disdain and Scorn, and Crosses with Wrath and Rage. Thy Pride looks like
the Harbinger of thy Death!] Pride gave the Apostle Paul, a Messenger of Satan,
2 Cor. 12.7. Wonder not that any break and burst, when they swell of Pride's
Tinpany. Marvel not that high Hills be barren, and high-minded Men be begging.
Think not strange to see Lice eat up Herod's; and Gnats and Flies plague
Pharaohs. But know this; the Meek shall inherit Earth, and Heaven too, Matthew.
5.5. Valleys shall laugh with richest Fatness, and honorable Estate shall be
to the Humble, Prove. 15.33.

If Humility put your Mouth in the Dust, neither God's Wrath or Man's shall put
your Honor in the Dust. Humble your Minds to God's Sovereignty, and your Wills
to his Precepts and Providence; and then assure you of his rich Promises. He
will exalt you, 1 Pet. 1.6. He will beautify you, Psalm. 149.4. He will make
your Soul dwell at ease, and your Seed inherit the Earth, Psalm. 25.

Of Humility I will say, As poor as it looks, it makes many Rich. Though it
seems to have Nothing, yet it possesses all Things. And he was not besides
himself, who said, That he would rather be an humble Devil, than a proud Angel.
The Depth of Humility, is better than the Height of Pride. Say then to Pride,
as Naboth to Ahab; God forbid it, that I should give away the Inheritance of my
Fathers unto thee.

Direct. VI. Hold your Heart at your right Hand. Your Heart's Business is to
Contrive and Consult; your Hands is to Work and Execute; your Interest
requires, that these two be never asunder. They are Fools, and it is odds but
they are Beggars too, that contrive without executing, or rashly act, without
first deliberating, Eccles. 10.2. God's Blessing you may not expect upon your
Affairs, if you follow not his Counsel in ordering of them. His Counsel is,
that you order them with this Discretion; Psalm. 112.5. A good Man will guide
his Affairs with Discretion. Clothe his Family, Furnish his House, Buy, Sell,
Give, Refuse to give with Discretion. With all his own, and oft-times borrowed
Discretion; taken from the Counsel and Example of Men more Discreet. He that
hearkneth to Counsel, is wise, Prove. 12.15.

It is often said by decayed Men, This and that unadvised Act undid me; had I
taken my Friends Advice, I had not become a Charge to my Friends. He is surely
no wise or good Man, that asks not Counsel from God in his secular Business;
and having asked it, does not look after it: Expecting to have it given him in
the ordinary Ways of his wise Providence. These are Meditation and Consultation
with such as are Godly Wise. The neglect whereof is therefore stark
Profaneness; and, as a direct working Cause, a highly deserving Cause, of deep
Poverty. Nor need they to wonder at their ignominiously low Condition, who
hereby sin themselves into it: Forasmuch as they do (among other Evils) bring
the Religion they profess into greatest Disgrace. Causing more than a few to
conceit and exclaim, that Religion makes Men simple and self-undoing Idiots in
this World.

Walk wisely then, and you are safe; you have Royal Security; Prove. 24.3, 4.
Through Wisdom is an House built, by Understanding it is established. By
Knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant Riches.
The Riches, which are not always to Men of Understanding, are such as can be
very well spared by Men of Understanding; that is, for the time that they are
without them, and upon the occasions.

Even David was once fain to ask Supplies from Nabal; and our blessed Savior
had not where to lay his Head. But ordinarily Wisdom enricheth; and when for a
short season it receives, it rejoiceth in Tribulations. As well it may; for,
its Poverty is glorious. No Martyr is a Beggar. There is a very reigning with
Christ, in suffering for him.

Direct. VII. Watch against your five Enemies: Such are your five Senses. See
to it, and keep those Bears in Chains. They are as wild Creatures; and if not
warily and strongly kept in subjection, will tear and destroy your Temporal,
with your Spiritual Interests.

He was a Monster, that in this London spent his whole Patrimony (of many
thousands of Pounds, as I hear) in one Treat of his five Senses: But he was a
Brother of yours, by Father and Mother's Side. And your Blood has the like
Brimstone in it; beware that it take not fire. If your Lusts kindle, your
Substance is quickly in Ashes: For Wool will not be soft enough then for your
Backs; nor any but the most sumptuous Silks. No Dishes will relish, except
Dainties; no Table please, unless it be spread with Snares; nothing but what is
above your Estate, will please your Palate. Necessaries will be loathed without
Superfluities. One Lust shall stand you in more by the Year, than all Nature.
More will be spent extravagantly in a Day, than necessarily in a Week. So
chargeable things are sensual Delights: Its bewitching Epilepsies require so
much to maintain them.

Alas, our Bodies are sinful, as truly as our Souls, and need Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. They are rebellious against God and our Souls; their Senses sway
more powerfully, than the unrenewed Soul's Reason does. And regenerated Men
have enough to do to control and keep them down, 1 Cor. 9.27. If they prevail
and act us, we cease to be Christians, yea Men; we are as Beasts that perish,
Psalm. 50. ult. They cease not to war in us for that prevalency; they are
restless Tempters and Seducers within us, as Devils are without us. The Eye,
the Ear, and the rest of them crave for what Grace and Reason forbid. And, O
how commonly are immortal Souls damned to gratify those perishing Brutes? How
also are Names and Estates devoured, that these Senses may be humoured? Damned
Angels are less Destroyers? and without these, could not be so easily
destroyers of us. Prove. 21.17. He that loves Pleasure, shall be a poor Man; he
that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich. That is, he that loves them for
more than their proper Use; for Lust, as most do. Adam and Noah (our two great
Parents) fell by Eating and Drinking; millions of their Children are undone
thereby.

The Senses were given to maintain natural Life; but Sin makes them destroy
rational Life, and Natural too, full often.

Would you see good Days, and many? This you must do, Day by Day: Let religious
Reason rule you; and so, that your Eye shall not see, nor your Ear hear, nor
your Mouth taste, nor your Finger touch, what Conscience does not warrant. No,
though, as oft-times they will be, they be very troublesome, and importunate
for their unwarrantable Objects. Though you be put to vex and crucify your
Flesh in this Combat, as you must do, Gal. 5.24. This is what the Apostle
speaks in those emphatical Phrases, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my Body, and
bring it into subjection. Such a mortified Body will not be forsaken, nor its
Seed beg Bread. But of those that are pampered, multitudes come to be famished;
Epicures do so eat up themselves, as well as their Friends. As commonly do we
see those unclean Fowls go barefoot, as other Geese; and almost as unpitiedly.
Yet, mistake me not; all sensual Pleasure is not sinful. Some does whet, and
not let, Body and Mind for their Services. And so much is lawful, needful, and
laudable.

It is Sin and Folly to prefer Money above the Body, as to prefer the Body
above the Soul; and very often this Folly is conjunct. It Is seldom any value
their Flesh more than their Spirit, but they take far greater care to preserve
their Estates than their Lives. Many are the Misers, that die to save Charges.

Solomon, when he was returned to God, commanded eating with joy, and drinking
with mirth, Eccles. 9.7. Enoch, while he walked with God, begat Sons and
Daughters, Genesis 5.22. Sordid withholding and stingy, tends unto Poverty, Prove.
11.24. They that pinch their Families Bellies, to cram and swell their Bags, do
not so certainly die rich, as they live poor; but do together sin against Body
and Estate. It is not the Holy Spirit that leads any Man to hate his own Flesh;
though it is most certain, Whosoever indulgeth the Luxury and Lechery of the
Flesh, he is a Stranger and an Enemy unto that Heavenly Spirit. Temperance
stands between Scylla and Charybdis; it is equally distant from Luxury and
Penury. Hold that golden Mean, and shun both of these Rocks, you need not fear
Shipwreck. Never waste a Penny, you shall never want a Shilling; said Dr.
Harris to his Children. It is because Epicures and Misers do swarm among us,
that the Poor we have always with us; otherwise Beggars would be as rare in
England, as Frogs and Spiders in Ireland.

Direct. VIII. Lay not violent Hands on your selves. The Murder of many Men's
Estates, is by their own wicked Hands and Seals. They do run into Danger, in
hopes of coming out with Safety. Without just forelooking, they leap into
perilous Projects and mortal Suretiships. But take you this Divine Counsel; Do
not ever hang your selves, in hope the Cord will break. Do not forget, or
slight God's Word so much; his Word put into the Bible, to give Wisdom to the
Simple. Prove. 6.1. If thou be Surety for thy Friend, thou art snared, thou art
taken with the Words of thy Mouth. Prove. 11.15. He that hates Suretiship, is
sure. Prove. 20.16. Take his Garment that is Surety for a Stranger: that is,
Trust not such a Fool without a Pawn; no, take the Coat from his Back. It is
true, Suretiship is in some Cases lawful and necessary; Genesis 42.37. Genesis 43.9.
Philem. v. 18, 19. But always unlawful it is, to oblige you to pay for another
more than you have right to dispose of, and a sincere Will and Purpose to pay
for him, if need require.

It is, I suppose, wisdom always to give unto needy Men as much as we can spare;
and not bind us at any time to pay for them any more. The Divine Wisdom
brandeth ordinary Sureties for Fools; Prove. 17.18. A Man void of Understanding,
strikes Hands, and becomes Surety in the presence of his Friend. Wise Men may
fall into Evils of Affliction seven times, and rise up again.

The Royal Preacher (in that much mistaken Text) says that they do so, Prove.
24.16. But Nabal is his Name, and Folly is with him, that leaps into ruinous
Troubles. Notorious is the Reason of our common Saying, That the greatest
Leapers break most Bones: And the most exquisite Dancers on the Rope, die by
the Rope. Providence is no safeguard to Desperateness: The Ruins of many Rich
Families be sad Witnesses.

I do compassionately warn you and yours; adding but this memorable word, Most
commonly they be Judasses that do hang themselves; I mean, covetous as that Son
of Perdition, and treacherous as he was. Where Kindness makes one Surety,
Avarice and greedy expectation of Gain makes twenty. And we see that it is
scarce one of twenty, who betrays not the Creditor, the Debtor, or himself.
Wherefore if you will be Sureties, take good Advice first; remembering, that
Judas who was his own Judge, was his own Executioner also.

Direct. IX. Load your Parents soundly. So is the Hebrew Text in the fifth
Commandment; load them with Honor: Give them Measures of Reverence, Love,
Gratitude and Obedience, pressed down and running over. It is a Commandment of
express Promise; and that Promise of greatest temporal Good. It is the first
Commandment of the second Table; next and immediately to his own Honor, God
stands for the Honor of Parents. His Zeal for it, appears in Threats for Sin
against it. Prove. 20.20. Whosoever curses his Father or Mother, his Lamp shall be
put out in obscure Darkness; that is, he shall live in Misery, and die with
Disgrace. The Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother,
the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it,
Prove. 30.17. that is, he that scorns and derides Parents, tho it be but with a
Look and Gesture, and without one Word uttered, he shall die untimely and
ignominiously; and after Death be denied a Burial, lying exposed to Birds of
Prey.

Have you been guilty of Disobedience? Be as eminent for your Repentance. Have
you been Dutiful to your Parents? continue to be so to your last Breath.
Fathers be Kings, and Mothers be Queens unto you their Children. Next and
immediately under God, Christ and Conscience, they be your supreme Moderators
and Governors. Sweeten you their Lives, and God will sweeten yours. Honor you
them, God will honor you. Scripture and Providence say of this Duty, Length of
Days is in its right Hand, and in its left Hand are Riches and Honor, Prove.
3.16.

Direct. X. Marry to none but Heirs of the Crown; Heirs of the Crown
incorruptible. Poor Matches be the notorious Seminary of Beggars. The King of
Heaven is not Childless in England; and he provides, as becomes a King, for
his Children. All be Heirs of God, Romans 8.17. and Heirs of the Kingdom, James
2.5. All of them he blesses; and his Blessing makes rich, and adds no
Sorrow with it, Prove. 10.22. A rare Portion, is it not? A godly Man is the Son
of the King of Kings; a godly Woman is his Daughter. The ungodly of both Sexes
be the Devil's Children, and outlawed Rebels. The Wrath of God abides on them,
John 3.36. God's Curse is on their very Blessings, Malach. 2.2. Will ye marry
Rebels? then bear you Hunger, and wear Rags. They deserve to be stung, that
choose a Serpent for their Bosom. And they cannot look for God's Blessing, who
prefer such Vermin before his Children: liking better to have Satan, than to
have his divine Majesty for their Father-in-Law. Would you secure an Estate? do
not burn, nor marry a Child of his who has no Estate, but the Lake of Fire.
Lust consumes many single Persons; and ill Yoke-fellows starve many married
Ones. But while the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness of it, you need not to
fear Famine, if you marry into his Royal Family: If you take a Child of his;
and that for his Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. and by his Will, expressed in the Rule of
his Word, Gal. 6.16. which is that which the Apostle names marrying in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.

This I judge they do not, who take such a Husband or Wife, as a good Minister
should not dare to take unto the Lord's Supper. And my Advice is, that you hold
this Rule; refusing Marriage-Covenant with those that renew not their
Baptismal-Covenant.

Direct. XI. Make Battlements for the Roof of your House. That is, make such
Provisions against Sin in your Families, as shall make it hard for any to be
wicked therein. Make, and keep good Rules of Government. So that none shall
fall headlong into destructive Courses, for want of the Fence thereof. Nor
perish, unless they will wilfully leap into Perdition, notwithstanding all your
Means of their Salvation. See the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.8. When thou buildest a new
House, then thou shall make a Battlement for thy Roof, that thou bring not
Blood upon thine House, if any Man fall from thence.

Blessed are the Housekeepers, that do their best to make all their House
blessed. But how few of these are to be found? Hence, more than from our War
with France, comes Poverty. Prove. 3.33. The Curse of the Lord is in the House
of the Wicked; but he blesses the Habitation of the Just. Wicked you are, and
not Just, if God gives you a House, and you rule not for God therein, but
against God. Not to rule for him, is to rebel against him; and then, what
wonder if he eject you? But do you Rule for God, that make not all your Family
hear his Word, as daily as eat his Bread? as daily pray together, as work or
eat together? And to discern by your Words and Behavior, that they cannot
offend God, without offending you; or any way so much please you, as by care to
please God. Yea, to find that there is no abiding in any known Sin in your
Families, without Reproof to them, and Reformation by them. Psalm. 101.7. He
that works Deceit, shall not dwell in my House. O that these words were
written on Housekeepers Hearts; Abraham 's Family-government will bring all
Family-blessings, Genesis 18.19. The House of the Righteous shall stand, Prove.
12.7. The Tabernacle of the Upright shall flourish. When Family-Piety revives,
the Evil shall bow before the Good, and the Wicked at the Gates of the
Righteous, Prove. 14.11, 19.

Direct. XII. Take special care of the King's Children. The King of Heaven
calls yours, his own. God has given me a Child, says every Parent. But God
so gives them to every Parent, as that he himself remains still the
Proprietor. He gives them unto you, but only to educate for him. Your Children
are still his Children; and so he expressly calls them, My Children, Ezekiel.
16.21. whom thou have born unto me, verse. 20. You are but Nurses chosen by the
grand Parent; the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. and the Fashioner of Bodies,
Psalm. 139.16. His they are, and he it is that says of every Babe unto you, as
Pharaoh's Daughter said of Infant-Moses unto the Hebrew Woman, Take thou this
Child and nurse it for me, and I will pay thee thy Wages.

This Father of the Children you call yours, is a great King, and as kind a
Father. God is a mighty lover of Children. You may compare Snow and Fire, as
well as your Love and his, unto Children. Expect no other, his Wrath, the
fierceness of his Wrath, comes on such as neglect these Objects of his Love. A
Neglect, that is, of Sins sinfullest; the Sin, that next to Original Sin, does
most to the corrupting of the World, and the filling of Hell. And a Sin,
whereto Poverty and all Judgments are extremely owing.

Children be choice Gifts of God, rich Rewards of his Grace, Psalm. 127.3, 5.
Write this Man Childless, is in effect, write him Comfortless. Indeed, Africa
is not the only Country of Monsters; ours bears many, that wish to be
Childless to save Charges. Egregious Wisdom, to wish one may have no Lands, for
fear of the Cost of Tillage. Well-cultivated Children enrich their Fathers, as
well-tilled Lands enrich their Owners. Truly good Breeding is the Parent's
Blessing as well as the Child's. From Children, as from Land, we do ordinarily,
and we may expect always, to Reap as we Sow. A rich People we should soon be, if
generally the Culture of our Minds, were as well followed as that of our
Grounds. Were they as painfully Plowed, Sown, Fenced, Watered, Weeded; the
ill-natured Phrase of a Charge of Children, would be dismissed; we should take
to say, a Stock of Children, and count it a most valuable One. Wherefore let
past Neglects be thoroughly repented, and utmost Diligence be henceforth used.
Let not vain Men's Hawks, Race- Horses, and Setting- Dogs, have more Care and
Cost bestowed on them, than their Childrens Souls. Let not any lay out more
Time and Pains to teach their Children a Game of Folly, or a Trade for a Penny,
than you lay out on yours to teach them their Baptismal Covenant, and the
glorious Art of living unto God.

Train the King's Children in the King's Way, Prove. 22.6. Bring them up
therein, Ephesians. 6.4. Let Heaven ring of your Prayers for them; (O that Ishmael
might live!) Provoke not, chide not the King's Children without Cause, or above
it, Ephesians. 6. Provide for them, and give them all that you are able, without
countenancing them in Evil, or making them a Way to it, 1 Timothy 5.8. Lay up for
them, as well as lay out upon them, though you be put to deny your selves
useless Ornaments and unnecessary Pleasures to compass it, 2 Cor. 12.14.
Dispose of them in Marriage wisely, and tempt them not to Folly, 1 Cor. 7.38.
Let it be seen, you are as much afraid of their Poverty, as of your own; and
more afraid of their want of Grace, than of their want of Money. This do, and
see if the great lover of Children do ever starve their Nurses. No, he will
not; but, He will feed them with the finest of the Wheat; with Honey out of the
Rock will he satisfy them, Psalm. 81.16.

Direct. XIII. Let not Arsenick be your Salt. So it is when an ill Man is
chosen for your Companion. You are sociable Creatures; Company you must and
will have. Unto the Company of your Love and Choice, you are very Bondmen.
Invisible Chains of theirs, hold you even unawares. It Is your Life to have them
good; you are dead Men, if they be evil Ones. Good ones our Savior names
Salt, that seasons you, Matthew. 5.13. Ill ones are as very Arsenick to poison
you. Of your Company, much is at your Choice; and there are but these two sorts
for you to choose.

That the latter does poison and undo you, is sure; A Companion of Fools shall
be destroyed. That the former does season and better you, is as plain; He that
walks with wise Men, shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. Yet how few are so nice of
their Company, as they be of their Food or Sauce? Unadvised, how much depends
on it, for temporal Good and Spiritual? Though it be rare for any at the
Gallows, and on the Dunghill, not to exclaim against ill Company for bringing
them thither; robbing them of their Time, their Understandings, their Hearts,
their Names, and their Money, altogether.

There is no fear of Want, where these Texts are observed; Prove. 14.7. Go from
the presence of a foolish Man, when thou perceivest not in him the Lips of
Understanding; q. d. endure not his poisonous Breath. Psalm. 119.63. I am a
Companion of all them that fear God, and keep his Precepts; q. d. others be my
Eye-sores, these be the delight of my Eyes.

Religious Friends stick as close as Brothers, and are as full of good Offices
to us. Their Prayers will be of unknown Worth, so will be their Counsels; and
if we shall deserve them, their Commendations of us, to Persons that will be
most helpful to us. What we are most likely to deserve and to need, their
Reproofs will be of excellent use, to bring us to Repentance, and from thence
to Innocence, and beyond it too. Whereunto their holy Example conduces more
than a little. For this Cause, said David, They that fear thee, will be glad
when they see me, Psalm. 119.74.

In a word, a Man is always burnt with the Fire, or blacked with the Smoke of
bad Company: And always he is refined, or at least refreshed with Company that
is good. Reputation and Safety, Comfort and Profit, are got in good Company,
and lost in Evil.

Direct. XIV. Kindle huge Fires on your Enemies Heads. Be they hardened in their
Enmity, made hard as Iron? Fear them not. Coals of Fire heaped on it, melts
down Iron: And true Kindness, giving and forgiving from the Heart, will work as
much on cruel Hearts. There is a Charity, as well as a Faith, of Miracles: It
is your Fault if its Miracles cease. Feed your Hungry, give Drink to your
thirsty Enemy, my, clothe your naked One; you shall see strange Effects, Romans
12.20. We have known many undone by exasperating their Enemies, and by being
overcome of their Evil; by flashing Wildfire in their Faces. But never heard
we of a Man that proved not his own Friend, by kindness to his Foe. Sacred
Fire, as Love's is, is always profitable.

Monsters there be, whose Evil cannot be overcome of its Good; but then does
the overflowing Grace of God otherwise reward it. He shall never be a miserable
poor Man, who gives no place to Wrath, and leaves all Vengeance unto God,
Romans 12.19.

Direct. XV. Trust not your Door without a Watch. There is a Door of yours, out
of which come Legions of Evils to you. A Door that needs Watch and Ward, as
much as the Gate of any besieged City. A Door to which David sought to Heaven
for a Watch; Psalm. 141.3. Set a Watch before my Mouth, O Lord; keep the Door of
my Lips. And well he might, for we are told, Prove. 13.3. He that opens wide
his Lips, shall have Destruction. The Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity; it
defiles the whole Body, sets on fire the Course of Nature, is set on fire of
Hell, Jam. 3.6.

St. Paul is large in the Account of the Sins of Speech, Romans 3. But who can
name all? or count the Evils done by unwary Words? All Places are full of
Instances of their impoverishing Efficacy. Who knows not such as had not wanted
Bread for their Mouths, had they not wanted a Bridle to their Tongues? Or,
would they have timely believed, what they after felt; Better a Head without a
Tongue, than a Tongue without Government. An Estate is a small thing; a whole
Kingdom has been lost by a rash Word.

Attend me, O you that are Poor; Immortal John Fox professed, he did forget
Lords and Ladies to remember such as you. This Discourse speaks my Care of you;
and this that follows flows from my Kindness unto you. It Is your great Mistake,
that you have nothing but your Fingers ends to live by: Nothing therefore to be
careful of but them. Alas, your Welfare, and the contrary, comes as much from
your Tongues Ends. And the Divine Wisdom counsels you to take as much care
of them. Subject then your Lips to God's Laws. Take heed to your Words as well
as your Works. See that your Tongues drop nothing but Honey; such is all that
is of Honor to God, of Use to Men, of Benefit to your self. All that truly
edifies, or innocently recreates. The Psalmist's Rule is as good as Free Land;
What Man is he that desires Life, and loves many Days that he may see Good?
Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile, Psalm. 34.13. Death
and Life are in the Power of the Tongue; our Safety depends on the use of it,
Prove. 18.21.

If any Rich and Noble bestow their Eye on these Pages, I advance this Doctrine
to their consideration; God prescribes one and the same way for all Men to
Prosperity. Dukes and very Kings, as well as Stockarders and Plowmen, must keep
their Tongues from Evil, if they expect to have their Estates good. Crowned
Heads have not the Promise of good Days, without good Tongues in them. Palaces
are no such privileged Places, that Men may speak what they please in them. By
their Words God judges, and blesses or curses Princes and Peasants.

Direct. XVI. Unite Courtesy and Truth. Godliness is not clownish; Divine
Graces are no Enemies to good Manners. It is an Apostolical and Divine Precept,
Be ye courteous, 1 Pet. 3.8. Be of a pleasant, winning Conversation, [(...), i.
e. (...)] loving and affecting to please as far as innocently we may, in Words,
Looks, Gestures, Habits. Inconformity to sinless Customs herein, comes of
Evil, and works Evil. It Is an unreasonable ruggedness of Behavior, and
contracts mischievous Censure, Disaffection, and Blame. Few esteem a morose Man
as other than a Hedghog; and his needless ungrateful Singularities, as other
than Bristles turned to his Neighbors. It is very often that a gracious Man
faulty herein, is secluded, and one of no serious Religion is taken into a
gainful Employment. None wondering, that the best of an ill Man, should be
preferred before the worst of a good One: Though lamenting that a good Man
should be the Martyr of his adhering Distemper.

But how dear is Truth to God and Men? What is Fallacious, is odiously
Courteous. Religious Courtship is without Dissimulation; it is a Complaisance
with Love, and with the Love of Love. The Truth of both in the inward Parts;
Simplicity and Sincerity. 1 John 3.18. Let us not love in Word, neither in
Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth: q. d. Let not our Love have only Lips, and no
Hands. Words without Works are heartless. Let us abhor real Unkindness as much
as Verbal; and of the two, let us more fear to do an ill thing, than to speak
an unkind Word. Let our Veracity and Integrity be as conspicuous, as the
World's Falsity is notorious. It is sure that Love universally exercised, and
apparently unfeigned, highly pleases God, and mightily takes with Man. Nor
will you in haste be forsaken of either, if you provoke them neither by
Churlishness nor Falseness. You can come into no Want, till you are forsaken:
And how should you be forsaken by any other Means? Wherefore express all the
Love ye ought, and bear in Heart all the Love you express; then shall you not
be ashamed in the evil Day; and in Days of Famine you shall be satisfied, Psalm.
37.19.

Direct. XVII. Be at Court one whole Day in a Week: At the King Eternal's
Court, I mean. Six Days of the Week we have somewhat to do beside: But one Day,
the first, we have nothing to do beside; we are called to the Court of the
Great King; therein to rest and feast our Souls all the Day long: Seeing the
King of Glory's Face; hearing his Voice; eating of his holy Bread, and drinking
of his holy Wine: Remembering his redeeming Love more than Wine; making a
joyful Noise to him with Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; taking the Day
in his Courts, for better than a thousand in Shops: calling it our Delight. But
let it not be asked, Will a Man rob God? Where is the Man that robs him not
of his Day? The Day, which is the Lord's, electively, as his chosen Lot; and
his, subjectively, as that whereon his Affairs are to be transacted.

Who makes Conscience of Sacrilege? of taking God's Time, and giving it to the
Flesh, to Sleep, to their own Ways, to their own Words, to their own Pleasures?
Whose Heart smites him for cutting off a Moment, half Hour, or whole Hour of
the King's Day? Who hastens early to his Court, beginning the Sabbath in the
Mount? Who is not weary of his Court, but ends the Sabbath late in the Valley?
Where is any great Zeal for his Court, commanding of Children and Servants into
it? And is not the Divine Majesty provoked hereby, think we? Yea, and because
of these things comes his Wrath all the Week after on the Children of
Disobedience. They slight his Court, and he overthrows their House; they
neglect or profane his Table, and he will not spread theirs; their Families are
Dens of Thieves, and his revenging Justice makes them Habitations of multiplied
Sorrows. Therefore is it that we see not better Days, because we no better
hallow the Lord's Day. Therefore decays secular Trade and its Markets,
because Trade for Heaven is let down, and the Market for that is so ill kept.
If ye hallow the Sabbath Day, there shall enter into this City Kings and
Princes sitting upon the Throne of David, and the City shall remain for ever.
But if ye will not hallow the Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a Fire in the
Gates thereof, and it shall devour the Palaces (as well as Shops) of Jerusalem,
and it shall not be quenched, Jer. 17.

Your Blessings depend on your keeping the Day that God has blessed. You
cannot profane it, and be sure of Bread; nor sanctify it, and be without good
Security of it. Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath,
etc. then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, [have pleasure and comfort
in all Kindness of his to thee.] I will cause thee to ride in the high Places
of the Earth, [I will put thee above the reach of Danger.] I will feed thee
with the Heritage of Jacob, [Thou shall have from me Milk and Honey.] The Mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.

Direct. XVIII. Lastly; Wrestle all the Week. The highest Master of Language,
calls Praying a Wrestling. Happy they that are not only Jacobs, but Isreal's;
not only VVrestlers with God, but Prevailers. They that have, and do well use,
the Skill given by God's Spirit, which never fails, never lets God go, without
giving the Blessing for which we come. Is the Holy Ghost your Advocate? then he
gives you this rare Art: An Art the World knows nothing of; having scarce heard
whether there be any such or no; therefore seek they not after it.

But I am speaking to Christians; professed Temples of the Holy Ghost, the
Spirit of Supplication: Consequently, a People that have this Art and Skill.
VVrestlers, that if they use their Art, and (as becomes them) strain hard every
Vein therein, may gain all they want from him with whom they have to do. Ask,
and ye shall receive; Every one that asks, receives, Mat. 7.7, 8. Receives,
yea, commonly receives more than he has the Faith and Face to ask. Let an
Abraham ask a Son; he has one, and the Promise of an Offspring as numerous as
the Stars. Let a Jacob ask but Food and Raiment, he has it, and two Bands also.
Let a Solomon ask Wisdom; he has it, and has Wealth and Honor thrown in
with it. Let a Canaanite ask but a few of the Dog's Crumbs; she has given her
the Childrens best Bread. There is no end of Examples. Whence is it then that
you want any promised Good of the Covenant? the Covenant is your Charter for
Temporals as well as Spirituals, remember.

Sirs, Either you wrestle not, or not so well as you are able. You receive not,
because you ask amiss, James 4.3. Deny it not, doubt it not; for, Whatsoever
you (the weakest Christians) ask the Father in Christ's Name (with all the
little Skill you have) he will give it you, John 16.23.

And here shut you my Book; sit down a little and think; stand up then, and say
if you can really imagine, that these Texts do signify nothing? Or do less than
assure us of this, that, The poorest Christian alive may have a Supply of his
Wants, if he will but fetch it upon his Knees. Holy Mr. Carter told his
Neighbor, who complained that he did not Thrive, though he worked hard, and
fared hard; he would surely Thrive if he also prayed hard.

Hear this, O you that scarce have from Hand to Mouth, as you speak; and are at
your Wits end to think how you shall get through the next Winter's Cold! Tho
God may not keep you from the Cross, he has bound himself to maintain you under
the Cross; to give you Bread, if he deny you Trade; to sweeten Water, if he
bring you to drink it; in short, to give you your Heart's-desire, or to bring
your Heart's-desire to what he gives you. If you wrestle not amiss, to this he
has bound himself. You are your own Thieves, if you go without Maintenance,
for you may surely have it for asking. And of the two, rather would I ask and
not receive, than receive and not ask. There is such a Bread and Wine in
Prayer it self; Spiritual Wrestling does get one such a comfortable Heat. But
fear you not, where no Fear is; these Promises be God's blessed Bonds given
you. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack and suffer Hunger;
but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. Jer. 29.12. Ye
shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.

Direct. XIX. Get well acquainted with your Father's Will and Testament. The
Holy Bible is no other, if Jesus Christ be your Father. Vast and immense are
his Riches; and in and by this said Will, he has bequeathed all unto you. For
which Cause he is named a Testator, and his Word a Testament, Heb. 9.15, 16,
17. The Testament, wherein you are to read the Inventory of the Goods you are
to receive, and the Sum of the Debts you are to pay to your Supreme King, and
to your Fellow Subjects.

Let your Hearts be like the Ark, Repositories of the Divine Word, and see if
you ever want Bread. This take also for your Encouragement; It was a less
Honor to the Virgin Mary to bear Christ in her Womb, than it shall be unto you
to carry his Testament in your Hearts. Luke 11.27, 28. Blessed is the Womb that
bare thee! But he said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word, and
keep it.

Indeed, Wills and Testaments are not easily understood by raw Babes; nor do
their Memories soon retain great and numerous Legacies. But your tender Father
has provided good Help for your Infirmities. He has chosen for you such an
Executor of his Will, as is able to teach you all things: And, that being done,
to bring all things to your remembrance. Nor is he more able, than willing, to
receive of Christ's, and show it unto you; provided that he be duly sought
unto. Sought unto in Prayer, and in all other his instituted Means. This
blessed Executor, you know, is the Holy Ghost; God, by Eternal Essence, and
Sanctifier and Comforter by Office.

Need I say, what a frequent loss to Children the Ignorance of their Father's
Will is? the World well knows. But your unacquaintedness with Christ's
Testament, is a Sin more heinous, and a Loss more horrible than I am able to
say. Such an Affront is it (...) displeasure, condemn thee to thousands by the
Year. In Judgment he may give thee all Comforts, besides the Comfort of the
Scriptures. And remember it, that the World throughout, where Christ's Word is
not to be had, there be few good Meals made. People have bare Feet, or but
wooden Shoes, and bitting Salt. Where it may be had, and it is not used; even
as the Daylight, for constant Walk and Work; Chastisements or Curses are at
the Door. And flatter we not our selves, France conquered, and Turkey and
India-Trade exalted, be nothing to enrich us, if our Savior's Will and
Testament lay neglected. But if young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children,
duly ply that, there shall be no complaining in our Streets: But, Corn shall
make the young Men cheerful, and Wine the Maids, Zech. 9.17.

Direct. XX. See that your Meat be not your Poison. Good Works be the Meat of
good Christians. Their Lord said of himself, and in their Measure they say
after him; My Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his
Work, John 4.34. But Conceit of Merits, is the Poison of Asps: If this Poison
get into your Head, you lose your Life. For Christ shall profit you nothing, if
you place Merit in any thing. In any thing wrought in you, in any thing wrought
by you, Gal. 5.2. As many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse
of the Law, Gal. 3.10. To trust to your good Works to pacify God's Wrath, and
to merit his Love, and to buy so much as a morsel of Bread, is to be of the
Works of the Law. To be of the Party that is so bitterly guilty and condemned.
And, to be under the Wrath which the Law threatens to Soul and Body, to Name
and Estate, is to be under the Curse, and poisonous Sting of it: A Condition
you cannot look to thrive in.

God be merciful to us Sinners of this Day: Whose evil Works are
unparallellable; and our good Ones, for the most part, are Evil. Little Bread;
and that which is, poisoned. Papists have the Plague, but Protestants have the
Fever. Merit is their open Faith, but it is also our inward lurking Folly.

Even Luther, its victorious Enemy, would complain of a Pope in his Belly. And
our English Luther said consonantly, I may lift up Christ in my Pulpit, and
pull him down in my Heart. Sad are the Indications, that Roman Frogs have place
in very Puritans Bed-chambers. So that slender Alms are given, with swelling
Opinions of them; and God has little Service from us, without conceit of his
contracting a great Debt to us. We declaim against adding the Virgin Mary 's
Milk unto Jesus Christ's Blood; but can imagine that our own Prayers, and Sweat
and Tears, will make a good Mixture. Now this know; Whoredom and Witchcraft are
not more odious in God's Sight. He will not bear such Indignities done unto his
own Munificence, and to his Son's Righteousness. If you will not serve him as
the perfect Giver, and his Son as the sole Purchaser of all Good, the Devil
must have your Works and Service, for God will not accept of them. They are
Carrion and not Sacrifice for him. His Wrath is revealed from Heaven against
your dead Lions and your living Dogs; Against the Carcass of your Virtues, as
well as the Soul and Body of your Vices; against your pharisaical Hearing and
Praying, as well as against your Tippling and Blaspheming.

Nor is it to be doubted, but for the one as well as the other, God is this Day
contending with us. And we may thank our Practical Popery, for our Epidemical
Poverty. To this will it be justly ascribed, if, as on the Jews, Wrath come
upon the Britains to the uttermost.

What but Woe can betide us, when our very Religion is Irreligious? Help, Lord,
or we are twice dead, and shall be plucked up by the Roots. I am teaching
People this Truth, but find few that hastily learn it: The Devil is every Man's
King, who makes himself his own Priest. Who mixes the Covenants of Works and
Grace; and scrapes for the Honor of a joint Purchaser with Jesus Christ:
Expecting good things, partly for Christ's Oblation and Intercession, and
partly for his own.

Will any Man now say; To what purpose then is it that we should serve God? or
be zealous of good Works? I think you have been told good Reason in every
Direction. But you shall have a Candle lighted for you in the Sun. We Ministers
are Debtors to the most Unwise. There is abundance of Reason to eat Bread that
is wholesome; as mad work as it is to swallow Poison. In Nature, you must eat or
die; and in Religion, you must be doing, or be undone: For God elected,
redeemed, and new created you for good Works, Ephesians. 1.4. Tit. 2.14. Ephesians.
2.10. And dare you to cross God's Ends? He commands and requires you to abound
in good Works, Tit. 3.8. Phil. 1.11. 1 Pet. 2.15. And dare you to disobey the
Lord whom you dare not deny? He delights in your good Works, Prove. 12.22. Prove.
15.8. Heb. 13.16. And dare you, that are out Hell by his Favor, to deny him
his Pleasure? He is honored before Men by your good Works, and by nothing
else, Matthew. 5.6. And dare you, feloniously, to take from him his Universal
Glory in this World? He judges Men by their Works, here, in our present State,
and hereafter at the final general Judgment; He renders to every Man according
to his Works, Psalm 19.11. Romans 2.6. Rev. 20.12, 13. And dare you to make
trial, whether he be not a God changeable? whether he will not tolerate your
Sloth, and give you a right to the Tree of Life, without keeping his
Commandments? Rev. 22.14. In short;

God's Mercy makes not needless Christ's Merits; that Fountain sends no Drop of
Goodness to us, but through this Conduit. And Christ's Merits do not make our
Faith needless; unapplied Balsam can heal no Wound. And holy Faith cannot
excuse good Works; as good never a whit, as never the better. As good no Roots
as no Fruits. Without Communion, vain is all Union. If I bear not Fruit, as
good never have been ingrafted into Christ's Stock. If I abide an useless
Member, as good never have had Christ my Head. If I continue Straw and Chaff,
as good never have been built on Christ's Royal Foundation. If I bring not
Issue unto God, as good never have been married to Christ. So that, good Works
are as necessary and far from useless, as if they were really meritorious. And
he that obeys not Christ as King and Lawgiver, he takes Satan for his Prophet
and Commander. As ever you expect this World's Comforts, or next World's
Glories, Do all good Works, though you rest in none.

Antichristian Faith laid in Ruins the renowned Jerusalem. And Antinomian Life
brought Hell from Heaven upon Sodom. The Lord add more Faith to London's
Virtue, and more Virtue to our Faith! The Lord send us more Faith for our
Works, and more Works from our Faith. Works of Worship toward God; Works of
Sobriety, Watchfulness, and Self-denial. Works of Justice and Charity toward
Men. Works of the Callings wherein we are placed; (for from Angels to Worms,
God gives an Employment to all his Creatures.)

The Complaint Abroad is, that Money is scarce, and Trade dead: But no Money
seems so scarce as this Faith that is of the true Royal Stamp; no Trade so
dead, as this of good Works undefiled. If these be had and held by you, you
shall find and feel true the Apostle's words, 1 Timothy 4.8. They have the Promise
of the Life that now is. If not, you may e're long be made to exclaim, in
Moses's words, Lord, we are consumed by thine Anger, and by thy Wrath are we
troubled, Ps. 90.7.

These twenty Directions thus do, and see what God will do. Remembering still
these my concluding Words, to prevent your Mistake of God's Word: What is truly
BEST for you, God will give to you. Romans 8.28. All shall work for Good.
Temporal Blessings, if God deny in one way, he will make Compensation in
another. Christ was denied the Deliverance that he asked; but had it made up in
the Support that his Father granted, Matthew. 26.39. Luke 22.43.

The Covenant of Grace exempts you not from the Rod, if you break these Rules.
Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
Judgments; If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then will I
visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes. In
executing of his Threats, God does not break his Promises.

My Directions are ended. By some, it is like, they will be quarrelled: But I
think them of Qualifications to answer for themselves. The Language is unusual;
yes, but it is not found unprofitable. The Matter will offend; for many good
Souls do all that is here advised, and yet be not rich enough. No? let that be
proved. What godly Soul will tell me of any bitter Wants, and disclaim all
Guilts? I meet with no such.

But what is the Design of these Directions? They are very blind that will not
see. It is to fetch Martha to the place of Mary, at her Savior's Feet: To
empty Hearts of earthly Cares, that room may be made for Heavenly: To kill the
Thorns that choke the Seed of the Word; Yea, the Canker that preys upon, and
eats up the Souls of many. To persuade Men to mind and do all that they have to
do, and not take God's Work out of his Hands; but leave him to provide for
their Subsistence; and practically regard our Redeemer's Command, five or six
times repeated, Matthew. 6. Take no thought (no disquieting distracting One) for
your Life, or Livelihood.

Briefly; to convince of this Truth, that God is a kind and no hard Master: And
that his good and faithful Servants, are not themselves when they distrust him.
And when they cease to tell him to this effect; Lord, I refer all to thee: I
would have nothing but what thou think good. The Condition that is good in
thy Eyes, shall seem best in mine. Infinite Wisdom cannot choose amiss for me.
And the Goodness and Power which are no less, will not fail to bestow that on
me. Wherefore henceforth I will no more trouble my Heart with Thoughts, who
shall give me Bread to eat; than with Thoughts who shall give me Daylight to
see by, or Air to breath in. I will take it for very certain, that the Covenant
of Grace is the best Freehold in the Creation, for this World and for the next.
And therefore, although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be
in the Vines; the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no
Meat; the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation, Hab. 3.17, 18.

Policy fails, and Strength fails, I know. Serpents I have seen naked, and
Foxes thin Clothed and Bald; I have seen Lion's very meagre, and Bears but
lean. The profoundest Sophy of our Nation died poor. And strange Exemplars of
Diligence have lived in wretched Want. But my Savior's Rule I am sure is
infallible; Seeking first, and most, and all God's Kingdom and Righteousness;
All, and every needful thing must be added to me. I must have all I want. In
Heaven they have not as yet all they have a Will unto. The Saints there are
without their Bodies, and much of their Company. I may not expect more on
Earth, than they have in Heaven. But there have they as much as they yet want,
and here will I expect so much also.

And now, Farewell worldly Sorrow. Farewell all Sorrow in the World, save only
for the world of Sin in me and it. Lord Jesus, thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee! And (to my Comfort) I know so much, Thou causest them
that love thee to inherit Substance, Thou fillest their Treasures; With Good
perfect, without Defect; and Perpetual without Decay; the Good of the upper
Springs and the Nether. All Things are mine, for I am thine. In proper Speech
the Devil has no Child Rich, and my Lord and my God has not one Poor. Let
them be Poor therefore that can be so. I cannot want, I am most certain; the
King's Tax shall be well paid, and my House well kept, as long as I do,

1. Trust my Guardians. 2. Go to School to the Ants. 3. Lean on no Reeds. 4.
Serve but one Master. 5. Wear my Master's Livery. 6. Hold my Heart at my right
Hand. 7. Beware of my five Enemies. 8. Lay not violent Hands on my self. 9.
Load my Parents soundly. 10. Marry none but an Heir to the Crown. 11. Make
Battlements to my House. 12. Take Care of the King's Children. 13. Use good
Salt. 14. Kindle huge Fires on my Enemies Heads. 15. Keep my Watch at my Door.
16. Unite Courtesy and Truth. 17. Be at Court one whole Day in a Week; And, 18.
Wrestle hard all the Week. 19. Get well acquainted with my Father's Will and
Testament. 20. See that my Meat be not my Poison.
And this will I do, if God shall give me to will and to do it!

Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, O that thou would bless me
indeed, and enlarge my Coast; and that thy Hand might be with me, and that thou
would keep me from Evil, that it may not grieve me. And God granted him that
which he requested, 1 Chronicles. 4.20. -- Because thou have asked Wisdom and
Knowledge for thy self; -- Wisdom and Knowledge is given to thee, and I will
give thee Riches, and Wealth, and Honor, 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12.

Quest. 1.
WHose is this Earth? whose Goods be all
The Creatures it contains?
Who takes the Care of this wide World?
As Lord and King who reigns?
Answer.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Are the one King and Lord;
Who made, and owns, keeps all, and rules
All by his wondrous Word.
Quest. 2.
But who be they this King affects?
Who be his Favorites?
In filling whom with all good things,
His Majesty delights?
Answer.
They be the Just, that live by Faith,
On's Power, Love and Truth;
As Orphans on their Guardians lean,
Throughout their helpless Youth.
They be the faithful Servants, who
In constant Labors sweat;
And take more pleasure in God's Work,
Than earthly Princes Meat.
They be the Saints, that trust not Kings,
And Princes, for their Bread;
As knowing, Kings be poor themselves,
And from God's Board be fed.
They be the Calebs, that, all times,
Serve fully their own Lord;
By whom Religion cut in halves,
As Atheism, is abhorred.
They be the poor in Spirit, known
By their Humility;
Who of all Mercies, ever say,
Less than the least am I.
They be the wise in Heart, whose Minds
In Cares are exercised;
And whose right Hands strait execute,
What they have well devised.
They be the Spirit's Soldiers,
Against the Flesh they fight;
Against the ravenous Lusts of Sense,
The Hell, named, Appetite!
They be the wisely Charitable;
Rash Suretiship they loath:
Forward they are to Lend and Give,
But with Discretion both.
They be the Children good, who pay
A Duty not often seen;
To whom a Father is a King,
And Mother is a Queen.
They be the Chaste and Holy Ones,
Who purely keep their Bed;
And of God's Royal Family
Adopted Children wed!
They be the Friends of God, whose Zeal
Their House a Church does make;
And see that all their Household shall
Their House, or Sin, forsake.
They be the Holy Abraham's,
That tend God's Nursery:
And use their Power, Skill and Love,
Their Babes to sanctify.
They be the fearful of the Plague
In Fools infectious Breath;
They count, walk with the Wise, is Life,
And walk with Fools, is Death!
They be the Follow'rs of the Lamb,
That blessed and cursed not;
The glorious Art of pard'ning Spite,
Their Christian Souls have got.
They be the David's, who suspect
Their Mouths most dangerous Door;
Strict Watch they keep; and for a Guard
They do their God implore!
They be the lovers of true Love;
Their Pleasure is to please:
And what gives any one Distaste,
Takes from their Rest and Ease.
They be the Saints, who every Week,
In Heaven spend one Day;
Glad in their Heart, that at God's Court
They have so sweet a stay!
They be the Jacobs, that in Prayer,
Do wrestle all the Week;
Nor cease they, till, as Israel,
They gain the things they seek.
They be the Heirs of Life, that prize
Christ's Will and Testament;
By Day they read it, and by Night,
Without it no Content.
They be the Zealous of good Works;
And Jealous of them too;
They all perform, and all disclaim;
Trust none of all they do.
These be the Men of God, our King;
These be his Favorites;
In filling these with all good Things,
His Majesty delights:
These be the Apples of his Eye;
These in him safely trust:
Others can only wish to thrive;
But these for certain must.
FINIS.
Books sold by Andrew Bell and Jonas Luntley.
RULES for heating the Word of God with certain and saving Benefit. The Second
Edition.

The Sure Way to Wealth. Infallible Directions to get and keep sufficient
Riches, even while Taxes rise, and Trades sink. Both by Mr. Daniel Burgess.

The fulfilling of the Scripture, or a Discovery of the Accomplishment of God's
Holy Word in his Providential Works. The third Edition, corrected, and enlarged
with Doctrines and Histories, by the Author Mr. Robert Fleming, Pastor of a
Church in Roterdam. Published and recommended by Mr. Burgess.

Mr. Rutherford's Letters, the third Edition, now divided into three Parts. The
first containing those which were written from Aberdeen, where he was confined
by a Sentence of the High Commission drawn forth against him, partly upon the
account of his declining them, partly upon the account of his Nonconformity.
The Second and Third containing some which were written from Anwoth, before he
was by the Prelates Persecution thrust from his Ministry; and others upon
Occasions afterward, from St. Andrews, London, etc. Published for the Use of
all the People of God, but more particularly for those who now are, or
afterward may be put to suffering for Christ and his Cause.


