Victorious News FROM IRELAND, Being A Battle fought by the Lord of Ormond,
the ninteenth day of June, to the loss of two thousand of the Rebels, ten
miles beyond Limbrick, sent in Letter to Master Thomas Flings, now Resident in
Covent Garden.

And many other Remarkable passages in that Kingdom.

As also a Letter that was sent from the Right Honorable Robert Earl of
Warwick, Admiral of the Sea, to Master John Pym, Esquire, and presented to
both Houses of Parliament, July 6. 1642.

Die Mercurii, 6 Iulii, 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, John Brown,
Cler. Parl.

July 8. London, Printed for Marmaduke Boat.

Worthy Sir,
I Know you do much desire to hear from your friends especialy having left them
in this distracted Kingdom; yet it has pleased God to bless your friends with
health, and your Uncle mac Shane, and your Coufen Dermot. The 13 day of this
Month the Earl of Ormond marched toward Munster with an Army of 7000. men,
which when Sir Phelim Oneal had intelligence, marched toward him with an Army
of 14000. men, some ten miles beyond Limbrick, where they had as famous a
pitchs Battle as has been since these troublesome times begun; these Rebels
and their forces continued for the space of two days, until Sir Patrick
Weams, and some other English Commanders, with two pieces of Ordnance, made an
assault upon them the 16 day of this Month, about two of the clock in the
morning (they not expecting any such thing) which being so suddenly performed,
did so distract the Rebels, that they all seemed to be men without life, and
speedily provided every one for himself by flight* yet for all this their
haste, there were slain and wounded on the Rebels part to the number of 2000
men, we losing but 40 or 50 at the most. Thus we daily see by experience how
mightily God does fight for us; To whom be praise and glory for evermore. After
the flight of these miserable people, the whole spoil of the Camp was taken,
and a great part of it divided amongst the Souldidiers, to encourage them, and
the rest is kept for the relief of our men. The Rebels have since assembled,
which when Sir Patrick Weams heard of, did march toward them, but could not
cause them to stay, nor durst they fight, the fear which the last skirmish had
stricken them into being still in them, and the want of Arms and Powder, which
if they had, they would soon be with us. We want men and money extraordinarily;
for had not God blessed us with this little pillage to relieve our men, we had
been in a miserable condition, but we hope, and daily expect both from England:
which if a speedy course be not taken, it will much endanger the loss of this
Kingdom, and the lives of many poor distressed Protestants: for there is scarce
an Irish Gentleman, but is turned to the Rebels; for they call themselves the
holy Catholic Camp, and do daily expect Supplies from some foreign enemies.

Your friends hope to see you shortly: your wife and children are all well, and
remember you daily in their prayers. So, till I see you, and ever, I shall
remain your assured loving friend,

Darby Bargine.
From the Fort of Leas, this 19 of June, 1642.
M. PYM,
BEfore these shall come to your hand, I make no doubt but M. Nicbolls of the
House of Commons has made both Houses a Relation of what has passed here
since I received His Majesty's Letters for the discharging me of the Command of
the Fleet wherewith I was entrusted, How I called a Council of War, and
acquainted them with His Majesty's Letters, and likewise with the Ordinance of
Parliament, sent from the Houses for me to continue my Charge: I confess it
was a great straight that I was put in, between two Commands that have so much
power over me: But when I consider the great care which I have ever observed in
the Parliaments of this Kingdom for the good and safety of the King and
Kingdom, and every man's particular in them; And that they are that great
Council by whose Authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to their
Subjects; And likewise that the Trust of His Fleet for the defense of His
Majesty and the Kingdoms was committed to me by them; And knowing the integrity
of my own heart to His Majesty and Parliament, I resolved not to desert that
Charge committed to my Trust, wherein God (blessed be his Name for it) has
made me hitherto so successful, but to continue it until I shall be revoked
by that Authority that has entrusted me with it: Which having declared to my
Captains at the Council of War, all of them unanimously and cheerfully took
the same Resolution, excepting five, which was the Rere-Admirall, Captain
Fogge, Captain Barley, Captain Slings by, and Captain Wake, All which five
refused to come upon my Summons, as having no Authority over them, and got
together round that night to make their defense against me, only Captain
Burley came in and submitted to me. Whereupon in the morning I weighed my
Anchors, and caused the rest of my Ships so to do, and came to an Anchor round
about them, and besieged them; And when I had made all things ready, I summoned
them: Sir John Men's, and Captain Fogge came in to me; but Captain Slingsby
and Captain Wake stood out: Whereupon I let fly a Gunne over them, and sent
them word I had turned up the Glass upon them, if in that space they came not
in, they must look for for me ab^ord them. I sent to them by my Boat, and most
of the Boats in the Fleet; their answer was so peremptory, that my Masters and
Saylors grew so impatient on them, That although they had no Arms in their
Boats at all, yet God gave them such Courage and Resolution, as in a moment
they entered them, took hold on their Shrouds, and seized upon these Captains,
being armed with their Pistolls and Swords, and struck their Yards and top
Masts, and brought them both in to me; The like Courage and Resolution was
never seen amongst unarmed men, so as all was ended without effusion of blood,
which I must attribute to to the great God of heaven and earth only, who in
the moment that I was ready to give fire on them, put such courage into our men
to act it, and so saved much blood.

I hope the Parliament will think of some course for all our Indempnities, and
especially for the Officers of the Navy, and principal for the Surveyor of the
Navy, my Vice Admiral, a very able and good man, For my self, I doubt not but
they that put me in this employment, will preserve me for serving them
faithfully.

I pray you Sir be a means to Sir Robert Pie, and M. Green, that some money may
be sent us; for it has been often promised, but hear not of it. The weather
continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts, and top Masts, or
some detriment or other falls upon us daily, so that we are in great extremity
for want of money.

Thus, having nothing else to trouble you for the present, only that you will
be pleased to acquaint your House of Commons with our proceedings here, I bid
you fare well, and rest,

Your assured friend to serve you, Warwick.
From aboard His Majesty's Ship the James, on the Downs; this 4 of July, 1642.
Die Mercurii, 6 Iulii, 1642.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter beforth with printed and
published.

Jo Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

