Die Mercurii 27. September. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, That
Mr. Salloway do from this House give thanks unto Master Anthony Burges for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he this day preached (at the entreaty of
this House) at S. Margarets in the City of Westminster, It being the day of
public humiliation, and to desire him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered
that none do presume to Print the said Sermon but whom the said Mr. Burges
shall appoint under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Thomas Underhill to Print this Sermon.

ANTHONY BURGES.



The Difficulty of, AND The Encouragements to A REFORMATION.

A Sermon Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS At the Public Fast,
Septem. 27. 1643.

BY Mr. ANTHONY BURGES sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College, and now Pastor of
Sutton-Cofield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in
Woodstreet. 1643.

TO The Honorable House OF COMMONS, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Worthy Patriots,
GOD has made you like the Brazen-Serpent; those that have been stung with the
Serpents and Dragons of Rome, have looked upon you and been healed. You have
overcome, and slain many Lions of difficulties that have been in the way;
yea, you have found honey in them.

The Church is not in her travels and labor, as those strong women of Israel,
that could bring forth alone; Therefore God has stirred you up to help her in
her pangs; Be courageous therefore, and languish not in this so great and
necessary a work of Reformation.

All truth is sweet, even natural truth; therefore the Heathens in their
Sacrifice to Minerva (their Goddess of Arts) offered honey, crying out, (...),
truth is sweet; but spiritual truths are sweeter then the honey and the honey
comb; And this is the truth, even that about Doctrine, Discipline, and the
Worship of God, which the godly desire above all their outward advantages, And
above all those works of Reformation you have in hand; especially provide
against the general ignorance in people by a solid and serious Catachizing;
and against the profaneness of people by powerful Discipline, that so the
Sacraments may be dispensed comfortably. As in this Kingdom, the Lawyer, the
Physician, the Tradesman can go comfortably in his calling, so provide that
the Pastor also in the Dispensation of Ordinances may do it with joy, and not
with grief; The very Heathens were careful about their Idol Sacrifices,
Procul, O procul este prophani: And we read in Story, that the Priest being to
sacrifice, asked this question, (...); who was there? Answer was returned,
(...), good and honest men. And now in this work of Reformation, go on
exactly, consult not with flesh and blood, leave not in your Building any
nails or hooks standing out, that may tear those who go by. And that God
may delight in your works, labor to reform your own lives, and Families, lest
you be as the Torch or Candle that gives light to others, but consumes it
self.

The great God of Heaven go along with you, strengthen, settle, and establish
you.

Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus, ANTHONY BURGES.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS At the Public Fast,
September 27. 1643.
MARK. 1. verse. 2, 3. As it is written in the Prophets, Behold I send my
Messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. The voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight.
I Will not begin my Sermon, as commonly Printers do their Books with some
flourish or gaudy pictures on the first leaf, but fall immediately upon that
special matter which is contained in my Text, and that cannot be handled
rightly, unless I take in the former words, The beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ the Son of God: for in the whole contexture of these words, you
have a proposition to be confirmed, and the argument confirming it: I call it a
proposition, and not a Title or preface, such as that is, the Revelation of
John, and in doing thus I borrow gold of the Egyptian, (I mean) fetch my
interpretation from a Popish Commentator, who had much learning, and more
malice; and that this is more probable, consider the use of the word (...).
Gospel, which signifies in the Scripture Maldonat, who has it from others.
sometimes any joyful matter that is published, sometimes in particular, the
Doctrine of Christ; and lastly, for the preaching of this, which is the
frequent use of the Word; and as for the sense of taking (...), for the Book
and History of Christ, that is not a Bible-sense, but an Ecclesiastical; even
as Evangelist in the Scripture does not signify one that made the History of
Christ, as we call the sour Evangelists; but one, who accompanied the
Apostles in preaching the Gospel: so that Gospel is here as much as preaching;
and when it follows, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ is not the
matter, but the author, so that the sense is, The beginning of Christ's
preaching was as it was foretold by the Prophets. This being explained, you
have first the manner of proving, which is by testimony, and although that be
the weakest argument in humane things, yet it is the strongest in divine; and
secondly, there is the matter or proof it self: and in the clearing of all
this, we might enter into two disputes; 1. In vindicating the Author from
perverting the meaning and scope of Esaias, as the Jews would persuade us; 2. In
answering the doubts about the diverse readings, whether it should be the
Prophets, or in Esaias only, which Beza contends for as the true reading, and
this is made so great a difficulty by Jerome, that he says he will crave
pardon for his ignorance, as if the knot could not be untyed; but should I
handle these at large, you would say I gave a stone or serpent of
controversies, when you asked for the bread of nourishment; this therefore take
briefly for the explanation: the words in the Text you shall find in Esaias 40.
3. (for those of Malachi tend to the same purpose) and are not to be unstood
only literally, as the Jews would have it, of an exhortation to the people of
Israel to make ready and prepare for their return from captivity; nor as
others only as a prophecy of John Baptist, and our Redemption purchased by
Christ, for whose entertainment we are to prepare, but we think it literally
true of the Jews, and the voice enying in the wilderness to be all those
several Prophets, that proclaimed their return; and also typically true of
Christ and John Baptist in his time, and consequentially to be applied to any
time when Christ is coming graciously to deliver us from any such captivity.

So that from the manner of proving, and the matter or proof it self we will
gather two Doctrines seasonable for these times.

Doct. 1. That Gods Word is the only rule and principle in matters of Religion
and Reformation: It holds a majori ad minus, if the Prophets that were acted
infallibly would yet confirm their matter delivered by Scripture, how much
rather others?

2. From the matter or argument, and in that, the duty pressed.

Doct. 2. That it is a special duty upon all, to remove all impediments, and
to make way for Christ when he is coming to us.

We will begin with the first.

Doct. The Word of God is the only rule and principle in matters of Religion
or Reformation.

It has the properties of a Rule, which are these:

1. It is known and easy. Psalm. 19. 78. It is compared to a light, and a
Lanthorn to our feet; Nor will that evasion of the Papists serve their turns,
that it is lumen or light in it self, but not quoad nos (as if the Scripture
were a light under the bushel; God should then do that, which our Savior
says no man does,) for that the Scripture is light effective as well as
formaliter, appears by the addition, giving understanding to the simple.
Besides, to be a light in it self, but not quoad nos, is a kind of
contradiction, seeing the light it has is for us. It is true indeed, there is
a twofold obscurity, one of matter, which sometimes is so excellent and
perfect, that our understandings cannot reach it, and so in this sense it is
said, the natural man perceives not the things of God: (...), a natural man,
one that does excolere animam, such as Aristotle and Tully; but this blame is
to be cast upon our understanding, not the Scripture, for as we say, Sol est
maxim visibilis, and Deus est maxim intelligibilis, the Sun is most
visible, and God most easy to be known, because the one has the greatest
motive of seeing which is light; and the other of being understood, which is
verity; so are these truths most full of light, if our understandings were
opened. The second obscurity is of the phrase, and that the Scripture uses not
in things essential to salvation, and commonly what is obscurely set down in
one place is clear in another; and shall not the Spirit of God which gives a
clear understanding and expressions unto men be clear? See the Papists folly,
they hold it possible to fulfill the Law, but not to understand it; for when we
urge that place, Deuteronomy. 30. 12. The Word is not hidden from thee, and it is very
nigh thee; Oh, say they, this is to be understood of the fulfilling of the Law,
not the knowing it; we conclude then, the holy Scriptures are the holy
Ladders, whereby we climb up into heaven, and know Gods meaning.

2. It is infallible and certain. The infallibility of it is witnessed by those
places where Gods Word is compared to Gold seven times refined, and where it is
said, Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one jot or tittle, (a).
And so thy testimonies are sure; By all Mat. 40. 35
this it appears, that the Word of God is a fixed Canon, it cannot be wrested
and wyer-drawn, so as to approve one thing to day, and the contrary to morrow:
It is hellish blasphemy to compare it to a nose of Wax; and to say that it is
to be interpreted secundum currentem statum Ecclesiae, as the condition of the
Church alters, so must the Scripture alter; thereby they confirm that of
Tertullian, Deus non erit Deus nisi homini placuerit, God shall not be God
unless man please. If you say, that the Apostle Peter speaks of some who did
wrest the Scripture, and put it upon the wrack; This is to be granted
concerning the words, not the sense, and matter of the Holy Ghost intended by
those words: That is invariable and cannot be a Reed shaken with every wind of
interpretation, and because Heretics would fly to the words, denying the
sense, therefore has the Church of God been constrained to use new words to
distinguish them by. Irenaeus does well compare Heretics to the Beast Hyaena,
that imitates the Shepherds voice, and so by that means seduceth the Sheep
into destruction. Now this infallibility of the Word is so great that when
some, as Saul and Uzzah, have gone against it, as if their special
considerations might give them a protection, which were indeed fair and
plausible, yet they were severely punished by God.

3. It is universal in regard of time, place, and persons, so that he is the
true and good Catholic that keeps to this Catholic rule. The Word was ever a
rule; to declare unto the Church any thing besides that we have received,
nunquam licet, nunquam licuit, nunqua^ licebit, Vinc. Lyr. Hence in the Old
Testament, Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this, it is because there is no light in them: Hence also the good
Kings Hezekiah and Josiah were guided by this pillar of fire when they set upon
Reformation. It was a rule in the New Testament, therefore our Savior often,
Luke 10. 26. Psalm. 11. 17. How read thou? and how is it written? Paul when
he would reform the abuses crept in the Church of Corinth about the Sacrament,
goes to the first institution, and as it was delivered from Christ; And if we
consult with the Fathers, we shall find that this Scripture was the brook, out
of which they gathered those stones which they slung in the forehead of those
Goliahs that oppressed the truth; There was never any error, but it went up
and down, like Cain, from one place to another, fearing lest every place of
Scripture that met it, would kill it. Then it is universal for all places, as
the Sun in the firmament is light for the whole world, not for this Kingdom
only, or that, but it is for Nations; so is Gods Word a rule to England, to
Scotland, to Rome, to all where it is promulged. Lastly, it is universal to
all persons, for as the Psalmist says of the Sun, there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof; so no person or persons are exempted from the Obligation of
the Word; there is none too great to have his faith and life controlled by it:
Hence it is able to make the man of God wise to salvation, 1 Timothy 3. 17. And
not only a Minister, but an whole Council; yea, this is a rule that binds
Kings and Parliaments. We must all stoop to his Word.

4. It is Indivisible: When we say a rule is indivisible the meaning is, that
nothing may be added to it, or detracted from it, and this the Scripture in the
close of all, Rev. 22. challenges to it self; how great a breach of this truth
has been made when the Apocryphal Book, and many other traditions and
Ceremonies have been equallized to Scripture, and made as necessary as that?
Nay, is there not such folly in people, that they are as willing to be without
Gods Word as man's inventions? It is a necessary truth, which all Magistrates,
all Ministers, all people should believe, that Gods Word is perfect; There is
enough in it as a rule to direct and work holiness in us; How wretched then
are the Papists, that will have Images, the Lay man's Bible, as if Gods Word
were not enough; and see their perverse disputings, they will not have the
Scripture read in the known tongue, lest people through mistake, make errors,
whereas Images are suffered by them, though they do naturally teach idolatry.
When therefore these traditions and ceremonies climb up, like Reuben, into
their Fathers bed, let them lose all their glory. The Word of God is Heb. 9.
15. and alibi, called (...), a Testament; now you know to a man's Will nothing
may be added, nor any thing detracted: And this you will always find to be
true, all subversion of true faith, and pure worship, flows from this, either
because something of Scripture is neglected, or something that is not
Scripture, is introduced.

5. It is adequately proportionable unto our faith: The rule and the thing
regulated must be fitted one to another, Faith and the Word of God must run
parallel; all that is written must be believed, and all that is believed must
be written; and oh that the Church of God had in all ages kept to the Scripture
as Ruth to Naomi, where the one lives the other would, where the one dies the
other will. Non credo quia non lego, I do not believe it because I do not read
it, was a known speech in Antiquity; Thou art to say, Hitherto thou shall go O
my Faith, and no further; hitherto thou shall go O my worship, and no further;
Hoc primum credimus cum credimus, quod nihil ultra credere debemus, this we
first believe when we do believe, that we ought to believe nothing beyond
Scripture; and this also is to be extended unto your practice and conversation;
As you are to take no other Religion then what the Scripture allows, so
neither to live any other life then what the Word commands; come therefore thou
who live a profane and wretched life, let us expostulate with thee, thou art
no Papist, thou will not hold transubstantiation, why? because it cannot be
proved true by Scripture; And can thy profaneness, thy lusts, thy oaths, be
proved lawful by Scripture; Does not the same Scripture that bids thee believe
thus, bid thee also live thus? Is not Gods Word against profaneness as well as
popery? If this were attended to, men would have holy lives as well as sound
judgments.

6. And lastly, a rule must be first, and before the thing to be regulated; a
rule is a measure, and therefore must be first in its kind; To question whether
the Church should be before the Scripture, is to question whether man be before
God: It Is true, Divines do well observe, that the Scripture may be considered,
either quoad formale externum, in respect of the outward form, as it is a
writing; or quoad formale internum, in respect of the inward son and sense of
it, as it is the Word of God: Now in the latter sense, Gods Word was always
before a Church, because by the Word we are begotten again, and so made the
Church: Hence it is that Gods Word is more ancient then Churches and Fathers,
and this is the antiquity we should set up. It is true, the Church in regard of
her Ministry, and leading us to believe, is before the Scripture, but we never
put forth a Divine holy Faith till the Spirit of God work our assent to his
Word, because it is his Word; so that to stay in the authority of the Church,
is to stay in John Baptist, that did bear witness of Christ, and not go to
Christ himself. Seeing therefore the Word of God is most ancient, why should
men press us in faith or worship, to go and see what was done 5. or 600. or a
thousand years ago, and not rather go to the Scripture which was before
this? But as the Owl and Thief cannot endure the light, so neither can error
or superstition the Word of God.

Now take these Cautions,

First, the Word of God is the only rule. In Popery they share with God in
every thing; to grace they join freewill to Christ's merits their own, to God,
Angels and Saints, to the Scriptures their traditions, and Church authority;
and this is urged so precisely that if the Church do determine an error to be
a truth, yet they are bound to believe it yea, that they do mereri credendo,
merit by believing it; even as it was among the Sadduces and Rabbis, if their
Elders said the right hand were the left, or the left the right, they must
assent to it; If we would be content with this, that the Scripture were an
half rule all would be well, but as God is a perfect God, so is his Word a
perfect Word, we must have no other Gods besides him, so also no other
Scripture or Word beside this. Do not then in matters of Religion make this
thy Compasre to sail by, What say others; and what is the custom; but, What
says Gods Word? Are not politic considerations a rule to many? is not
custom a rule to many? Vae tibi flumen moris humani, quis tibi resistet? Woe
to thee, o thoutorrent of custom, who is able to resist thee? cries Austin.
It is true if this be received, here will appear much nicety, much
singularity, here must be loud cries for a Reformation, which the world does so
much oppugn; The world is not able to bear this exhortation, Let the Word of
God rule you, let the Word of God reform you.

2. When we say its a rule, it must be extended to that end for which it is a
rule; for as the Scripture is not a rule to Physicians or Mathematicians in
their proper arts, so neither does it particularly tend to this, or that
individual action for all essentials it is a rule, and a general rule for
circumstantials. Nor does this detract from the perfection of the Scripture,
that it does not command every circumstance because then a thing is imperfect,
when it wants some perfection that is due to it: It is not an imperfection in
the body, that its not every where, because this is not requisite to the body,
so neither is it to be expected from the Scripture, that all circumstantials
must be by name commanded; Its true, the Church must take heed that under the
name of circumstances she does not bring in worship, which has been always
the subtilty of Satan. Thus Altar-worship, and Image Worship were made but
circumstances in men's books by distinctions, but in their practice as much as
Gods own instituted worship. Be sure to give enough to the Scripture. Adoro
plenitudinem Scripturae, I adore the Scriptures fullness, says Tert. As
Bonaventure said, if he were to er, he wuld rather er in giving to much to
grace, then to free will; so do you, in giving too much to the Scripture,
rather then to little, though its best to go neither to the right hand, nor the
left. 3. Though it be a rule, yet it does not exclude other ministerial
helps, and here comes the office of Pastors and Teachers in, as also of
praying unto God, and diligent reading of Gods Word; Therefore its a vain and
absurd question of the Papists, Let a man be locked up in a study, with a Bible,
what good will he get by that, if he cannot read? as if because we say its a
rule, therefore other ministerial helps were not also necessary. The Pastors
and Teachers have indeed a light, yet as God when he created the world,
conveyed the whole light of the world into the body of the Sun, so that
though the Moon and Stars should give light, yet they should shine with no
other light but what they received from the Sun; So God in the constitution
of the Church, conveyed the whole light of it into the Scripture, and the
Offices of the Church are to shine with light from thence; The godly Pastors
and Teachers of the Church, they do not make truths, though they may declare
them; As Solomon by his prudence did not make the child, the true mothers
child but declare it; and the skillful Ieweller does not make the Jewel, but
does distinguish it from the counterfeit.

This rule does extend, first, to matters of faith.

A sound faith is the soul of Religion, its like the Sun in the firmament,
like the eye in the body; and commonly ubi male creditur, ibi nec been vivitur,
An ill faith and ill life go together: Hence Hymeneus and Philetus, as they
made shipwreck of their faith, so they did also of a good conscience, 1 Timothy
2. 17. There is no building of any confessions of faith, but the materials must
be fercht from this mountain. Error and Heresy have no such enemy as the
Scripture. The holy Fathers were scrupulous in using the word (...) and
Trinity, and all because they were not Scripture words; Hence Heretics are
lucifuga Scripturarum, Owls that cannot endure the light: therefore Lindan the
Papist was not ashamed to say, That it had been better for the Church if there
had been no Scripture at all, but only Traditions. Now the Scripture being the
ground, faith, though we be never so orthodox, yet if it be not because of
Scripture, its but an humane faith. As men may have anhumane repentance (when
their hearts are troubled) merely upon humane considerations which is far
from godly sorrow: So he may have an humane faith, merely because of education
and humane custom, and all this comes far short of divine faith.

Secondly, to worship and discipline. An orthodox Church without good
discipline and pure worship, is like a field of Come without hedges. What a
comely Church should we have, if Scripture Orders were looked too? In worship,
all that is done without Gods Word, is doing we know not what, John 4. 22. You
worship you know not what. And by what ground they receive one voluntary
worship, they might receive more. The Pope once resolved that he with his
Cardinals should at a set time ride on Asses partly to show their humility, and
partly to imitate Christ's riding on an Ass to Jerusalem; But the Cardinals
refused it as too absurd, yet they might on the same ground have received that
as a custom, as all their other rabble of worship. So for discipline and
order, a profane man should be as rare in the Church, as a blazing star, If
any one be an Idolater, a reviler, no not to eat with such an one, 1 Cor. ^.
11. And again, If any walk disorderly, withdraw from such an one. I know
different judgments improve these places to different opinions, but I press
that which all agree in; I acknowledge that governors are more to be
encouraged in this work, because the ignorance and profaneness of people
cannot endure to see a brazen serpent broken down. You worthy Patriots, you
have endeavored to bury Moses his Body, left it should be worshipped and how
does the Devil withstand you?

Thirdly, to our outward conversation, Psalm. 19. By them thy servant is
forewarned; The Scripture is the Antidote against sin, Psalm, 19. 9. A young
man may cleanse his ways by them: in the former a King, in the latter a young
man. Where there are the greatest temptations, even there Gods Word will
prevent. Now this use of the Scripture men do not consider, they dare not have
any other faith then the Scripture propounds, yet they date live another life,
Verba Scripturae non sunt legenda, sed vivenda. As therefore you believe as it
is written, so live and fear and joy as it is written: can thou prove thy
drunkernesse lawful, more then thy heresy?

Fourthly, to the heart and conscience of man: and herein it differs from all
other Rules and Laws, they bind only the outward man, but these reach to the
heart and conscience, Romans 7. The Law is spiritual, it does convince even a
selfe-admiring Pharisee; when this Sunne-light shines, it discovers all the
hidden thoughts of the heart all those moates, that otherwise would not be
seen, so Heb. 4. 12. Its a two edged sword, etc. The eloquence and wit of men
does not awe and terrify the conscience, but the Word of God does, that makes
the heart cry out, I am overcome, overcome. Its true God makes use of humane
eloquence, Qui dedit Petrum piscatorem, dedit and Cyprianum Rhetorem; but all
must be subordinate to the Word: As God is the Father ofspirits, so the Word is
a word of spirits; If the word comfort, though all the world threaten, the
heart bears up it self, and so if that threatens, the heart is discouraged.

Use 1. Of exhortation, to set up this rule.

Let the Word of God dwell in you, sollow that in your reformations, as the
Wisemen did the star: you are careful (as Magistrates) to keep Parliament
privileges; be as tender about Scripture privileges, this is your spiritual
Magna Charta: Then will God set you up in the consciences of men, when they
shall see that you are as seriously bent to keep Gods right as your own. Esaias
8. 19. Should not a people enquire of their God? Every Nation seeks to their
own god; The voluptuousman takes counsel from his belly, the ambitious from
his great ones, the Papist from the Popes chair; and shall not we from God? It
was a complaint of an Anonymus in his Epistle to Calvin; (we hope through the
blessing of God this Parliament will take it away) this man writing out of
England to Calvin concerning the disorders in our Discipline and Church way,
says, We go to the Nobles and great men to redress this abuse, they say the
Bishops must look to it; when we go to the Bishops, they answer, they cannot do
any thing unless there were a public Constitution of the Realm for it: But
when that public Senate is called, there are so many civil businesses to be
handled, that the cause of Christ is always neglected. Therefore we the
Ministers of Gods Word, are like John Baptist, a voice crying out to you,
Prepare ye the way for the Lord, and that by his Word. It was said of the
people of Israel, That there was an ounce of that calfe they made in every
punishment that fell upon them. And may not we say, that the general neglect
of Discipline has had a great share in all our sins and punishments? O ye
blessed Fathers, who were afraid to use the word Trinity, and the like, because
it was not in Scripture, how could you lie still in your graves for these
years past, and not rather haunt us as ghosts, who had so much of doctrine and
of worship that had no Scripture for them!

Now there are other rules set up by men.

1. Antiquity: This is the Gorgons head that all superstitious men hold up,
thinking to silence all men immediately, whereas indeed they deal as the
Gibeonites did, who came with their moldy bread and old shoes which they had
newly got, as if they had enjoyed them a long while: so it is with most of
their old traditions, and their moldy inventions, which they obtrude upon us.
But how many things are improved? are not your states, your revenues improved?
and shall not the light and gifts that God has given be improved? Is it not
Austins observation, that the Epistles of the Fathers were mended by
Provincial Councels, and Provincial by Universal, and the first Universal
by the latter: mark that, the first by the latter; so that what is said of old
age natural, may sometimes be true of ecclesiastique, ipsa senectus morbus. It
was the observation of an acute wit, That time was like the River of waters,
that bore up all the frothy and empty things, but all the ponderous things sunk
and were seen no more.

2. Custom: This a rule more then all Scriptures to many; This we and our
fathers have been used to do; Now how vain is this? for by the same reason
Heathens and Pagans might plead for their Idolatry. Yea Symmachus did when he
entreated the Emperor not to bring in Christian Religion; Oh, says he,
sequendi sunt parents, qui sequuti sunt feliciter suos, contumeliosa est
emendatio senectutis: our fathers lived quietly doing thus and thus, it is a
reproachful thing to be wiser then our fathers. And this is the great
mountain in the way of Reformation; Customs, though never so ridiculous,
though never so dangerous, yet they will stand for. Austin tells us, that he
came into a City where the people had a custom upon one day in a year to meet
together, and to throw stones at one another, whereby many were killed, yet
because it was a custom, he could not make them leave it.

3. Fathers: Thus the Papists were the fathers of this new Religion: now
although it be true, that our learned Divines do prove all our orthodox
positions out of them; yet withal we say, they are no rules of faith. Call no
man Father, says our Savior, that is, so as to rely and rest upon his
authority: And indeed there are none set forth the fullness of the Scripture
more then they. It was the insolent speech of that proud Heretic Dioscorus,
(...), I am cast out with the fathers; so let any error, any willworship be
cast out of the Church: then the cry is, this is cast out with the fathers; The
Fathers works are uncertain, they contradict one another, yea themselves
sometimes, and how then can they be rules?

4. The name of a Church: This is another rule to many; they will be of that
faith which the Church they live in does profess, and this has been the
Goliahs sword, none like that. It was Erasmus his speech, as Gerhard cites him,
That the Church had so much authority over him, and he gave so much to it, that
if she should conclude the Arian and Pelagian opinions to be the true faith,
he would believe it. What? do you go against the Church? where if you asked,
what is the Church, it would have been found to have been nothing but the will
and resolution of a proud Pope, for he is the Papists virtuall Church. It is
true, the authority of a Church that is holy and true, ought to work much upon
men; We, says the Apostle, nor the Church of God have no such custom; and
therefore that is commendable, Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturam
nemo Christianus, contra ecclesiam nemo pacisicus: but then still provided that
the Church shines with the Scripture light. The authority of the right Church
must not be a cipher, and yet must not be all things. To keep Church Government
from tyranny, and Christian liberty from a Socinian (...), or doubting, is very
hard.

5. Reason: And this has been much extolled by a Socinian party a ate, but
they confound the instrument and the rule together; reason is the instrument
applying, not the rule it self, and they are not reasons truths, but Scripture
truths: As the Artificer, that beats out his golden metal into such and such
forms, it is not the hammers Gold, but only it is formed by it; And as they
argue against Scripture, that one interprets it thus, and another thus, so we
may say of Reason, this is right reason to one, that is not to another; Tu
haereticus mihi, and ego tibi. Especially all reason severed from Gods Word is
corrupt and carnal, a very ill Judge in the worship of God and our
conversation.

6. Universality: To do as the most do; this is a great rule; they never
consider what the Scriptures direct to, but they will believe, and worship, and
live as the most do; now God has expressly forbidden this, Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil; They are but few to whom Christ reveals
himself: The whole world lies in darkness; And as that mould of the earth
which turns into stones is far greater then that which becomes metal; and
as the weeds are far more then the flowers; so are sinners far more then
those that do truly worship God. This sect is every where spoken against, say
they of Christ's way; And you shall be hated of all men for my names sake; But
as hell is not the more comfortable, because so many are there, so neither
ought the paths thither to be the more pleasant, because there are so many
companions, which lead to destruction.

7. Enthusiasme: That is, when men set up their private fancies and spirits
against the meaning of God in his Word. But because all the godly are traduced
by following a private spirit, and because that place of Scripture is urged by
some, No Scripture is of private interpretation, it is good to consider the
distinction I shall bring, grant that it be read (...), not (...), (which
signifies an impulse or coming upon us:) An interpretation may be said to be
private either 1. in regard of the person, and so that is not forbidden, for it
is lawful for one private man to gainsay the whole world, if he have a true
interpretation of Scripture; or 2. it is private ratione medii, when he takes a
false medium, he does not take the context, and the circumstances; and this
private interpretation, which does not publicly appear in the words, is
forbidden: or 3. private is ratione finis, the end of a man, when though he
take a right way and course, yet he has some sinister end, and this also is
forbidden: So then, a private spirit is then made a rule, when we take our own
thoughts of the Scripture, and do not found or establish our meaning upon the
context. The Papists and Enthusiasts are contrary one to another; Thus Christ,
as Tertullian says, is always crucified between two thieves, truth suffers
between two contrary errors.

Now if we follow Scripture Rules, there will these consequents flow from it.

1. Such a man will be sure and constant in his way; for as the truth is
yesterday, and to day, the same for ever; so also will the frame and temper of
the man be the same for ever; whereas a man that does not build upon Scripture,
he has a weekly and a monthly Faith: Hence are those phrases, Holdfast the
words of Life, Tit. 1. 8. The godly men (says Fox) were called the just, and
hold-fast men, because they would not abate of the least tittle they held; It
was a proverb to express the difficulty of a thing, (...), you may sooner
unteach a man Christ: whereas men that have not built upon this foundation,
they are like Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, who was nicknamed Euripus,
because of his ebbing and flowing in matters of Religion; for a Bishopric he
would swear to the Nicene Council, and then to keep it he would forswear it
again.

2. He will be holy and spiritual in his conversation; for such as those rules
are, such will he be: The Scriptures are called holy, not only because the
matter of them is holy, and the efficient Author of them holy, but because the
end and effect of them is to make us holy; They will not only make orthodox in
judgment, but right in affections and conversations also; Hence it is that
there is as little holiness in the life's of the Papists, as there is sound
faith in their judgments: and how can it be otherwise, seeing the Church of
Rome has dealt with the people of God, as if a man would commit a Ship into
the Sea without Pilot, Compass, or Sails, and so venture it into the Ocean?
And this Scripture holiness does as far surpass that which people call
piety, as the Sun does the glow-worme.

3. This will bring peace and security to him, and to the Kingdom that
receives it: As many as walk according to this rule, peace unto them, Gal. 6.
16. Ignorant and profane people cry out, it is this crying for Scripture so
much, that makes all this trouble; but see the contrary, 2 Chronicles. 5. 35. When
there was no teaching Priest, nor the Law in Israel, then there was trouble to
him that went in and went out: Again, 2 Chronicles. 17. 9. 10. when Iehoshaphat
Reformed according to God, then all was quiet, and fear fell upon all the
Nations round about. The bringing in of Gods Word, and a Scripture Reformation,
is like the bringing in of the Ark to Obed Edoms house, it carries much
blessing with it.

4. This Scripture man will be accounted nice and scrupulous. If you do
regard his conscience, which attends Gods Word only, it must needs be nice and
scrupulous in the Worlds account, That as they wonder you run not into the
same excess of riot with them, so also that you cannot use all such Worship
and receive all such Traditions as they do: A tender constitution feels the
least blast of wind, so also does a tender heart; Look upon the carriage of our
Saviors not washing his hands, it was but a civil. thing, he knew how much
the neglect of this would prejudice him, and yet he would not do it. For as he
will have a liberty of conscience where some are superstitiously fearful; so
again he will have an holy fear of conscience, where others are desperately
bold; never then let Reformers startle at this, to be thought more strict then
needs.

5. He will be judged singular from others: This arises from the other, for
seeing his conscience is so tender, thence also his life will be disagreeing to
the most, as the Apostles rule, Romans 13. 2. Not to fashion our selves according
to this world; and so Jam. 1. 27. pure Religion is to keep our selves unspotted
from the world: it is true on the other side, if there be any irregularity, it
is in the most men of the world that they conform not unto the Word of God
which is the rule, for the godly do as they should do; as in a pasture where
a flock of sheep is, if all but two or three break the hedges and run into
the highways, who are wanderers? the multitude? no, those two or three that
abide in the pastures.

6. It will make him become hated and abhorred of all; You shall be hated of
all men for my names sake: Hence the Papists, because we would have all decided
by Scripture, they call us Scriptuarios, and atramentarios Theologos, Inky
Divines; and to be a Bible bearing Puritan was matter of scoff: How would the
fire of Chrysostom have kindled against these wretches; who upon that place,
Let the word of God dwell plentifully in you, Cor. 3. 16. cries out, (...),
Hearken all you tradesmen, get Bibles; this undoeth you, that you think it
belongs only to some special men to read the Scripture: And how can it be but
that the world must hate this, seeing there is such a contrariety between a
Scripture life, and the life of carnal men? A Scripture conversation, and a
Scripture reformation can be no more endured by the world then David by Saul,
because the pulling down of one is the establishing of the other: Semper aliena
virtus formidolosa est, one man's virtue makes him that wants it afraid.

But how may we get good by this rule?

1 We must be frequent in it: see that Col. 3. Let it dwell in you, you must
know it, and be as familiar with it as your own houses: and then plentifully,
that is, both for the object and subject; the object, not this or that parcel
of the Word of God, but the whole Scripture; and then for the subject, in all
the parts of the soul, the understanding, the will, and the affections it must
be like Aarons Oil running down from the head to the feet; hence God would
have the King himself to write his word with his own hand, that so he may be
acquainted with it, and rule accordingly, Dent. 17.

2 Pray for understanding: Only a spiritual understanding and an heavenly eye
can discern an excellency in the Scripture; it argued a profane spirit in
Politian, who said there was more in one of Pindars Odes, then all David's
Psalms; But David prays that God would open his eyes, that he might see the
wonderful things in Gods Law. All truth is sweet, but the Scripture truth
above all; men may read the Scripture, write Comments on it, and yet not have
spiritual and savoury understanding of it: Nunquam Pauli mentem intelliges,
nisi prius Pauli spiritum imbiberis, unless God give thee the heavenly spirit
of Paul, thou will never understand the heavenly meaning of Paul.

3 Be humble and meek, submitting to the simplicity contained therein; The
humble he will teach his way. It is a great matter to stoop to the Scripture;
Austin complains of this, that literarum typho tumidus, swelling with pride
of humane learning, he did refuse the simplicity of Scriptures: Bradwardine
speaking of himself, before he felt the power of grace upon his heart, says
that he was much offended, when he heard Paul read in the Church, because he
had not metaphysicum ingenium: Thus proud men seldom ever come to know the
truth, God hides these things from the prudent and wise of the world.

4 Get love to Gods truth; And this is the reason of all Antichrists errors,
and believing such lies as they do, because they receive not Gods Word in the
love of it; They loathed this Manna, and therefore God makes a famine among
them; and there is no more terrible prognostique of Gods delivering up a people
to blindness and hardness, then their rejecting of the Word. Take we heed
then how we reject God reforming, lest he swear in his wrath, that we shall
never be reformed; What is the great crying sin of England this day? even an
hatred of Gods truth, they love not the power and purity of it, but as the
Gadarens had rather have their Swine then Christ's presence, so these their
brutish lusts rather then Gods truth; God removes these means of grace when
people are incurable, as when the Patient is dead, all the physic boxes and
cups are taken away.

Now that the Word of God may be set up, these three things are necessary:

1 To encourage preaching; which is that great work so severely charged upon
the ministers; Hezekiah spoke comfortably to those that taught the good
knowledge of God. There was a very noxious and destructive opinion, that
reading was preaching; The question is not whether reading may not in some
sense be called preaching, (taking preaching for any declaration of Gods
truth;) But whether it be ministerial preaching whether when the Apostle
says, he must divide Gods Word aright, he means no more then to read?
whether when he says, who is sufficient for these things, he means, who is
able to read? when he says. Give thy self to study, that thy profiting may
appear to all men, he means that all men see thou read better then thou
did.

2 Catechizing; This would do good both to Minister and people: the ministry
in the first place; Memorable is that which Chemnitius relates of his Master
Chytraeus, that when he read over diverse Authors, and devoured many Volumes, he
set himself to prove the Catechisticall points of Divinity by Scripture, and
then he sound himself in a new world, he was not able to do it. As for the
Minister, so much more for the people. Who will give us to weep rivers of
tears for the general ignorance in all Parishes and Congregations? Bellarmine
says that faith may be defined better by ignorance then knowledge; This is
true, that the faith of the common people (such as it is) may be so defined:
Help the the Church of God, O you Wotthies in this.

3. Encouraging learning, and the knowledge of the tongues; for howsoever
translations may be good, yet in regard of the emphasis of the Original, we
may say as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, that which she heard was nothing to
the glory she saw. Then came in error and superstition, when it was Heresy,
or at least suspicion of it, to understand Greek and Hebrew. A Divine ought to
be that which was said of Nazianzene, (...), an Ocean of Divinity.

We come now to the Testimony it self, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc.
which does contain the effect of John's Ministry, as also the duty of his
hearers, who were fallen into a corrupt time, when the Philistims had filled up
all the Wels the Pharisees and Scribes had corrupted the Word of God by false
interpretations: The word (...), he will prepare, and (...), prepare ye, are
taken from the custom of great Ones, who use to have way made for them; or as
others, when great Commanders were to lead an Army, they sent some before, who
were called (...), that did complanate and make level the way; and the Hebrew
Word is emphaticall, Grotius in (...).
which signifies such a removal of all offensive things, that the face may no
longer behold them: and thence we observe that,

It is the duty of a people to remove all difficulties and oppositions Doct.
in the way, that so Christ may come and dwell with them: for so the Text
carries it, either literally to take every thing away that may stop their
speedy return from Babylon, or typically, what should oppose the spiritual
restoration of the Church, by the Messiah; and so proportionably, whatsoever
mountain or valley may be in the way, where Christ is coming. As they threw
garments in the way, and with much acclamation cried, Hosanna, blessed be he
that comes in the name of the Lord; so are we with all earnestness of
affection, to cry, Blessed be that Reformation, which comes in the name of
the Lord; This also the Psalmist cries, Lift up your heads ye gates, that the
King of glory may come in. Psalm. 2^. 7.


We will first show what are the impediments, the hills and valleys, that
hinder Christ's coming to reign in his Church.

1 A corrupt judgment, as if there were no necessity of preparation, of
Reformation; That was Laodicea's case, she thought her self full, and rich,
therefore she is counseled to buy eyesalve, Rev. 3. 18. Thus the Church of
Rome is in a desperate disease, because she thinks she cannot be sick, she
cannot err: Thus all Reformation is accounted needless, what need we any more
do? As he said, many had been learned, if they had not conceited they were so;
so many Churches had been more pure and reformed, if they had not thought
themselves reformed enough and therefore as for a particular person, Paul
[saith, I had not known sin, had not the Law said, Thou shall not lust; so
also may a Church say, I had not known this to be an abuse, this to be
error, had not the Scripture manifested it.

2 Attending to carnal policy: This makes men vary according to State
consideration; there are many men that can place their consciences, as Diogenes
bragged he could do his Tub, which ways soever the wind blew, he could turn
the mouth of his barrel from it. There are a certain people spoken of in
story, that worship no set God, but the first thing they met with, Hodie tu
Jupiter esto, cras mihi truncus eris, To day this shall be good Divinity, to
morrow error to day this shall be a reformation, to morrow turbulencie. This
carnal respect is a loadstone to many, Fac me Episcopum Romanum, and ero
Christianus, make me Bishop of Rome and i will be a Christian: There be some who
thought gain godliness; how many children of Balaam are there who may be
hired to curse the people of God?

3 A sinful symbolizing moderation; How hard a matter is it, not to take a
lame and half Reformation? Si dimidio Christo essemus contenti, facile
transigremus omnia, all quarrels would soon end if we would take up with a
half Christ, says Calvin; Let the child be divided, says the false mother;
Purge out the old leaven, (...), Chrysostom ponders that, he does not say
(...), but (...), that is, thoroughly and fully; And Peter Martyr follows this
of Chysostome; In Reformation, these are our principles, ad multa connivendum
est, leniter est agendum; sed alia est severitas verbi Divini, We must wink at
many things, and proceed gently, but the severity of Gods Word is another
matter of thing. But you will say, Shall there be no moderation, must we all be
like frogs that cannot go, but leap? Yes, there is a lawful moderation, but
here we condemn a sinful symbolising one.

4 Love to earthly things: If you read the Prophet Haggai, you will find that
the care and love to build their own houses, made them neglect to build the
Temple of God: Thus also the Pharisees to satisfy their covetousness, made
corrupt interpretations of the Scripture; and what is all Popery, but the
Daughter of ambition and covetousness? When men had rather lose their God then
their wealth, part with their Religion then their riches; how can they promote
the cause of God or make way for Christ's coming? when men can delight more in
the glory of their own houses then in the spiritual beauty of Ordinances; when
they have more joy in their hearts, by the increasing of wine and oil, then in
God and his ways; it is no wonder if so few make way for Christ; it was
Nazianzens excellent temper, to thank God he had any thing to lose for Christ's
sake.

5 A fifth impediment to reformation is profaneness and license in
wickedness; This is that which troubles men so, They shall not be so merry in
their lusts and their sins; but this should comfort you, Christ endured the
contradiction of sinners, this comforted the Christians heretofore as
Tertullian notes; Who are they that speak against us, but the Alehouses and
Brothel-houses? you may ask, What is the good we would do, that the mouths of
the bad are so open? Hence it is that men are patient under all Popish
burdens, because these and their lusts may stand together, but when Christ
comes, then they rage, crying. Let us break his bonds. It is a torment to
wicked spirits, that they cannot be wicked, as they have been, Mat. 8. 29. Why
art thou come to torment us before our time; what torment could that be to the
Devil, to be cast our of the possessed bodies? yes great, because they could
not vex and destroy as before: so a Reformation comes and torments proud
Church Governors, and why so? because they cannot oppress and rage as they
use to do.

6. The general opposing and disliking of it by people: This is a great stop
in the way, What should some sew stir for and against the current of men's
desire? especially if many great, and many learned rise up against it; and this
Luther confessed was no little temptation to him, Tune solus sapis? totne errant
universi? Art thou only wise, are all others in an error? But if this were to
be regarded, then neither Prophets, nor Christ, nor Luther, nor Calvin, should
have set upon any Reformation: for the world could not bear them. Always
Reformations have been judged impossible things; Abi in cellam, and dic,
Miserere nostri, says he to Luther, go and pray in thy Cell, for thou art not
likely to do any thing by stirring; so Psalm. 2. Why do the people rage and
take counsel together; that Christ may not be exalted on his Throne; But this
will not excuse, better it is to endure the rage of people then the anger of
God; better have the world frown on you, then God frown on you.

7. The seeming newness that is in it; For indeed, truth is before error; it
is for our sins that truth is new; It argues our deep Apostasy and
revolting, that the orders and ways of Christ should be new: That profane
persons should lift up their heads so high among Christians, was not so from
the beginning; it is a novell thing to be erroneous or superstitious, thy
breaking of the Sabbath, thy neglect of piety, these are new things; and it is
strange to consider, how doting men are of the old ways they have lived in,
though never taken up at first upon any Scripture consideration: and see the
corruptions of men's hearts, new fashions are admired, superstitious innovations
were generally received, but truth and discipline that is seeming new, is
rejected.

8. The divisions that seem to arise by it, and errors multiplying at such
times; It is true, it were a happiness if as in nature monsters are barren, (a
monster cannot beget a monster) so also in spiritual, a monstrous error could
not beget another; but there must be heresies. As the rending of the Temple was
a sign of the abolishing of that Church and State, so are rents and divisions
in a Church. The Physicians make that Patient in a dangerous condition, whose
distempers have an (...) in them, that while they labor to heal one disease,
they hurt another way; but still you are to know a Reformation does not make
these, but find these: It is the tyranny of Church Officers, that make
divisions in the Church, as we see by Pope Victor, who excommunicated the
Eastern Churches about a trifling business. You shall have many cry out of
the diverse sects that are risenup, but yet they never blamed those that
occasioned them: and I must further add, its causa, non separatio facit
schismaticum, it is the cause, not a separation that makes a schismatic: This
has always been the slander cast upon Reformation, Quot homines, tot
Evangelia, so many men, so many Gospels; and Luther was often required not to
divide the inconsutilis tunica, the seamlesse coat of Christ, therefore he
calls his adversaries inconsutilistae, and Tunicastri; Lay then this blame not
upon Reformation that only can remove such things, but upon those who were the
Fathers of these Rents.

9. The ninth let to Reformation, is, the outward troubles and commotions that
do accompany it: And certainly these lie in the way of Reformation, as Amasaes
carcass that stopped all the passengers; but this our Savior foretold, I come to
send a fire and a sword, and to set Father against son, and son against Father:
not that our Savior means this was the Finis operantis, that he intended
this, but that it was Finis operis, there would be this event wheresoever his
pure and powerful preaching was set up: for he is not the cause of it, but the
stubborn and rebellious hearts ofmen make it; neither the Physician nor the
Physic are the cause of the pains and troubles the sick man feels, but the
ill humors that have been long gathering in him.

10. The unthankfulness of people, that they should no more esteem or prise
those instruments which God sends to deliver them by. Thus they were
unthankful to Moses and Aaron: and the Roman Worthies have drank of this cup.
Therefore one Heathen, when his son was desirous of public service, he
carries him to the boards and planks of old weather-beaten Ships that lay upon
the shore; Lo (says he) thus the people will do to thee after they have
used thy service. And so another Heathen complained, who had done much public
service, but neglected, that he was like the Trees, which the beasts run to in
time of a storm, and when that was over they fell on cropping and browzing of
it. Now as this unthankfulness is a gross sin, so it ought not to be any
discouragement for those who are employed in the public good: Luther was much
offended at this, and therefore he tells us his temptation, Cum hac itavideo,
non nunquam impatientia frangor, and serio cogio, nisi illa doctrina in mundu^
jam sparsa esset, me quidvis potius facturum quam ut ingrato mundo ostenderem;
Sed hae cogitationes sunt carnis; When I see this (ingratitude) I am sometimes
broken with impatience, and seriously resolve unless this doctrine had been
already dispersed, I would rather have done any thing then declared it to this
unthankful world; but these are the thoughts of the flesh.

But yet there are many urgent motives and arguments, why Reformers should go
on.

1. Because God has severely punished the neglect of any order he has left
with his Church; though they have done much, yet if they have not done
completely, he has been angry; Hence you read so often, Nevertheless the high
places were not taken away; May not the judgment upon Nadab and Abihu, for
offering strange fire; may not the breach God made upon Uzzah, for ever awaken
Reformers, that they should not be conniving and indulgent to the breach of the
least command of his? O ye worthy Patriots, think not that you are free, and at
your own disposal, how much or how little is to be done for God, you are
accomptable to God for jotaes and tittles.

2. There is nothing more odious unto him then corruptions in his Church: what
detestable names does che Scripture put upon Idols? and the false Prophet is
called the tail; and our Savior when he was to purge out the corruptions from
his Temple, He makes a whip, and drives the polluters out; a strange way it
was, but hereby he would show how odious such were to him, even as so many dogs
in his presence; Consider that speech, John 4. My Father seeks such who
worship him in spirit and in truth: he seeks such, which argues how precious
and delightsome they are unto him, that worship him in his own way, therefore
our Savior tells the Pharisees, that, that which was highly esteemed amongst
them as great piety and devotion, it was (...), an abomination before God: oh
then let us not do any abominable things.

3. A third motive is, whatsoever carnal Statists think, yet doing the will of
the Lord in this, we are sure ofblessings: Remember those two places quoted
before (for we desire they may always stick upon your hearts) how ill it was,
when there was no law, nor no preaching Priest, and then how well it was when
Iehosaphat set up those that taught the good knowledge of God: It is true, we
may be a long while in the Wilderness, and God for the sins ofhis own
people may suffer the enemies to prevail, but we are always to remember the
end of the Lord, mark the ends of all Reformation, and you shall find them to
be peace: And as we say of the sorrows and sadness of a particular godly man,
it is not his godliness that makes him so, but because he has not godliness
enough: so of a Church or State, it is not a Reformation that makes woe and
misery, but because we are not reformed enough, we are not willing for this.

4. Consider how much men venture, to prepare ways for antichrist, and to make
his paths straight; Do not men venture their estates, and their lives, that the
man of sin may become a man of glory? and shall not we do as much for
Christ? will not the prisons and miseries wherein they suffered, witness
against our dastardlinesse? Did not the people bring their eare-rings to make
the golden calfe? Did not the Corinthians suffer the false Apostles to buffet
them and smite them? shall there be Martyrs for error, and not for Truth? As
that good old Pambus wept when he saw a Strumpet cunningly dressing her self
to please her Lover, because he could not take as much pains to please God; so
do thou, when thou hear of the Papists and such adversaries, making
themselves poor, and venturing their lives, that error may be advanced; why
do thou not humble thy self, because thou art not so forward, or self-denying
for the truth?

Use of Exhortation. That now we would prepare the way for Christ: God will
reform his Church by other means if we do not promote it; take heed, lest
while we are negligent, he come down himself as it were, and scourge out all
profaneness from his Temple, and so you lose both your reward and comfort;
consider, that as it is your danger to prepare Christ's ways; so it is the
greatest honor that God did ever put upon you: How many thousands that shall
find the benefit and sweetness of drinking the pure streams of Gods
Ordinances, will then bless God for you? In these matters of God consult not
with flesh and blood, remember that he is engaged for his truth more then you;
you indeed have your lives and estates to lose, but God has his Honor, and
his Truth to lose, which is more then all the World. How will you ever answer
it, if God at the day of Judgment shall say, he put an opportunity into your
hands, and you have not improved it, when the blood of other men's souls may be
required at your hands? Take heed that at your deathbeds there be no outcry,
O my England sins! I speak not this in any spirit of discontent, but rather
of joy, seeing those clusters of grapes you have already brought us from the
Land of Canaan those good and wholesome Laws that have been enacted since your
sitting; only be exhorted to hold on, and take the opportunities that God puts
into your hand: Those that would not gather Manna in the morning, could find
none all the day after: only the man that stepped in first into the pool of
Bethesda, could be healed. And you are the more engaged to this, by the solemn
Covenant you have entered into; so that you must needs break many bonds asunder,
if you grow forgetful of this work: Take David for an example, Psalm. 1 32.
there he had vowed to bring the Ark back into a fit place; now when he had thus
sworn, see how careful he was, Remember David and all his troubles, or more
near the Original, in his whole affliction, that is, in all that trouble, and
fear, and care that was upon him, when God smote Uzzah, and so hindered him in
his intended Reformation: There is his grief, where was a stop in his work.
Then consider again his resolution, he would not sleep, nor eat, (its an
hyperbolicall expression of the indefatigable pains he would take) that the
Ark might be settled. I shall therefore pray as David, when the people were
willing, The Lord keep this always in their heart; the Lord always keep your
Covenant and resolutions alive in your hearts.

Now that you may not be as those who built the Ark for Noah, but were drowned
themselves; or as Hiram, that sent materials to build a Temple to that God,
whom he did not know, that you may have comfort and benefit in all that is done,

1. Humble your souls for all your failings, and sins; one miscarriage may
imbitter many mercies. 2 Samuel 6. When David was with great pomp and
cheerfulness bringing back the Ark, on a sudden God manifests his
displeasure against Uzzah, not as some think, because he touched the Ark, seeing
he was a Levite, but because it was put on a cart whereas it ought to be
carried on men's shoulders; see what a sad obstacle was put in the way, David
hereupon leaves the Ark, and will carry it no further. Take the advantage
therefore on these days, that all the sins which stand upon your account may
be wiped off.

2. Labor for a spiritual heart, to be such as can delight in the spiritual
worship of God, that can account spiritual things glorious things: men that
are affected with outward glorious pomp in the service of God, it is a sign
they have no spiritual things to rejoice in; the woman that has no children
to play with, she can delight in dogs, and other creatures? Hag. 2. there is a
promise, that God would make the glory of the second Temple far above that of
the former, and how was this true, but because of Christ's spiritual preaching
and presence there. I cannot but name a passage out of Isidore Pelusiota, lib.
2. epist. 246. because its so parallel with our times alate, and I would all
were of his judgment: There was one Eusebius a Bishop, that did cast out and
revile the good people, and in the mean time was very devout in building and
adorning the Churches; now says, Isidore, (...), the Church is one thing, the
place of the Church another; the one consists of unblameable men, the other of
wood and stone which if the Bishop did consider, he would not any longer
overthrow the one, and adorn the other. And in the Apostles times, when the
Church did abound with spiritual graces and holiness of life, they had no
Temples; but in our time the Temples are more adorned then is fitting, (...),
but the Church is scorned and mocked: If I might have my wish, I had rather be
in those times wherein the Temples were not so beautified, but the Church
splendent with heavenly graces, then in these our times, wherein the Temples
are very glorious, but the Church empty of graces.

3. Get sincere and holy aims, even in doing Gods commands: let there not be
Paul's complaint, All seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ; Be
willing to be even an Anathema that the Church may prosper. It was a noble
resolution of Tullies, Ne immortalitatem quidem contra rempublicam acciperem,
he would not have immortality it self to the prejudice of the Commonwealth:
You have a notable instance for this in John, how did he reform according to
all that was in Gods heart? and yet he lost the reward; nay, Hos. 13. God
threatens to be revenged on him; and why is all this, but because his heart was
not right to God? Do not thou aim at glory, and at fame, but at Gods own
glory and honor.

4. Reform your own lives and conversations; for how reasonable is it that
you who make laws that others do not swear, you your selves should not? how
fit is it that you who bind others to the keeping of the Sabbath, you your
selves should sanctify it? And this again did undo Iehu, that although he
pulled down Baal, yet he did not reform himself from Ieroboams sins: lege
historiam ne fias historia, read the history of Iehu, lest thou thy self be
made such an history to others. Oh therefore let it be true of thee, that since
thou have been laboring in this public Reformation, thou have been more holy,
thou have been more pure: Thou that have endeavored to make way for Christ in
the Church and State, have much more made way for him in thy own family: What
will it profit to have holy Ordinances, holy Worship, if we our selves still
remain unholy?

Use 2. Of Instruction unto people not to mutter under these sad calamities, if
hereby Christ may come and reign in his Church. Consider,

1. That a Reformation does not make these troubles, but sin. Do not murmur
under Gods providence as is forbidden, 2 Cor. 10. The Jews, they murmured
under Moses and Aaron, how many of them did God destroy? so again, the
Corinthians, because Paul did urge strict Discipline about the incestuous
person and other disorders, therefore they were prone to murmur: And thus
people think that this Reformation is the cause of all this evil, and that
Reformers are the troublers of England: but sure it is our sins and an
unwillingnesse to be subjected to Christ that works us all this woe; and if we
had more truth, we should have more peace.

2 How slowly we prepare and fit our selves for mercies; Its true, speed is a
great advantage in public works; The heavenly bodies conveigh their sweet
influence, non qua calida, sed qua velocis motus, as they are swift: but yet
you are to take notice of it, that our slownesse in fitting our selves for
mercy is more to be blamed. Its your complaint, the Parliament is slow; Why not
rather we reform our lives slowly, we prepare our selves slowly, and
therefore it is that good things are kept off? Moses and Aaron were not the
causes that the people were kept so long in the wilderness, but their own
sins and rebellions against God; Let this therefore stop your mouths and do
not discourage those who labor for your good, that is not profitable for you,
as the Apostle speaks in the like case.

3 How grievous a sin it is, to wish for thy old condition again or to
magnify that; This was the temper of the perverse and froward Jews, would
they were in Egypt again, Moses and Aaron would destroy them; and see how they
amplify that condition, the bondage of which they did so much complain of
before: They sat down by the fleshpots in Egypt: [sate down] as if they had so
much ease; and by the fleshpots, as if they had had so much plenty: whereas
indeed their estate was miserable. It is true, our times are very sad, and as
Tully of his civil wars, so may we say of ours, Non est civit Romanus qui in
hac tempestate ridere potest, he is not a true Christian that can be heartily
merry in these days. But were not the times of Superstition, of Altar-worship,
of silencing your Ministers as bitter unto you?

4 How the mercy when it does come, will make amends for all. Canaan will
satisfy for the troubles in the wilderness. That the Church has brought
forth a man-child of Reformation will make all former sorrows and pangs be
forgotten: When and how God will put a period unto these sad Distractions, we
know not; but certainly God will own his own Truth, he will not forget his
promises to his people: and if we should perish, yet when we have done our
duty, we shall have our comfort and reward in heaven; and certainly God has
not raised all these hopes of his people, to make them the more miserable; Will
God do with his people, when they have laid up all for his service, as the
husbandman with his Bees, when they have enriched themselves with their honey,
and laid up all their stock, then to set fire on them, and burn them? no
certainly; if the servent prayer of one righteous man prevail much how much
rather the prayers of many thousands?

FINIS.

