No Sacrilege nor Sin TO ALIENATE or PURCHASE Cathedral Lands, As SUCH: Or, A
VINDICATION Of, not only the Late Purchasers; but, of the Ancient Nobility and
Gentry; yea, of the Crown it self, all deeply wounded by the false Charge of
SACRILEGE upon New Purchasers.

The third Edition, Revised, and Abbreviated, for the Service of the
PARLIAMENT: With a Postscript to Dr. PEARSON.

By C. Burges, D. D.

Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? London: Printed by
James Cottrel. 1660.

TO The Right Honorable, THE Lords and Commons in Parliament.
Most Noble Lords and Gentlemen;
HE that will take notice of the incessant (yet groundless) clamours daily
emitted, in a Rhetorical Dress, out of Pulpits, and Pamphlets, against the
pretended Sacrilege of the late Purchasers of Cathedral Lands; cannot but see,
that, through their sides, those Pungent Verbalists endeavor to gore more
deeply most of the ancient Nobility and Gentry of England (not sparing Majesty
it self) who hold more of such Revenues then all other Purchasers set together.

Did any of these Accusers solidly set forth the true nature of Sacrilege, and
make it out that those Purchasers are guilty thereof, they would deserve
regard. But that is none of their work. It is enough for them, Calumniari
fortiter, that somewhat may stick. To which end, they passionately take on, as
Michah against the Danites, Judge. 8.22. for spoiling him of his Ephod,
Teraphim, and Graven Image: and, labor to raise (as he did) what company they
can, against all engaged herein, to expose them to the rage and fury of the
abused-ignorant mutinous Rabble; which may put all into new confusions and
flames, if not carefully prevented by your Wisdom and Care; for which, you have
a Noble President in that Parliament of 1.2. Phil. and Mar. 8. most seasonable
and necessary to be now again put in ure (unless that part of it which concerns
the Papal Confirmation) by all that seriously intend the Public Peace. If any
Purchasers soberly ask those obstreperous Declaimers, What aileth you? all
their Answers are (instead of Arguments) but a parcel of high words; no more,
in effect, than those of the same man, to such as had stripped him of his Idols,
verse. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods which I have made, and the Priest; and,
what have I more?

To lay open the emptiness of their unjust charge, I have revised, and
abreviated (for your better service) a late Treatise, often threatened, but
never Answered; to let all men see, how much those Censurers abuse, not You
alone; but the Kings of England themselves, as well as new Purchasers.

If it should be deemed piacular, for a Minister to undertake the defense of
this Cause; it is humbly answered, that he does it not to patronize evil; but,
to detect their Error who being Ministers of high rank, boldly affirm (without
proof) this to be a Sin, and that of the deepest Dye. How dare then, any
Minister that finds this, be silent? And should I petition, or plead for
Confirmation of those Sales now under Debate (according to the Declaration of
You the Honorable House of Commons, dated the 8th of May last, which cannot be
forgotten;) it were no more than was prayed by all Bishops themselves in the
Parliament before cited: Yea, by all the Representative Clergy of England in
Convocation Assembled, in 1.2. Phil. and Mar. who (of all others) were most
concerned in a Revocation. Yet they, in their Instrument and Petition to the
then King and Queen (recorded in that Act before mentioned,) say, that ( mature
consilio and deliberatione; and, bonum and quietem publicam privatis
commoditatibus anteponentes, etc.) they most earnestly prayed, the Confirmation
of all Alienations of Church Lands, even of Bishops, Deans and Chapters as well
as of others, made by King Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. in his nonage. All which they
did, propter multiplices and pene inextricabiles super his habitos Contractus
and Dispositiones: Et quod si ea (recuperatio scilicet) tentaretur, quies and
tranquilitas regni facile perturbaretur, etc. By this means, a Confirmation of
the whole was granted in Parliament, whereby many Nobles and Gentlemen of the
Romish, as well as Protestant Religion, possess a large portion of not only
Cathedral, but Hospital-Lands unto this day. This therefore (in the behalf of
all Purchasers) I humbly lay before You, according to the bounden duty of

Your most humbly Servant, C. Burges.

TO ALL Impartial Readers.
HAving heretofore been forced hastily to present to a Convention in
Parliament, a Case touching Sacrilege falsely so called; that, fell into some
bands, who threatened to confute it. This, put me upon the Revising, enlarging,
and digesting thereof into a Treatise; which was published before I could see
any Answer to the former Case. But, immediately after, came forth Dr. Gauden's
huge Bulk of Words, in Folio, called The Tears, Sighs, Complaints, and Prayers
of the Church of England. In which Book, he is pleased to bespatter me with so
much virulency, and false calumnies, as take up five whole Sheets; in all
which, he has not bestowed one line in a solid, Scholarly Confutation of, or
distinct Answer to any one part of that Case.

Indeed, in the Front of his 667. page he makes this flourish; Of the sin of
Sacrilege, with the nature of it. But, neither in that page, nor in any other
(which concerns me) does he afford so much as a word to set forth the
Definition of it: instead whereof, he only spins out (more like a Schoolboy,
then a Doctor) a sharp Declaration full of personal Invectives, and gross
untruths; as namely, the charging my defense of Tithes, to have proceeded from
my desire to uphold two fat Benefices; whereas I have had none at all (either
fat, or lean) for above these sixteen years: his taking up, and publishing a
false Report, that I should offer 1000 Marks to procure me a richer Benefice;
whereas (my witness is in heaven) never any such base profer was made by me,
nor came into my thoughts. It is true, that a Person of Honor came several
times to my house, and offered me (in the year 1640) a fat Bishopric; which
when I refused, he then propounded another offer of 1000 Marks per annum for
preaching, if I would then have done what he would have put me upon. This is
true, and the Lord who knows all things, knows that Ilye not. Then, he thinks
to pay me to purpose, for that I, being a Minister, etc. should plead for such
Alienations, as he calls Sacrilege; as if this were more improper for me,
than for him (since that) to revile, and cast dirt upon the Solemn League and
Covenant of God, which both Houses of Parliament; yea himself, and (which is
more) his present Majesty had also religiously taken. Of which I resolve (God
assisting) to let him, ere long, hear more, he being the Ringleader of all
those foul Pamphlets against the Covenant, to entice and tempt those that have
taken it to renounce it, and so to bring Zedekiah's punishment upon both King
and Kingdom. Mean while, I am confident that whoever seriously and judiciously
reads that Declaration, will find, that rather than this Doctor would not
make me his Dung-cart, be would himself be content to become a Scavenger, to
rake up and cast all the filth and dirt he could, upon me: and, that this is
the All of that his undertaking against me.

On the first of September, last, I wrote to him; and, with my Letter sent him
one of my Books of the second Edition, entitled, No Sacrilege, nor Sin, to
aliene, or purchase the Lands of Bishops, etc. that so, if be thought fit, be
might answer it otherwise than he had done my Case: promising, to wait for his
Answer till the end of Michaelmas Term, then next following. He was pleased on
the fourth of that same month, to acknowledge the receipt of my said Letter and
Book, thanking me for it: on the 15 day of that month, he promised to Answer
it. Allwhich, I have under his hand. But, in stead of Answering thereof, he
still declaimeth against Sacrilege, at Paul's, the Temple, Westminster, etc. but
never sets forth what it is, nor one Argument to prove the late Purchases to
be a sin. Nor can be hold in his Pen from blotting more and more paper with
heaps of words, without matter, nor keep it from being as extravagant as his
tongue.

This is one occasion of publishing this third Edition; which, because it was
to be presented to the High Court of Parliament, I have (as much as I well
could) contracted it, that it might be more willingly perused by those
Honorable Persons whose weighty Affairs will not permit them to read copious
Volumes. Yet, have I left out nothing material, or pertinent, but only pared
off such pieces as might best be spared, without obscuring, or weakening the
main subject here undertaken. If any have a mind to answer it, I desire them to
do it soberly and solidly; and, if they will confute it, let them be sure to
refute my Definition of Sacrilege, contained in the first Chapter of this
Edition, which is the foundation of the whole Fabric: else it will be to
little purpose, to batter the Superstructives.

I know it to be too usual, where things cannot be clearly confuted, to make
the loudest noise upon a wrong sent: and, by personal reflections, quibbles, or
by-confutations, of some occasional passages of History, Chronology,
Criticisms, or the like, (wherein by following other Authors, there may
possibly be some mistakes, or differences) upon which the stress of the cause
is not laid, to eek out what they want in substantial Answers to the main
Points they undertook to refute. Of which, I have bad some experience, and
shall neglect them. But, if ought be offered in a substantial manner against
the chief matters herein asserted, I shall carefully miud it; and, either
ingenuously acknowledge my Error; or, civilly Reply, where I find my Antagonist
mistaken.

If any shall thunder out Vollies of eminent Protestant Divines against what I
have here undertaken, I resolve to strike sail to nothing but Scripture, or
unto Arguments taken thence: and rather imitate one Athanasius, who chose to go
alone with the truth, when all the world was turned Arrian; and one Paphnutius,
when the generality of that first Grand Council of Nice, inclined another way;
than to run with the stream; or, to join with the loudest outcries of
interessed parties, to admit that to be Sacrilege, which, upon due examination,
appears not to be any sin at all.

It were to be wished, that such of the old imperious Prelatical Party, who yet
remain, and such as now join with them to cry up all to as great an height as
ever; and in order thercunto, to poison all from the highest to the lowest,
with a false and dangerous opinion of Sacrilege, in hope thereby to exasperate
them against all Purchasers, which are many thousands; till they have brought
all into new Combustions; would seriously and religiously reflect upon the
former Calamities they have brought upon themselves, a pious King abused, and
the whole Nation almost destroyed; and sadly to lay to heart, the occasions and
means of all our Confusions; and, thereupon, to say and conclude with devout
Ezra, (even after deliverance) Ezra. 9.14, 15. After all this is come upon us
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing thou our God have
punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such
deliverance as this; should we again break thy Commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations, (that is, not only in strange
marriages, but any other corrupt conversation, savouring more of Heathenism
then of Christianity, which too palpably begins to break out again;) would
thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be
no remnant nor escaping? The good Lord set on this upon all their and our
hearts, before the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as chaff; before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon us, before the day of the Lords anger come
upon Zeph. 2.6
us, and overturn, overturn, overturn: I tremble to say, what; and, shall
humbly and cordially pray for the preventing of it, as becomes the Loyalty,
and real endeavors of

Aug. 25. 1660. Your faithful Friend and Servant in the Lord Jesus, C. Burges.

THE Contents of this Book.
1. OF the mistakes in, and about Sacrilege; and what it truly and properly
is: Chapt. 1. 2. That Cathedral Lands, as such, were never owned, or accepted
of God, as Holy to the Lord; nor were either his, or theirs by Divine Right:
Chap. 2. 3 It is neither Sacrilege, nor other Sin, to aliene or purchase such
Lands; especially, since 17. Car. I. Chap. 3. 4. Answers to Objections brought
to prove the Purchase of such Lands to be Sacrilege: Chap. 4.
Errors of the Press Correct thus.
Page 7. lin. I0. r. Consecrations, P. 21. l. 2. r. 800. p. 44. l. I7. r.
procured, p. 48. l. 33. r. plurimum, P. 50, l, 43, blotyea, l, 44. r. yea, all
the Clergy then in Convocation, prayed.

CHAP. I.
Of the mistakes, in, and about the Nature of Sacrilege: and, what it truly,
and properly is, according to the sense of Scripture.

SOme deny that there is, or can be any such sin, as Sacrilege, under the
Gospel; being confident that nothing is now due to Gospel Ministers, but by
humane Laws, Prescription, or Custom. But this, being a palpable error,
deserves to be exploded with contempt, rather then seriously confuted. Others,
in another extreme, stretch Sacrilege so far, as to involve every man in that
sin, that deviates from their constitutions; or any way offends about
persons, places, or things Consecrated by men, and by them called Holy,
although never made such by Gods Ordination.

Thus, the Roman Emperors declare the violation of their Imperial Laws to be
Sacrilege; and fasten that Crime on all that wilfully neglect, or knowingly
break them L. un. c. de Crim. Sacril. l.6. de Appel. C Thendos.
Now albeit this be not admitted as a truth; yet, their Power of making Laws,
giving sanction to them, being from God Romans 13. I.
they had more color for such stigmatizing the breach of their Constitutions,
than He, who cannot justly pretend to any such Commission. I mean, the Pope,
who delivers for Doctrines of God, his own Commandments, making them binding
Laws even to the consciences of men, in this very particular. Hence, most of
the commonly received opinions and assertions touching Sacrilege, have taken
rise; and he is accounted a man of no reading, or learning, that shall dare to
contradict, or confute them.

The Canon Law and Canonists extend it to the taking away, wasting, invading,
or purloining of any thing consecrated or given by men unto God; whether it be
man, beast, field, or ought else once consecrated by man: which consecration
(in their account) makes it to be Sanctum Sanctorum Domino, most Holy to the
Lord Decreti. pars 2. cause. 12 q. 2. c. 3. Nidli liceat ignorare.
; Whether there be, or be not any Word, or Warrant from God, or the Magistrate,
for such Dedications: of which Law, it is not lawful for any man to be ignorant.

Upon this sandy foundation, the Schoolmen, Summists, and Casuists, erect
their Definitions and Discourses of Sacrilege: and (according to the interest
of their several parties) they draw all their lines: making the Canon Law their
Circle; and the profit and advancement of the Pope-holy Church, their Center.

He that, in his time was the greatest Gamaliel of the Civil and Canon Law
Mart. ab Aspilq. Dr. Navarr. to. I. Tract. de Reddit. Eccles. page 264. monit.
18.
, has succinctly extracted the Quintessence of most of those Writers, who make
three sorts or kinds of things to be Sacred or Holy; against each of which,
Sacrilege may be committed: sacred Persons, sacred Places, and sacred Things;
which last is subdivided into four species, or sorts: holy Sacraments, holy
Vessels, holy Ornaments, and holy Goods, for maintenance of all the former
persons, places, and things.

Thus, Aquinas 2 2 q. 99.
, Alexander of Hales Part. 2. q. 168.
, Hostiensis Lib. 5. c. de Crim. Sacril. l. 1. de Offic.
, Linwood Archipresb. C. Ignor. Sacerd. verb. Sacril.
, Bonaventure To 6. Cea tiloq. Sect. 30.
, Azorius Moral. 1. 9. c. 29.
, and sundry others, do all deliver themselves in the main, (although with some
differences in some particulars) and all, or most, out of the Canon Law, or
Civil; alleging few Scriptures, but what they find quoted in the Canon Law.
Out of all which together, it will appear, that any violation by irreverence,
done to Sacred Persons, is generally held by them to be the greatest Sacrilege;
whether it be striking, defiling by fornication, or otherwise slighting, or
abusing of their Priests, Nuns, or other Votaries, or Church Officers; the
casting off of holy Orders, the recalling of any Vows whatsoever.

In the next place, the profanation, or irreverence done to holy Places,
whether Churches, Chapels, or Churchyards; by committing fornication, or
adultery in them; by stealing ought out of them, although the things so stolen
be not consecrated, or holy, but only common; the carnal knowledge that a man
may have of his wife, in any of those places; the taking thence of any
Malefactors, fled thither for sanctuary; unless in some very few cases, with
consent of the Priest or Ordinary; the negotiating of any Civil affairs in
them; buying, selling, acting of Enterludes, and other common exercises (such
as, Logical, or Philosophical Disputations, etc.) the bringing of a man's goods,
and eating and drinking there, unless in case of invasion, or sudden fires; the
alienating, or applying of them to Common, Civil, or private uses, upon any
reason whatsoever; Yea, although they be no longer used for Divine Worship, but
wholly deserted, ruined, and no more repaired.

From persons and places, they proceed to Things, among which, the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, is chief; by them called the Sacrament of the Altar,
Propitiatory Sacrifice, etc. the polluting whereof, by not adoring their Host,
by irreverent and unworthy receiving, etc. is, with them, Sacrilege (although
they account it no Sacrilege, to rob the people of the Cup;) the not admitting
of their Additional Sacraments; The alienating, detaining, converting to common
uses, any Vessels, Vestments, Relics, Images, Goods, or Lands, upon any
account given to the Church, or to Religious houses (as they call them) which
God never required at their hands, nor gave them warrant, or direction for the
donation of them, is by them pronounced and declared to be Sacrilege, which
hardly any satisfaction can expiate, unless it be to the great gain of such as
teach men so, and reap the whole profit thereof.

That sundry of these, are great sins, is willingly granted: but, that they are
all Sacrilege; or, that some of them are any sins at all, is denied. Hence,
Hales Ubi supra, mcm. 1.
and others of the acuter Schoolmen, are forced to distinguish of Sacrilege,
that it is taken sometimes properly; sometimes according to common (and
improper) use of the Word. What sin is it, to beat a quarrelling Priest, when
he is drunk, or otherwise taken abusing his neighbors wife, etc. to recall an
unwarrantable and rash Vow, such as that of Jephte? the not worshipping of
their breaden Idol, the not admitting of more than two Sacraments? the acting
of some Civil, or Scholastic businesses, in Churchyards, or Churches, when
the public Worship or service of God is not thereby hindered, or prejudiced?
the employing of the stones, or other materials of desolated, ruined, and
deserted Fabrics of Churches, to private uses, etc. to pass by other
particulars.

To make the mistakes of the Canonists, Schoolmen, and of all that follow them
in their Definitions or Descriptions, and Discourses of Sacrilege, yet more
Demonstrative and conspicuous; Consider, 1. the Etymology of the word, and the
use of it in holy Writ: 2. the nature of Sacrilege properly so called.

1. Touching the Etymon, or true signification of the word, Sacrilege is
borrowed immediately from the Latin, Sacrilegium, as all agree. But, this
being a compound, there is some difference among the Learned, touching the
simple words of which it is compounded. That Great Irrefragable Dr. Alexander
of Hales Par 2. q. 168. m. 1.
, Etymologizeth it thus: Dicitur Sacrilegium, quasi Sacriledium, eo quod laedit
sacrum. Sacrilege is so called, as if one should say, Sacrilaede, because it
does wrong or hurt somewhat that is sacred..

Hence perhaps, his famous Scholar and Pupil, Thomas Aquinas, describes
Sacrilege to be a vice whereby reverentia rei sacrae debita violatur 2. 2 q. 99
in Axiom.
. The violating of that reverence which is due to a thing sacred: as if the
word signified rather an affronting of it, in point of reverence and honor,
than an usurping or stealing of the thing it self. But seeing the same
Angelical Doctor (as he is styled) presently after, in laying down his first
conclusion Ar. 1. Ibid.
, (grounded upon an Etymology of Isidore, of which, more by and by) defines
Sacrilege to be sacrae rei violatio, a violating of something which is sacred;
taking violation in a large sense Ibid. 2. m.
; and, by sacred, meaning that which ad divinum cultum ordinatur Ibid. co. p.
, is ordained, appointed, or disposed to, or for Divine Worship: I shall pass
by that first Description of Aquinas, and that Etymology of Hales, as being
more witty, than sound.

Others, more rightly take the word Sacrilege to be compounded of Sacrum and
Lego, which signifies unduly to grasp to a man's private use a thing that is
sacred, by way of Usurpation, or Robbery. Thus, the Civil Law terms him
Sacrilegious, a Sacrilegious Person, qui publica sacra compilavit l. 6. and l.
9. F ad L. Jul. pecul.
, that has heaped up (for his own use) sacred things by stealth. So Isidore of
Sivil: Sacrilegus dicitur ab eo quod sacra legit, id est, furatur Origin. seu
Etym. l. 10. c 18.
: he is said to be Sacrilegious, who gathers, that is, steals things
sacred. To the same effect, Brissonius, Servius in 9. Eolog. Virg.
, and many more.

Here, by the way, take notice, that, according to the Genuine and Original
signification of the word, all Sacrilege is theft, or thievish Usurpation; yet,
all theft is not Sacrilege: for Sacrilege is a thieving, or stealing of things
that are sacred; but theft is of common things not at all consecrated. Hence,
Hales Ibid. q. 99. m. 2.
stateth the difference between furium, peculatum, and Sacrilegium. The robbing
of a private person, of any common (that is, unconsecrated) commodity, is
properly furtum, or thievery: the robbing of the public Treasury of a City; or
the sophisticating or imbasing the Public Coin, is (according to the Civil
Law) termed Peculatus, or more public wrong by robbery: only the purloyning,
imbezelling, or taking away of things truly and rightly sacred, makes the theft
to be Sacrilege, in the construction of all exact Etymologists.

And as this is the proper signification of the Latin word; so is it also, of
the Greek words; (...), by all translated Sacrilege; that is, active Sacrilege,
or the act it self. So is it, of the Verb (...), to commit Sacrilege: hinc,
(...), which signifies a thing gotten by Sacrilege; or, Sacrilege committed:
and (...), a Sacrilegist, or Sacrilegious person H. S. Thesaur.
: that is, who steals from God somewhat that was sacred, wherein God had a
special propriety. Thus, Basil the Great (...)
makes him (...), a Sacrilegious person, (...) that has once devoted himself
to God, (suppose, as a Minister, or the like) and afterward by a kind of
petulancy, recoiles, or betakes himself to another course of life, withdrawing
himself as it were by theft, and taking from God what was before by himself
given to God; and thereby, become his.

Thus, having seen the Etymology of the word Sacrilege, as it is a compound
word; before we leave it, some further and more penitious enquiry must yet be
made into the proper, strict, and genuine signification of the word sacrum, or
sacred, unto which the theft of Sacrilege is properly limited and confined.
Herein the learned and acute Isidore, Bishop of Sivil in Spain, (above a
thousand years sithence) will give us good help. For he distinguishes, and
shows the difference between Sacrum, Religiosum, and Sanctum Lib. Disserent.
lit. s.
. That is sacred, which is truly Gods own: that Religious, which pertains to
Religious men: and that Holy, which is consecrated by men. To which he adds,
Sacrum vero and Sanctum est; Sanctum vero, non continuo Sacrum est. Whatever is
sacred, is also holy: but all that is holy, (to wit, so called by men) is not
sacred. Not that these two words are not sometimes promiscuously used: but,
that there is a difference between them, in propriety of speech, which must be
observed by such as would be exact in the use of them in a Definition. This, to
Lovers of Antiquity, and Philology, hangs out a good light, to lead them to the
more exact disquisition and search into the nature of the sin of Sacrilege,
according to the sense and acceptance of the holy Scriptures, and the best
Antiquity; which is the thing here intended to be held forth.

For, all Sacrilege must needs refer to somewhat truly sacred, in sense of
Scripture. Hence even those Schoolmen that were out, in extending the Sin of
Sacrilege beyond Scripture-bounds, do yet concur in this, that Sacrilegium is
sacrae rei violatio, aut usurpatio Alex. Hal. Aquin. aliique.
, the violation or usurpation of something that is sacred: that is, which is
made so by Gods Ordination; or, at least by his direction and warrant to be
freely given and set apart for his service and worship. Of this, Solomon
himself speaks, when he treats of Sacrilege: It is a snare to the man that
devoureth that thing which is holy; and, after the vow, to enquire (or, to
recall it) Pro. 20. 25
. Where Tremelius renders (...) by sacrum. And Junius, in his Annotations,
keeps to the same word: understanding thereby (as the Text intends) the things
of God; or, his just due by command, or warrant from himself.

Upon which Text, Mr. Catwright has, in his Commentary, some sharp passages;
of which one Mr. Will. Walker sermon against Sacrilege.
makes use beyond and beside the intention of that Expositor. For, he says,
That Mr. Cartwright was forced, by evidence of truth, to confess, (asif he
would gladly have concealed it, if he durst; which is an uncharitable
intimation) that now, in the time of the Gospel, whatsoever is either
established by Law, or conferred by man's liberality for the uses of Gods
service, is all to be accounted sacred, or holy. And for this cause, both the
taking away of the whole, or the diminishing of any part of such holy things,
is Sacrilege, condemned in Dent. 23. 21, 22, 23. It is true, that Mr.
Cartwright uses words to this effect: Howbeit, he never intended to aver it to
be in man's power, by a voluntary vow, or dedication alone, to make a thing
sacred; unless God himself had given Rules and Directions about it, as he did
in all the voluntary Offerings in time of the Levitical Law, both for matter
and manner. Wherefore Mr. Cartwright concludes all with this limitation; Quod
tamen non ita accipi debet, ac si vot a nulia cujuscunque generis rescindenda
sint, cum haec de legitimis votis and (...) praescripto verbi factis, sint
intelligenda: Which expression (says he) is not so to be taken, as if no vows,
of what kind soever, were to be rescinded or reversed, seeing these things are
to be understood of lawful vows made by the Prescript of the Word.

But it pleased not Mr. W. W. to take notice of this passage, lest it should
make against his not dulybounded Assertion, for which he produced that Author.
Nor is it any wonder, he should comprise all gifts of man's liberality, without
that following limitation; because he therein follows the common Opinion too
often taken upon trust by many modern, grave, learned Authors, from the
Schoolmen, etc. without just ground.

That place in Deuteronomy. 23. although it leave a man at liberty to make, or not to
make a free will Offering; yet, if he once make a vow to give such an Offering,
it strongly binds to performance; not, in his own way, but according to the
Prescript of God. This must needs be so; because whatever is vowed, or devoted
to God, for a Divine Use; or, in order to Divine Worship (as Aquinas ubi supra.
speaks) is Worship. For, this is to honor God with thy substance Pro. 3. 9.
. But, whatsoever is so devoted and offered to God, if not prescribed by him,
is Will Worship, which he abhors Mat. 15 9
. The people of God might not offer what things they listed; no, nor so much as
they thought fit in their own eyes, even of what things God himself had given
them warrant to give: not thousand of Rams, nor ten thousand rivers of Oil Mic.
6. 7.
, (although perhaps Eli's sons, Papalines, etc. would have found room for so
much, and more, if offered;) but, what, and how many Rams; and, how much Oil,
God, in his Law, had appointed, to such as should freely offer the same. This
is so clear in the Levitical Rules, that he that runs, may read it. Yea, the
free will Offerings for the Tabernacle, were all prescribed what they should
be, Exodus, 25. 2. 3. etc. and when the people offered more then enough for that
work, Moses, by Command and Proclamation restrained them, Exodus 36. 5, 6. And,
when the Tabernacle was made, not a Beesom, Pin, or Ash-pan was to be made for
it, but according to Gods own pattern showed to Moses in the Mount, Exodus 25.
40. Heb. 8. 5.

If then, free will Offerings could not make them sacred, or holy to the Lord,
in his account and acceptance, further than Himself had given (and his people
had observed) his rules therein; how can it be seriously affirmed, and made
good, That any thing given by men, under the Gospel, can be truly sacred unto
God, unless it be such, as for which they have received warrant and direction
from his Word, to devote and consecrate it to him? And, if not sacred, how can
it be Sacrilege to aliene, or employ it to common Uses? Will God own any thing,
as sacred, and as having a special propriety in it, (when, even where only the
manner by him appointed in offering, is neglected, albeit the matter be
commanded or prescribed Isa. 1. 11, 12. Slat Ministers Portion, page 15.
) for which himself has given no order, but rather against it? Erroneous
Considerations, give not God a seizure in things devoted by men.

Apposite therefore is the Exposition in Pro. 20. 25.
of that holy man, Mr. John Dod, (a man, mighty in the Scriptures;) To devour
that which is holy, is (says he) to pervert those things which are by Gods
Ordinance appointed for his Service, from the right use of them, to a man's own
private gain and commodity. And verily, this is so proper a Definition of
Sacrilege, so far as it extends, that hardly can a better be given; were it
not that, in the judgment of some learned men, there needs somewhat more, to
set forth the full nature of Sacrilege.

There are, who bring within the compass of Sacrilege, not only the
purloyning, stealing or perverting to private use or benefit, of things
consecrated to Gods worship; but, of things appointed of God, to be destroyed;
as being under his curse, and prohibition, to spare; or to take them for a man's
own use and commodity.

Hence Basil ubi supra. So Lyra in Josh 7.
, (...) (...) (that is, Achan) committed Sacrilege, in taking of the accursed
thing Josh 7.
, that is, the Babylonish Garment, 200 shekels of silver, and a wedge of Gold,
and hid it in the earth, in the midst of his Tent Verse. 21.
, for his own use.

Now the word (...) Cherem, (which Lyra, or rather, his Printers, reads (...),
or Herem in Lev. 27.
) is in Greek usually expressed by Anathema, etc. implying such a devoting of
things to God, as is followed with a curse denounced by God upon all that shall
steal, use, or pervert them to any other employment or end, than what God
himself has appointed. Hence, not only gifts consecrated to his worship and
service according to his Will; but, things by him commanded to be destroyed,
are comprehended under the word Cherem: and, taken in the former sense, they
are called consecrated or sanctified things, as gifts given to God Luke 21. 5.
(...)
; in the latter sense, they are called, the devoted, or accursed thing: not, as
being to be preserved; but, to be destroyed (z), in such wise and manner as God
himself has commanded: and they are under his curse, that shall presume to do
otherwise. x Deuteronomy. 7. 2. cap. 20. 17.


Achan therefore, by that Act of his, was guilty of double Sacrilege, in taking
of that one Cherem, or accursed thing: for, by taking the Babylonish Garment,
he was guilty of Sacrilege, in stealing and keeping that for himself, which God
had commanded to be destroyed upon pain of his curse Josh. 6. 17, 18. compared
with 1 Samuel 15, 3
. And he committed Sacrilege likewise, in taking of the silver and of the gold
for his own use; all which God had before consecrated as holy to himself, and
commanded to be brought into his Treasury Josh. 6. 19
; not to be destroyed, or employed to private uses, but for his own service.

Upon this Consideration, the learned and accurate Lambertus Daneus, thus
describes things sacred; which, to abuse, is Sacrilege: Ethic. chri. l. 2. c.
15.
Res Divinae appellantur, quae sunt ad sacrum Dei cultum destinatae, quasve
sibi interdicto prolato Dominus reservavit, and in usu commercioque hominum
esse vetat. Quarum rerum furtum dicitur sacrilegium. Those are termed things
Divine, which are destinated to the sacred worship of God; or which by some
declared interdict, or prohibition, the Lord has reserved to himself, and
forbidden to be employed for the use or commerce of men:

the stealth whereof is called Sacrilege.

From all which premises, this appears to be a proper and full Description of
Sacrilege, according to the Scriptures, as the result and conclusion of what is
before laid down in reference to Gospel Times, in which we live, viz.

Sacrilege is the robbing of God, either by alienating, detaining, Sacrilege
described
purloining, diverting, or perverting that which is Gods own by Divine Right;
and therefore due to Christ; and thereby, to his Ministers; whether the things
be set apart by express command, or voluntarily given according to Gods special
warrant and direction; or, by retaining and converting to man's use what God
has ordered to be destroyed, as a service to himself, upon pain of his curse,
denounced (not by man, but) by God himself.

That Sacrilege is a robbing of God, we have Mal. 3. 8.
his own Word for it: It is a muzzling of the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the corn 1 Cor. 9. 9
: that is, a robbing of Christ and his Ministers of what by Divine right is due
to them from those to whom they preach the Gospel. Nor can it be any other than
Sacrilege, to preserve or make use of what superstitious or idolatrous custom
and practice has set up against God and his true and pure worship; or which he
has commanded to be destroyed: as, not only the things secretly taken and
reserved by Achan (of which before;) but those things spared by Saul 1 Samuel 15.
9.
contrary to the command of God Verse. 3.
, do sufficiently show. So Chrysostom interprets that in Romans 2. 22. Of which,
hereafter.

What has been before said, shall suffice for proof of the Description of
Sacrilege here laid down, and for setting forth the true and full nature of it.
Take now some Corollaries. For, hence it follows, that

1. Nothing bestowed by the voluntary, and free gifts of men upon 1 Corollary.
the Church, that is, upon our late Cathedral men, either under the Old or New
Testament, is owned, or accepted of God, as his special propriety, and as Holy
to the Lord, farther than himself has given warrant and rules for the
consecrating, and devoting of it.

This is inserted, to obviate those two first Assertions, which the Answerer to
a Letter, superscribed, To Doctor Samuel Turner, and printed Anno 1647.
concerning the Church and the Revenues thereof Page 25.
: viz. That God accepts of things given him, and so holds a propriety as well
in the New, as in the Old Testament. 2. That God gets this propriety in those
things be holds, as well by an acceptance of what is voluntarily given, as by
a command that such things should be presented to him. To which Propositions he
adds two more: Namely, 1. That to invade those things, be they moveable, or
immovable, is expressly the sin of Sacrilege. 2. That this sin is not only
against Gods positive Law, but plainly against his moral Law.

These he lays as a groundwork of showing the impossibility for the late King
with a good conscience to yield to the alienating of the Lands of the Church
taken in his sense, that is to say, of the Lands given to Cathedrals. So that,
if it appear that this foundation is but sandy, there will be no need to take
down the whole Fabric stone by stone, (that is, to answer him particularly in
all his out-leaps, or superstructives) but leave them to fall of themselves:
And it will, by good consequence, follow, that he, and such as he is, that
instilled into the Kings mind such Propositions as these, thereby to put him
upon, or to strengthen him in such resolutions, as rather to part with his
Kingdoms, and life, than to give his Royal Assent to the alienating of such
Church Lands; or, to the change of Government by Bishops, be truly guilty of
his death, by them and their party laid upon others.

To prove his first Proposition, he allegeth four Scriptures. But, unless he
could (which he does not) make it out that Gods acceptance therein mentioned,
reaches to the Lands of such Bishops as he describes, and other
Cathedralists, he labors in vain, and puts himself into the number of those
unlearned and unstable ones, that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction
2 Pet. 3. 16.
.

His first Text is, Mat. 25. 35. I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. This
is spoken not of Church Lands, but of necessary and occasional supply by Alms,
administered to the hungry, naked, sick, and persecuted Members of Christ See
Hierome on the place.
: not of feeding Lordly Bishops, or others fed to the full, and lying in the
wind for the like Domination. And whereas he should demonstrate from the Text,
that Christ hereby accepted of the gifts of Lands to our Cathedral Masters, he
confesses that the Text does not decide, that Christ extends this to gifts
bestowed on such as he had enjoined to teach others; to wit, to the Apostles,
and seventy Disciples; yet he (begging the question) confidently affirms,
that without doubt it must be meant of both Ministers and poor. It is true
indeed, that Chrysostom. says, Hoc potest intelligi and de Doctoribus; this may
be understood of Doctors or Teachers: but how? not of other men's giving Lands
to them; but, oftheir feeding others with the food of Doctrine, whereby they
might be nourished and grow fat in good works, etc.

Nor does that Scripture relate at all to Lands given so much as to the poor;
but, only to present supplies of food, raiment, and other necessaries suitable
to the instant wants of Christ's distressed Members. And however he seems to
wonder, that Christ should accept of meat and clothing, and not of those
endowments that bring both these to perpetuity; yet this would not seem so
strange unto him, were he not a stranger to the Scriptures. For, let him search
them duly, and he shall soon find, that though God made many provisions for the
poor, yet none in Lands. And how much the poor gain by gifts of Lands
(especially after an age or two) even under the Gospel, is too lamentable to
behold. Nor can he be ignorant, that though Christ accepted of gifts for the
poor, yet when they were more than served for present necessity, they were
abused, and the poor robbed of them, under Christ's own Nose, by one of his own
company, even by that thief Judas. And happy were it for many, that it were a
slander, to say, that too many of those that have been since trusted with that
Bag, and with the large revenues given to that use, are too near of Kin, in
qualities at least, to that first Treasurer of Christ. Thus we see that the
Text, which he wyredraweth, to prove Christ's acceptance of Church Lands, cannot
in truth be extended to his acceptance of any Lands at all.

Howbeit, to put it out of doubt, that Christ in that text intended to declare,
that he included his Apostles and Ministers, and accepts of the gifts of
Cathedral Church Lands, in that very acceptance of gifts to the poor, and of
both, as done to himself; he produces a second Scripture, as being very plain
to that purpose: He that receives you (meaning his Disciples) receives me,
Matthew. 10. 40.

But, Mr. D. herein deceives his Readers, as much as he had deluded them
before. For, this Text is clearly meant of receiving Christ's Apostles, First,
in respect of their Doctrine and Ministry, which in the name of Christ they
preached; (Therefore, he says elsewhere, He that hears you, hears me)
Luke. 10.16.
: Secondly, in respect of entertainment for present supply of necessaries,
which Christ and his Father would effectually move the hearts of such as
received their Doctrine, to impart unto them, so that they should want nothing
Luke 22. 35.
, while they were employed in the work of Christ. But what is this to man's
conferring, and Gods accepting of Lands to maintain the Pomp and State of Lord
Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, etc. in a perpetual State of Honor and
Dignity above their brethren, albeit they seldom or never (some of them) preach
Christ to his flock?

It is palpably evident, that, in that very Chapter, Christ charged his
Apostles to provide neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in their purses, etc.
and that upon this very account, that, the Labourer is worthy of his MEAT Mat.
10. 9, 10.
, or Hire Luke 10.7.
; thereby encouraging to labor, without taking care beforehand for provision:
and, withal implying too, a necessity of laboring, if they expected meat (for
it is his command, that if any will not work, none should give him to eat) 2
These. 3. 10.
. Therefore, he would take order against provisions beforehand, that they might
more industriously labor in the Word and Doctrine, whereby God might more
effectually stir up the hearts of those whom they taught in the Word, to
Communicate unto them that did so Teach, in all good things Gal. 6. 6.
. Where then will Mr. D. find, in this Text, Christ's acceptance of Lands given
to Cathedral-men, as holding a propriety in them himself, for a constant
pompous provision (beyond necessary maintenance) even unto excess, and faring
deliciously every day, whether they labor in the Gospel, or not?

That Christ has taken care for his Ministers that serve him in the Gospel;
and did so even long before they were in being, is manifest by that in Deuteronomy.
25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the Corn: that is, when
the Owner puts him into a floor, and drives him up and down upon the sheaves
there laid out for him, to tread the Corn out of the Ears, thereof to make
bread, he shall allow him liberty to eat part of the same sheaves of corn,
while he is so employed, without muzzling his mouth to hinder such eating. This
Law was made, partly to require men to show equity y Prove. 12.10.
and mercy to a working beast, in tendering the life thereof (p): but, it was
principally intended to instruct all, how to carry themselves toward his
servants in the Ministry of the Gospel; not grudging them their eating the milk
of the flock, which they feed. Hence that of Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. Does God
take care for Oxen? (that is, did he make this Law with reference only, or
chiefly for Oxen?) Or, says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no
doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he
that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. But, to prove from Mat.
10.40. that Christ owneth all their Cathedral Lands as given to himself,
whether they who enjoyed them, did work, or not work; or, what use soever they
made of them, will require time till the Greek Kalends, or the thirtieth of
February.

His next proof is that known passage of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. whose
sin, says he, was, he kept back part of the price of those Lands he had given
to God, for the public use of the Cburch. That his fin was keeping back part
of the Price, and his lying unto God, in saying, that which he brought, was the
whole price, when it was but a part, is acknowledged: but, that he gave his
Lands to God, is false: for then, by this man's Doctrine, he might not sell
them. He gave or pretended to give the price, not the Land it self, as is clear
by the Text. And even the price, after the Land was sold, was in his own power
Act. 5. 4.
to give, or keep it. But here was his wickedness, That 1. he pretended and
professed to give all, yet kept back a part. 2. When questioned for it, whether
that he laid at the Apostles feet, were the whole money for which he sold his
Land, he lied, not unto man only, but even to the Holy Ghost, to whom he
pretended to give the whole, for the use of the then persecuted Church, and for
relief of those Converts who had then received the Gospel. For this, both
Ananias and his wife (joining in the same sins) were sadly and suddenly smitten
with death, to the terror of all that beheld it, or heard of it.

And, whereas he says, that this was given to God for the public use of the
Church, there is an equivocation and fallacy in this also. For by Church, the
Text means not, an appropriation of it only to Ministers; or, at all to such
Bishops and Cathedral-men, as he pleads for (whose Government must not be
changed, nor their Lands alienated) but it is meant of the whole body of the
then Believers, according to the language of the Penman of those Acts Act.
2.47. 5. 11. 8 1, etc.
: and the money was to be distributed unto every man, according as he had need
Act. 4.35.
.

But, to what end, that flourish, that the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin
Church generally affirm the crime to be robbing of God of that Wealth which by
vow or promise was now become Gods propriety? It is true, that some of the
Fathers make the sin to be Sacrilege: yet the main charge for which they are
condemned, is lying to the Holy Ghost. Nor does any one of the Fathers
understand it of Sacrilege by defrauding the Apostles or Ministers of what was
given to God in relation to their Office and Ministry (which is the thing for
which he alleges it) but for defrauding the whole Community of believers of
what for supply of their present necessities they pretended, and falsely
professed to bestow upon them, even when the giving of the whole was not
required, had they not of themselves given it out to the world, to the
Apostles, and Church, and to God himself, that they would give all.

But whereas he, page 26. alleges Calvin and Beza, as concurring with the
Fathers; observe how corruptly he translateth the words of them both. Calvin,
says he, speaking of that fact of Ananias, Sacrum esse Deo profitebatur: which
he translateth: thus, He professes that his Land should be a sacred thing unto
God. And there, Beza too, Praedium Deo consecrassent, the man and his wife they
consecrated this Land unto God. Still he would fain be harping upon Land, but
to little purpose. And here, he does it without all color or show; abusing
both the Text it self, and these Authors quoted by him, by a false Translation
unworthy of a Dean, at least of a Doctor of Laws. Calvin says not, that
Ananias professed his Land should be sacred to the Lord; but, the money hemade
of it. Nor can Beza's expression of Praedium signify Lands; for, that were to
contradict the Text, which speaks of detaining part of the price; not, ofthe
land it self. And, let it be meant of land, or price, it is nothing to his
purpose, that hence would prove the unlawfulness of alienating the Lands of the
Church; quod erat demonstrandum.

If he think from hence, to prove voluntary gifts, without command from God, to
be holy to the Lord, he is mistaken. For, in cases of this nature, when the
whole Church is concerned, or the poverty of Gods people is sore and pressing
upon them (as now it was) there ought to be so much self-denial, as that he who
has two Coats, must impart to him that has none; and he that has meat, must
do likewise Luke 3.11
: yea, sell that he has, and give Alms Luke 12.33.
, which are all commands of Christ: which cannot be showed, for giving of Lands
to Cathedrals. Yet this man is so confident that the Texts alleged by him are
by such an universal consent so interpreted as to prove his Proposition, in
relation to the unlawfulness of selling Church Lands, that they may as well
doubt whether (...) signifies God, etc. who make question of what he undertook
to Prove from them.

His fourth Scripture, is, Romans 2.22. Thou that abborrest Idols, committest
thou Sacrilege? Whence he seeks to prove, that God accepts of things given him,
and holds a propriety in them, in the New Testament, as well as in the Old.
Else, there can be no Logic in Paul's words. For, if they be not Gods Goods, it
is no Sacrilege to steal them: but Paul, charging men with Sacrilege, plainly
implies that the things taken from the Church, are Gods own proper Goods.

But, the Gentleman may do well to make it out, that Paul speaks here of
lurching away, or perverting of things, or of robbing the Church of Lands given
to God for his service and worship: which will be an hard matter for him to do.
He that pretends to so much acquaintance with the Greek and Latin Fathers of
the Church, may know, if he please, that not only the Fathers, but Modern
Expositors differ about the meaning of that Text. For, some understand here, by
Sacrilege, the irreligious liberty which some, out of covetousness, then took,
in buying, and using those meats which had been sacrificed to Idols, and after
sold in the Shambles by the Priests, at a lower price then other meat was sold
for: which meats, Christians might not so much as touch. And so, Sacrilege here
meant, is like that of Achan and Saul, the taking of the accursed thing. Thus
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and sundry others.

And seeing Calvin was but even now so great a man with Mr. D. it will not, I
hope, offend him, to quote Calvin upon this Text, as he did upon the former.
His words are these: Sacrilegium est profanatio Divinae Majestatis: sed quum
Gentes Deorum suorum Majestatem Idolis affigerent, vocarunt duntaxat
sacrilegium, si quis subripuisset quod templis dicatum esset, in quibus
putabant sitam esse totam Religionem. Sic hodie ubi pro verbo Dei regnat
superstitio, non aliud sacrilegii genus agnoscunt, quam Templorum opulentiae
suppilasse. Quando nullus est Deus nisi in Idolis, nulla religio nisi in luxu
and pompa. Sunt tamen qui hic sacrilegii nomine intelligant contrectationem,
usumque rerum, quae Idolis'erant dicatae, quas ne contingere quidem debebant.
Sacrilege is the profanation of the Divine Majesty. But, whereas the Gentiles
fixed the Majesty of their Gods upon Idols, they only called that Sacrilege,
viz. If any man had taken away that which had been dedicated to their Temples,
in which they thought all Religion did consist. So at this day, where, in stead
of the Word of God, Superstition reigns, men acknowledge no other kind of
Sacrilege, then the pilfering or stealing of the riches, or wealth of their
Temples. When as (with them) there is no God, but in Idols (of their own
framing) no Religion, but in Luxury and Pomp. There are, nevertheless, who
under the name of Sacrilege, understand the contrectation, or meddling, and use
of things dedicated to Idols, which they ought not at all to touch.

Which of these Mr. D. best likes, is left to him to choose.

This is not alleged, as denying that there may be such a sin as Sacrilege,
under the Gospel in the New Testament; or, that it is less odious in a
Christian, then ever it was in a Jew, as being more immediately a transgression
of the first Table. But still this Author begs the question, by extending this
to Lands, while he produced no ground or instance of such an interpretation.
Yea, those very allegations, which he produces (without citing the particular
places) out of Irenaeus, and Origin, do (as he alleges them) refer to Goods,
not to Lands. And, what he adds, ( so the Fathers generally) must be limited to
what he last alleged out of Irenaeus, and Origin. Else, it were incongruous to
say, So the Fathers, etc. if they speak in another sense. How Emperors and
Kings have given Lands to the Church, shall after be showed, in due place.

His second Proposition is this: God gets this propriety as well by an
acceptance Page 29.
of what is voluntarily given, as by a command, that such things should be
presented to him.

For proof whereof, he instanceth in the Temple at Jerusalem, which God owns
as much as he did the Jews tithes and offerings. These last were his by express
command; but, the Temple was (if you will believe him) the voluntary design of
good David, and the voluntary work of King Solomon: Yea, God expressly tells
David, that he had been so far from commanding that house, that he had not so
much as once asked that service: whence Paul tells the Jews, that neither
against the Law, nor Temple, he had offended any thing Act. 25. 8.
: implying, that in some case he might offend against the Temple, yet not
against the Law.

But, was not this man asleep when he wrote this? It is true, that for the
time, and persons whom he would have to build it, he had given no express
command: these being but circumstances. Howbeit, he must needs confess, that
the Temple it self was to be built by Gods own appointment. Did not God, long
before, tell Moses and his people of a place which himself would choose, to
cause his Name to dwell there? Deuteronomy. 12. 11. Now, what is this less then a
Command? And if our Author take not upon him to be wiser then Solomon, he must
confess this to be meant of that very Temple. For so, Solomon himself
understood it, My Name shall be there, I King. 8. 29. Now, although David was
not admitted to build that House, for that he had been a man of war, and had
shed blood 1 Chronicles. 28. 3.
Yet Solomon, by Gods express appointment and ordination, was chosen by God to
build that House Verse. 6.
Who could imagine such stuff should stick to the Pen of such an Author, for
proof of a Proposition of so great Concernment to him that drew it; That the
Temple was a voluntary Offering, not built by Command of God; without which, no
man might worship there?

He also no less confidently affirms, that to say, God accepts of meat,
drink, and clothing, and of money for which Land was sold, yet not of Land it
self, is so contrary to all reason and practice, not only of the Christian,
but humane (or Heathenish) world; and, to what God himself has expressed in
the Old Testament, and no where recalled in the New; that he that can quiet his
Conscience with such conceits as these, may (he doubts not) attain the
discovery of some Quirks, which, in his conceit, may palliate Murders or
Adulteries.

But, this is so false, that it cannot but astonish a modest Reader acquainted
with the Word of God, and knowing the truth, to find him so boldly to affirm
that, for which there is no footstep in the Scriptures, as shall hereafter be
made out in the third Chapter, where it will be more proper (according to the
method before proposed) to speak to this futilous and absurd Assertion.

2. Coroll. The retaining or using of any thing in Gods Worship, 2. Corollary.
which he has not prescribed, but forbidden, is no less Sacrilege, than the
robbing of Churches.

It is all one with the taking of the accursed thing, and Putting it amongst
their own stuff Josh. 7. 11
All monuments of Idolatry, as well as Idolatry it self, wereto be by Gods
command destroyed Deuteronomy. 7. 5, 6.
: because they are as much accursed of God, as the worshipping of Idols
themselves Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
. Yea, God does so abominate such things, that he forbad his people, so much as
to enquire after the Gods of the Nations, how those Nations worshipped their
Gods Deuteronomy. 12, 30.
. Now then, Sacrilege being committed in retaining what is accursed, as well as
in perverting what is by God accepted and sanctified for his worship and
service, it can be no less than Sacrilege to introduce or continue any thing in
his service which himself has not appointed, and therefore forbidden.

They therefore that are for adoration of the Host, or of material Altars; for
Christians bowing toward the East, for the use of Copes, (brought in by
Antichrist into the Church) or of any other Popish or superstitious Rites and
Ceremonies in the service of God, never appointed by Christ, or his Apostles,
and therefore accursed, as Will Worship (being a Profanation of the Divine
Majesty) may do well to consider, and lay it to heart, whether they lie not
under the guilt of that great sin; and, whether God has not justly (yet
mercifully) punished them with casting them out of their places, and
dispossessing them of their Church-Revenues, for using, yea, preaching up the
lawfulness of those accursed Trinkets, and persecuting all such as bore
testimony against them.

If any shall plead, that what God has accursed, belongs to formal Idols and
Idolatry, and reaches not to any thing brought in, as relating to the true
God, it is a mere evasion and delusion. For, the Golden Calf made by Aaron, to
go before the Israelites Exo. 32. 1.
, was not intended either by them, or him, to be an Idol, or false god, such as
the Nations worshipped; but only to be a visible representation of Jehovah, to
go before them, in stead of Moses whom they now apprehended (through his long
absence in the Mount) to have forsaken them. For, even the Feast which they
hereupon held, is called a Feast unto Jehovah Verse. 5.
, in their purpose and intention; and, though they called the Calf Elohim,
Gods, (as the true God is often styled) yet not with intent to multiply Gods,
or to deviate from the true (if they might be permitted to give the sense of
their own action, which God would not suffer:) therefore Nehemiah, expressing
their meaning, renders the same speech of theirs in the singular number, This
is thy God that brought thee out of Egypt, etc. Neh. 9. 18. Yet, even this in
Gods account, was a worshipping of a molten Image; and the changing their glory
into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass, for which the Lord would have
destroyed them utterly, bad not Moses stood in the gap. And yet, for the same
offense, Moses himself gave order for the killing of about 3000 men in one day
Exodus 32. 28.
, and the Lord otherwise plagued the people that remained, because THEY had
made the Calf which Aaron made Verse. 35.
.

It is then no good Plea to excuse from Sacrilege, that what is done, is
intended to the true God, and not to Heathen Idols. For, when men make an Idol
of God, it cannot but be an high provocation of the Divine Majesty, and a
contempt of his Law. To such therefore who so do, may that of Paul (whether
spoken by him to Jews, or Gentiles) be most aptly applied; Thou that abhorrest
Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? It is not thy protestations against Idolatry,
or Popery, that will excuse thee, so long as thou borrowest from either what
God has forbidden (because he has not prescribed) in his worship. If Moses
must see that he make every thing according to the pattern showed him in the
Mount; who art thou, that shall presume to follow the pattern of thine own
brain, or the traditions of men?

3. Coroll. Those Magistrates who are not as careful to destroy 3. Corollary.
accursed things, that is, all humane inventions in the worship of God, do
thereby suffer God to be profaned; and so are as guilty of Sacrilege, as those
that aliene, or give way to the aliening of what is truly the Lords.

It is recorded to the honor of the Religious Kings of Judah, that they
destroyed all such things, as in their days provoked the Lord. For so had the
Lord commanded to all Israel when they should enter Canaan, not only to drive
out the Natives (for their Idolatry) but to destroy all their Pictures, and all
their molten Images, and quite pluck down all their high places Number 33. 52.
. Hence it is, that Hezekiah removed the high places, and brake the images, and
cut down the groves, and brake in pieces (also) the brazen Serpent (it self)
that Moses had made, when he found that the Children of Israel did burn incense
unto it 2 King. 18 4.
. He not only destroyed the inventions of men in reference to Idols; but even
the institution of God himself, when abused by men to the dishonor of God. And
how zealous Josiab was also in prosecuting the same work, may be seen at large
in 2 King. 23. from the fourth verse to the 21.

On the contrary, it is noted as a great blot even to those Kings who had done
much for God, that the high places were not removed: this is laid to the charge
of Asa 1 King. 15. 14.
, Jehishaphat 1 King. 22. 43.
, and Amaziah 2 King. 14. 4.
. Which is worth their notice, who labored so much to hold up the late King
against the aliening of Church Lands, but never endeavored to divert him from,
but rather infused into him strong conceits of the great usefulness and
holiness of many humane Inventions and Superstitions in the Worship of God, and
to put him above all that had gone before him, since Queen Mary, upon the
compelling of all others to practice the same, as if it had been a great duty
in him; whereas David (a man after Gods own heart) hated all those that held of
superstitious vanties Psalm. 31. 6.
; and after, died in peace. But, these making Formalities and Superstitious
Ceremonies taken from Popery, the All of their Devotions, and taking their
Lesson out of Adam de Contzen the Jesuit Politic. 12. c. 17, 18.
, for retroducing the very body of Popery, notwithstanding the Laws against it,
ruined themselves, and the King.

CHAP. II.
The Lands of Bishops and other Cathedral men, as such, were never owned or
accepted as holy to the Lord; nor were either his, or theirs, by Divine Right.

THe chief and (indeed) only Argument by which many endeavor to prove it to
be Sacrilege Ans. to a Letter to Dr. Turner, page 25.
, to sell, or purchase Cathedral Lands, is this; that those Lands were given
voluntarily by men unto God and the Church; and are accepted and owned by him
as holy to the Lord; therefore they commit Sacrilege, who sell, or buy them for
private uses: as being against not only Gods positive, but Moral Law. If this
be not only denied to be true, but proved, out of the holy Scripture to be
false, the whole Controversy will soon be at an end. In order whereunto, take
notice, that there is not only no command, but no direction or allowance in
the Scriptures of the Old, or New Testament, for the endowing the Church with
such lands; but rather, enough against it: therefore it is no Sacrilege to
sell, or buy them.

To make this out, take notice of these Propositions.

1. Under the Law, in the Old Testament, God was so far from commanding,
owning, or accepting of lands to be given to the Priests, or Levites,
especially to Aaron the chief Priest, (excepting a definite number of Cities
for the habitations of the Levites that were to be spread over the whole Land
of Canaan, and the parts without Jordan; and, a set quantity of Pasture for
their Cattle) that he absolutely forbad them to have any inheritance among
their brethren Number. 18 20.
. And this was to be a Statute for ever, throughout their generations Verse. 23.
: The reason was given before unto Aaron, in behalf of himself and the rest of
the Levites, to whom God, thus; I am thy part, and thine inheritance among the
Children of Israel. That is, his portion in Tithes and Offerings due from
Israel unto God, should be theirs. For, of those, to wit, Tithes, he there
expressly speaks; and, upon that ground, denies them a portion in Lands: I
have given them (namely, Tithes) to the Levites to inherit; therefore I have
said unto them, Among the Children of Israel they shall have no inheritance
Verse 24.
.

Should not he Ans. to a Letter, to Dr. Turner. page 29.
then blush, who so confidently affirms, that to say, God in the New
Testament accepts of money, and not of lands, is so contrary to all reason,
etc. so contrary to what God himself has expressed in the Old Testament, and no
where recalled in the New; that he that can quiet his conscience with such
conceits as these, may, be doubts not, attain to the discovery of some Quirks,
which in his conceit, may palliate either murders, or adulteries? For, admit
God should, in the Old Testament accept of some Lands (upon such and such
Terms, as in Leviticus Lev. 27.
, or elsewhere; yet then, God expressly gives all Rules about the nature of the
Land; and of the redeeming, or not redeeming it) to be consecrated to him; will
this prove his acceptance of Lands, in the New Testament, of any kind,
quantity, or quality, by any man given, upon any other account whatsoever;
until a Cathedral man shall say, Hold your hands?

Levi was one of the twelve Tribes of Israel, (therefore as considerable a part
as any other:) Nevertheless, God was so careful to prevent their claim to
Lands, among their brethren, by Divine Lot, that, when the rest of Israel were
numbered, in order to their several Lots in Land, God expressly forbad Moses to
number the Tribe of Levi, or to take the sum of them; and commanded him to
appoint them over the Tabernacle of Testimony, etc. Number. 1 49. 50
. Whereby is more then employed, that the Office of Priesthood; especially, of
the Highpriests, (who were always in person to attend the Tabernacle) was then
a bar to their inheriting of lands proportionable to their Brethren.

The inferior Priests and Levites, from thirty to the fiftieth year of their
age, were, in their courses, according to their three great families of
Gershom, Kohath, and Merari Number. 3. 17.
, put upon the most toylsome work in, and about the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. But being numerous (in all, 8580.) Number. 9.
, they did not, could not all attend the Altar at once; but only in their
turns. Therefore, were they to be dispersed all Israel over, to instruct the
people in the law of God Deuteronomy. 33 10.
, save only when their several and respective courses came about, to serve at
the Tabernacle. Which being so, there was a necessity of preparing habitations
for them in all the Tribes, and some ground for their Cattle, which they were
to use as well for traveling thence to the Tabernacle, when their turns came,
as for their own Domestic Occasions.

Upon this ground, God had Moses to command the Children of Israel, to give
unto the Levites, of the inheritance of their possession, Cities to dwell in --
and suburbs for the Cities round about, for their Cattle, Goods, and Beasts,
Numb. 35. 1, 2, 3. But of these, none were appointed to the High Priest, who
was always resident about the Tabernacle. His house, no doubt, was also
allotted to him. His portion, and the portions of such as served at the Altar
in person, consisted in Offerings, and in the second Tithes, that is, in the
Tenth of the Tithes gathered by all the Levites; which Tenths they were to pay
to Aaron and the rest that Waited at the Altar, before they might share the
rest among themselves, or partake of it in common Neh. 10. 38.
.

It is true, that the Levites had forty eight Cities in all, set out unto them;
and, some Lands: but God first gave the Word for the giving of them, and also
limited both the number of Cities, (among which, were six Cities of Refuge) and
the quantity of the ground that the Israelites should give unto them. The
several names of the Cities, and how, and where situated, are set down in the
21th of Joshua. Their Suburbs were also bounded by a set number of Cubits Number.
35 4.
. Nor might the Israelites give, nor the Levites accept one Cubit more. Nor
were they lords, or sole proprietors or inhabitants of those Cities. Others
dwelt therein, and shared also in the residue of the Lands adjacent, as well as
they: only, care was to be taken, that in every of those Cities, so many
Levites as were assigned to each City, should be well accommodated; and the
remainder should still continue to the former Owners. Hence Lyra, on those
words, Cities to dwell in, Non dicit ad dominandum, vel ad redditus inde
accipiendum, quiasic erant ipsius Regis, vel aliorum Dominorum urbes in quibus
habitabant Levitae. He says not, Cities for them to lord over, or to receive
the whole profits of them; for so, they were either the Kings, or Cities of
other lords, in which the Levites dwelt.



That this was so, is manifest by the City of Hebron, (or Kiriah-Arba, the City
of Arba, Father of Anak Josh. 15. 13.
, and a Great man, that first founded it.) That City, being given to the
Kohathites, who were Levites, and had the first Lot Josh. 21. 10, 11.
, was yet the City of Caleb, to whom Joshua had before given it for an
inheritance Josh. 14. 13, 14.
. Therefore, after mention of disposing Hebron to the Kohathites, by the free
Lot of the Israelites, it is said, But the fields of the City, and the Villages
thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession Josh. 21.
12.
. Out of which fields, it is clear by the next verse, that the Suburbs were
excepted; for these were given to the sons of Aaron the Priest.

Here, by the way, a few words to him, (whether he were a Bishop, or not) that
has taken much pains to demonstrate, that Church Lands are not to be sold.

1. He is much mistaken in the greatness of those Cities and Suburbs; so also
are others, (building upon St. Hierome's report.) Epist. ad Dordan.
, who say That those forty eight Cities, had Suburbs of so large circuit, that
they exceeded the portion of any other Tribe in Israel: Which cannot be. For,
the circuit of the Suburbs, given to the Levites, were But 1000 Cubits, to be
measured from the wall of each City. outward, round about Number. 35 4.
; which cannot contain 8000 Acres, English measure, in the whole, were each
City two miles in compass, which is not probable. And, in every of those
Cities, there must be placed near 200 Levites and their families: so as, the
Land could not extend to four Acres apiece to each Levite. For of such as were
fit for service, there were (as was noted before) 8580. All the Males were
22000 Number. 3. 39.
, besides women and servants. Now, divide 8580 into 48 parts, (according to the
number of the Cities) and you will find almost 200 Levites, that were in their
turns, for actual service, in each City. And these served for all the other
Cities and Countries throughout Israel.

As for that conceit of some Rabbis, upon the 35th of Numb. and fifth verse,
where 2000 Cubits are allowed for Suburbs to each City; that the first 1000
were only for walks, and recreations; and, another 1000 Cubits, for Fruit,
Vines, Corn, etc. this is a mere dream, and contrary to Scripture. For, 1. the
Suburbs given to the Levites are plainly declared to be but 1000 Cubits Verse. 4.
: and that, not for walks and recreation, but for their Cattle, their goods and
beasts Verse. 3.
. 2. the other thousand Cubits (verse. 5.) which were added, are said to be
Suburbs of the City, but not of the Levites. This thousand Cubits were for the
Owners, and other Inhabitants of those Cities, beside the Levites; as appears
by what has been before alleged in the case of Caleb, Josh. 21. 12. the
Levites then had their Suburbs next to the Walls: and the Owners of the Cities
had theirs, without the Levites; and so theirs must be of far greater Longitude
and Latitude, than the Lands of the Levites. For, as in all Cities there is a
Tract of ground measured from the Walls, which belongs to each City, as
Suburbs: so here 2000 Cubits in the whole; of which 1000 was for the Levites.

2. What, and how large soever the Lands of those Levites were, yet had they
none, but only Pastures for feeding of their Cattle, as Abulensis (upon good
grounds,) affirms In Number. 35. q. 2.
. They did neither sow, nor reap: but yet, had store of Cattle brought in by
the rest of the Tribes unto them, as being the Lords. And this is clear from
the Text; for, the Lands assigned them, were, for their Cattle, and for their
goods, and for all their beasts. Therefore they had only pasturage. And this
could not extend to such a proportion, as should exceed the Lands of the least
of the other Tribes.

3. There is a great mistake in the Computation of the Land of Canaan given
unto Israel; and, by Lot, cast out for the several Tribes. It is said by the
Author of Church Lands not to be sold, that the whole land was hardly 160 miles
in length from Dan to Beersheba; and, but 46 miles in breadth, from Joppa to
Bethlehem; as if this were the whole length and breadth of Canaan given of God
to Israel, and by them enjoyed. And, for proof hereof, Saint Hierome, who lived
long there, is produced as a witness. But, is not longitude usually reckoned
from East to West? and breadth from North to South? Now, Beersheba is almost
South from Dan; and Dan, almost North from Beersheba: on which account, there
is hardly 160 miles between them. But, what is this to the whole longitude of
Canaan, divided among the Tribes, from East to West, according to the latest
Maps; and, particularly that, appointed by Authority to be prefixed to the last
Translation of the holy Bible, Anno 1611? It is hardly a fourth part of the
true Longitude. And, as for the space between Joppa, and Bethlehem, where St.
Hierome dwelt, which is said to be 46 miles, it is not the one half of the
breadth of the whole Land from South to North; nor is it said by Hierome, that
it is the breadth of the whole; but, of the space between Joppa and Bethlehem,
the place of his habitation, which was almost in the middle. And here take
notice, that Hierome in that Epistle endeavors to prove, that much of the Land
of Canaan promised to Abraham's posterity, is to be understood in an allegorical
sense, as if God did not verify all that he promised to them in the Letter;
which, under favor of so great a Clerk, is a mistake. For can we think God
would be worse than his word, in kind? Read the several distributions by Lot to
the Tribes, in the book of Joshua, and elsewhere, and then it will clearly
appear that St. Hierome, in this, was out. But, whatever the length and breadth
of that Land was, this is clear, that the Levites enjoyed not one foot more
than God had appointed the Israelites to set out by Lot unto them. Therefore,
the Lands sold by Christians, Act. 4. or by that Hypocrite Ananias, Act. 5. can
be no warrant for Christians to set out what Lands they please; or, any Lands
at all, upon this setting out of Suburbical Lands for the Levites, until they
can show the like warrant from God (under the New Testament) both for kind,
and dimensions, for the Lands given to Cathedrals.

Now then, if Bishops take upon them (as of late they did) to be above
Presbyters, or Ministers of particular Congregations, as Aaron was above the
ordinary Priests and Levites; it is as clear as Analogy can make it, that there
is no color for, nor show of warrant out of the Old Testament, to enable
Bishops to hold whatever Lands the blind Devotions, or Commutations of Penances
of the people, conferred on them: but rather, that there was an express Law
against it. It is true, that after the Temple was built, there was (no doubt)
convenience of habitation, and perhaps some Lands for the beasts and Cattle of
the High Priest, in, or about Jerusalem; as there, perhaps, was, while the Ark
remained in the Tabernacle. And, if Bishops (answerable thereunto) had made it
out that they were, as Aaron, above the rest of their brethren in the Ministry,
there had been some reason for the allowance of some Lands to them (if they
labor in the Word and Doctrine) while they continue.

Howheit, (although Bishops could not by Scripture, make out their Title to the
Lands they held,) those 48 Cities allotted to the Levites, with the Suburbs
pertaining to them, (which lands were not to be alienated while the Levitical
Priesthood was in force) Levit. 25. 34.
, may, by Analogy, be a good Argument for the settling of Glebe-lands, upon
faithful and painful Ministers of each particular or Parochial Congregation,
for their habitation, and necessary provision of Cattle for their use; and, for
the acknowledging of them as sacred, or holy to the Lord. Because himself
commanded the like for the Priests of the Law, who had then, sundry other
obventions and incomes, which Ministers now cannot enjoy. Nor, can it be
thought that God is more wanting to the Ministers of Christ, when more grace is
given Jam 4. 6.
to those to whom they preach, than he was of old to the Levites.

And, as God then forbad the sale of those Lands while that Priesthood lasted;
so, it will accordingly follow, that Parochial Glebes, are not to be sold from
the Church, so long as they be employed for maintenance of such Ministers as
truly and faithfully preach Christ to the people of those places where such
Lands are given. For the very Churches to which they are annexed, were built by
men of Quality, and Piety, for the good of the Souls of the living. And, those
Glebes were bestowed for the encouragement of such godly Pastors, as there
officiated, and ministered the bread of life to the people; so far as the
Founders of those Churches, Donations, and Endowments, were able to judge; and,
to endow the Churches which they built.

If since, Sacrilege has been committed, by aliening, or applying some of
those Glebes to private uses, the Popes were first in this sin, and led the
way. For they, first appropriated 3845 of the fattest and largest Benefices in
England Church Lands not to be sold, page 31.
either to their Italian Harpies, or other their Creatures, of whom nothing
could be sure, but that they would feed themselves, and starve the peoples
Souls. Afterward, they gave them to those Augaean stables of Templars and
Monks, in the height of Popery, who never took care of the Churches of Christ;
but, to pamper their own bellies like Epicures; and, to maintain the pomp and
state of Atheists, under the name and habit of the Church. And since the times
that Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, etc. were possessed of such Appropriations,
they grew worse than their predecessors, in Leasing out some, for many scores
of years; and, passing away, other for ever See the Apology for Purchases, etc.
. And whereas those that first enjoyed them, were to make competent allowance
to the Minister that officiated: so do not these, but rather starve him. They
then, of all others, have least cause or color to blame the late Parliament,
for aliening or selling of those Glebes, to supply the necessities of the
State, occasioned by themselves: which Glebes, it were to be wished, might be
redeemed again, and restored, for the maintenance of such able and faithful
Mainisters in those places, as look more at the Work than the Wages; which is
now (if God give a blessing) in a good way to be done.

But, that which is most insisted upon, and which bears most show of voluntary
donations of Lands to the Priests, in the Old Testament, which may be called
sacred, or holy to the Lord, and may not be afterward aliened, or redeemed, is
that in Levit. 27. 10. If a man shall sanctify unto the Lord a part of a
field, etc. which sanctifying, was, say some, a voluntary act, not commanded;
yet allowed, and accepted of God; else he would never have put the case, so
often, nor have given so many directions in it as there he does. Therefore they
conclude, voluntary offerings, or gifts of Lands to the Church, without
command, or warrant from God, makes them to be sacred and holy to the Lord, and
gives him a propriety in them, not to be revoked, or aliened.

To understand this aright, take notice, that diverse distinctions are made in
that Chapter, all which must be heeded. 1. The Lord distinguishes of fields,
said to be consecrated to him. For the fields are either fields of a man's
possession, verse. 16. that is, his inheritance, which he may retain for ever;
or fields which he has bought, which are not of his Hereditary possession,
verse. 22. The first he might sanctify, of by vow, give unto God; yet so, that
he had his liberty to redeem it, according to the value, not of the Land it
self, but of the seed and profits, adding a fifth part to it: which done, he
might as safely take it back, and use it, as if he had never consecrated it.
But. if he did not before the year of Jubilee redeem it, but let it go out in
the Jubilee, that is, let it lie unredeemed till that year came about, he might
neither then, nor at all redeem it; that field was to be holy to the Lord, as a
field devoted, the possession (that is, the inheritance) thereof should be the
Priests, verse. 21. so was it also, in case it could be proved, that he that had
sanctified it to the Lord, instead of redeeming, would, underhand, sell it to
another man: that sale was void, and at the next Jubilee the inheritance
thereof was vested in the Priests, (verse. 20, 21.)

2. The Lord distinguishes between redeeming, and buying, or selling.
Redeeming, is the act of him that vowed the field of his own possession;
buying, is the purchasing of the field of another, for years, not for ever,
because all Lands bought, were to return to the first Owner at the Jubilee,
verse. 23, 24. so also is the selling of Lands, which could not be for longer
time than the next Jubilee. Now, if the Owner who vowed a field, would not
redeem it, any other might buy it of the Priests; and they not only might, but
ought to sell it to him, says Abulensis, for so many years as lasted to the
Jubilee, but no longer. After such a man had bought it, he might sanctify it
to the Lord for so much time as he had in it: but the Inheritance was to be in
the Priest. So, if he had bought a field, not before consecrated or vowed to
God, he might sanctify that till the next Jubilee; after which, it was to
revert to the first Owner that sold it, verse. 22, 23, 24.

3. The Lord distinguishes, between a thing sanctified, and a thing devoted.
The sactifying of it, is the first vowing or giving it to God; notwithstanding
which Act, he might lawfully redeem, and enjoy it as fully to his own use, as
ever he did before the sanctifying of it; provided he do it in time, that is,
before the next Jubilee. The devoting of it to the Lord, is a constant settling
of it, upon God, for the Priests, without power of revocation or redemption
after once the first Jubilee is over, if before, it were not redeemed, upon
pain of Gods Curse (...)
, so verse. 21. The field, (to wit, which is sanctified, and not redeemed before
the Jubilee) when it goes out in the jubilee, shall be holy unto the Lord, as
a field DEVOTED, the possession thereof shall be the Priests, as before was
alleged in reference to the first distinction. Thus also, verse. 28. No devoted
thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord, etc. shall be sold or redeemed;
every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. To the same effect Tostatus In
Levit. 27. q. 67.
.

To apply this to the matter in hand: First, it is clear that no Land
sanctified to the Lord, whether it were Land of Inheritance, or bought for a
time, did settle such a propriety in God, that it was not lawful to redeem it
for ever, or to buy it for a time, and convert it to any private use, before
the next Jubilee: therefore this is of it self no argument to prove the giving
Lands to Cathedrals to be such a consecration as it should be in no wise lawful
to recall, redeem, or employ them to any secular use again. Yet this is the main
thing for which this Scripture is so much urged.

2. Although that Text implies some voluntary Dedications of some Lands to the
Lord, for the benefit of his Priests that did him, and the people real and
constant service, either at the Altar, or in teaching the Law; yet this is no
Warrant for the Donation, or continuation of Lands to idle, etc. Lords over the
people of God; and such, as can never make it out, that ever they were truly
called of God to those pretended Offices and Dignities for which they claim
such large Revenues.

3. Albeit, some fields might sometimes be given to the Lord; and, his Priests,
enjoy the benefit of them; yet, He appointed upon what terms they should be
given, and continued: but, no such matter, for Lands given to Cathedrals. They
being many of them given to the dishonor of God and Christ, as afterward
shall appear, which God has no where given order for their converting to a
better use, nor given any rules about them. Nor were those Lands consecrated to
the Lord, under the Law, the hundredth part of what Cathedralifts have, by
wiles, not voluntary Donations, heaped up, to consume upon their lusts: Which
boundless grasping of Lands, by Bishops, Monks, Deans and Chapters, etc. laying
not only field to field, but Manor to Manor, to the impoverishing of
particular families, and the Commonwealth too, upon the account of the Church,
and Gods acceptance thereof, as sacred; has ever been so far from being
accounted lawful, that even an Archbishop himself (having deserted the Romish
Church) has proclaimed it Sacrilegium, and rapinam injustissimam; direct
Sacrilege, and most wicked robbery. This, says he, is not to enable men to
labor in the Gospel: but to supply them with fuel for Riot and Excess; and,
to pervert what was given for the benefit of the Church, and for necessary
provisions; to the shame, scandal, and ruin of the Church: it is not to take
off, but to multiply impediments of saving souls Spalat. de Rep. Eccles. 1. 9.
c. 7 n. 36.
.

4. Those consecrations of Lands were to be no longer in the Priesthood than
their Priesthood continued. Afterward, it was lawful for any to buy them, as
well as any other Lands. Therefore, if that instance be of force to prove the
lawfulness of giving such Lands, it must be of like weight to prove the
lawfulness of aliening those Lands, when the authority and jurisdiction, and by
consequence the Offices of all Cathedral men are wholly determined and taken
away by Act of Parliament.

5. Albeit, those Priests might have such Lands given them, yet Tastatus In
Levit. 27. q. 36.
largely and strongly makes it out, that it was not lawful for the Priests to
keep them in their possession, but must sell them at every Jubilee, even after
they were devoted to the Lord, by leaving them to the Lord till the Jubilee.
For, first he urges that place in Numb. 18. forbidding them Lands among their
brethren. 2. He says they were confined to those Cities and Suburbs which by
Gods Order, were set out for them by the other Tribes, Numb. 35. so that it was
unlawful for them to have either Lands, or Houses in any other places, or place
whatsoever. 3. He urges the great inconvenience of keeping any such Lands in
their own possession, because it would much distract and hinder them in the
execution of their Offices. Therefore if even such Lands did fall to them, they
were not to keep them, but presently to value them; and if he that sanctified
them would not redeem them, they must sell them to some others. And, even when
at the year of Jubilee the Lands came to be theirs, they must instantly sell
them, and put them into money: and, so, from Jubilee to Jubilee. Now, what is
this to the holding of Cathedral Lands, wherein they who plead for them, use
all arguments and means first to get; then, to keep them for ever: whereas on
the contrary, God allowed not his Priests to use Arts to get them, much less to
keep them: but, to use all means to get them off again; until they who
consecrated them had neglected the redeeming of them, and none else would buy
them; and so they came devoted, not by their first consecration, but by neglect
of the people who first gave them unto God? nor will those sharp Masters take
notice of the difference between sanctifying, that is, vowing or giving of
Lands unto God, and the devoting of them; which last makes them most holy to
the Lord Levit. 27. 28.
, incapable of redeeming, or of being sold: yet not, in the nature of the
thing; but, as having slipped the time limited by God for redeeming, or selling
of them.

If any think (as one does) that the setting out of the holy portion of Land,
about the Sanctuary Ezekiel 45. and c. 48.
, showed to Ezekiel in a Vision (as a Prophecy of the spiritual state of the
Churches of Christ under the Gospel) is both a Warrant and Command to set out
Lands for Cathedralists, to be holy to the Lord for ever, under the New
Testament; this can be no other but a manifest perverting of the sense and mind
of God throughout that Vision.

For, although it be on all hands agreed, that, from the 40th Chapter of
Ezekiel, to the end of that book, the main scope is to decipher and describe
the flourishing estate of the Church, under the Gospel; yet it was never
affirmed by any Author, that the Temple there intended, and Gods command for
setting out so many 1000 reeds of Land for the Temple, and the Priests, are to
be understood positively and properly according to the Grammatical Construction
of the Words, as if God meant to erect another new material Temple at
Jerusalem, or in Judea; and to revive and establish the same Levitical
Offerings and Sacrifices, formerly offered by Aaron and his sons, to be again
offered by Zadok and others of Aarons Order. But that all is spoken in See Jun.
in Ezekiel. 40
a figure, and to be understood of the spiritual endowments of the Church,
better than with all the Lands in the World.

Howbeit, this is set forth under Legal expressions, and by way of allusion to
the material Temple of Solomon, as being the most lively and most taking
instance, or resemblance that was then known, or could be found in the whole
World, to illustrate and set forth to life, the far more glorious estate, and
spiritual privileges and provisions of the Evangelical Church, the New
Jerusalem Heb. 12. 22.
, which should so far exceed in glory that in Judea, as the Heavenly Jerusalem
Heb. 12. 22.
, does the earthly; and, as the spiritual Temples of the living God do exceed
that of Solomon. Wherefore, to draw an Argument thence, for the consecrating of
Lands in a proper sense, for the maintenance and state of Bishops and other
Cathedral-men, is not only to proclaim the weakness of him that does it, but to
publish to the world that there is no firm ground in Scripture (as indeed,
there is not) to found any Title of such Lands upon.

But, one Church Lands not to be sold, page 1, 2.
has found out a gallant passage of Moses, to prove, that very Heathens, by
light of natural reason, found, and held it requisite that their Priests should
have a settled maintenance in Lands. The place is in Genesis 47. 22. where it is
said, that when Joseph, in the extremity of the seven years famine, bought all
the Lands of the people of Egypt, for bread, to keep them alive; Only the Land
of the Priests bought he not: which shows they had Lands, and that oseph would
not meddle with the buying of them. But why? what, because they were hallowed,
or consecrated to the Egyptian Gods, and therefore Holy? No such matter: but,
because Pharaoh provided a portion of meat for them, and they did eat the
portion which Pharaoh gave them. Wherefore they sold not their Lands. Indeed,
Nature may teach that God is to be worshipped, that he is to have Priests for
his worship, and that they are to be maintained; but, out of Lands, where did
Nature ever teach that? If the Heathens that were most civilized made any
standing provisions for their Priests, it was in Tithes and Offerings. This the
Reverend Dr. Carlton Tithes examined, Cap. 2.
has industriously noted out of Plutarch, Herodotus, Macrobius, Diodorous
Siculus, Xenophon and others. But, for making such provisions of Lands, none of
those Authors are alleged. And, whereas the Apostle says, that the things
which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrifice unto Devils 1 Cor. 10. 20.
, it ill becomes a Bishop to urge that Act of the Kings of Egypt, in setting
out Lands for such Priests, as done by the light of nature, which was done out
of ignorance and corruption of nature, as a warrant for Christians to give
Lands to Cathedrals.

2. Come we from the Law, to the Gospel; from the Old Testament, to the New.
Neither here can we find one silhable that countenanceth, much less requires
the endowment of Cathedrals with Lands, as holy to the Lord. It is true, that
the Learned Knight, Sir Henry Spelman in his Treatise de non temer andis
Ecclesiis, has Learnedly proved it to be Sacrilege to rob Churches of the
maintenance by Divine right due unto them: but, that is not spoken of Lands
given by men, but of Tithes settled by God as the standing maintenance of
Ministers of the Gospel: as is obvious to every eye that carefully heedeth the
body of that Book.

There are indeed some wyre-drawn Arguments produced by a great D. in his
Answer to the Letter to Dr. Turner, to make out Gods acceptance of, and
propriety in such lands. But, these have been examined before, and therefore
shall be here passed over. In the New Testament there is recorded: 1. Matter of
fact. 2. Matter of Ordinance, for the providing of maintenance for Ministers,
so soon as that Ordinance could be put in execution.

1. The matter of fact will appear, by what Christ himself; and afterward, his
Apostles had for their maintenance in those times.

As for Christ himself (although he were of the blood Royal, of the lineage of
David, both by his mothers side, and his supposed fathers side too) Luke 2. 4.
, he prosesseth, that very foxes, and birds of the air, were better provided
for then himself: for, the one had holes; theother, nests; but he had not so
much as whereon to lay his head Mat. 8. 20.
, neither room, nor pillow. It is true, there was a common purse, or bag, with
which Judas was trusted; and, thereupon tempted to become a thief Joh. 12. 6.
. And it is manifest, that out of that Cash, (contributed by well-disposed
Converts) Luke 8. 3.
, both he and his Disciples furnished themselves with necessary food Joh. 4. 8.
; and, gave to the poor besides Joh 13. 29.
. But, as for any House, or Land, for a standing or settled maintenance, or
abode, it is clear, he had none; although Heir of all things. Nor was that
provision which he had, any dainty, or costly fare: but only some loaves of
bread, and a few fishes; not above five barley loaves, and two stshes Mat. 14.
17. Mar. 6. 38. Luke 9. 13. Joh. 6. 9.
, at a time, (which a boy might carry) for Christ, and his twelve Apostles.

And, whatever Judas did in purloyning for himself, the rest of the Apostles
were content to observe their Masters Injunctions; not only when he first sent
them out, at what time he charged them to provide neither gold, nor silver, nor
brass in their purses, nor scrip for their journey, neither two coats Mat. 10.
9, 10.
, etc. but even long after, when he had left the earth, and ascended heaven,
and the multitude of believers daily increased Act. 2. 47.
: Even then, Peter professed to the lame man that lay at the Gate of the
Temple, and asked an Alms of him; Silver and Gold have I none Act. 3. 6.
. Yea, a good while after that, blessed Paul labored, working with his own
hands 1 Cor. 4. 12.
, as a Tent-maker: and that, night and day; not for recreation, or out of
covetousness; but, to minister to the necessities not only of himself, but, of
those that were with him Act. 20. 34.
: not as having no right to maintenance 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5, etc.
; but, that he might not be chargeable unto such, as being yet unconverted, or
not fully satisfied touching this matter, might take offense at his requiring
of present maintenance 1 These. 2. 9.
. Therefore, sometimes he would take maintenance of one Church, convinced of
their duty in administering to him, to supply his wants while he preached to
another, more disaffected, unsatisfied, covetous or quarrelsome. Thus, he
preached the Gospel of God freely to the rich, voluptuous, and quarrelling
Corimbians: robbing other Churches, by taking wages of them, to do service to
the Corinthians 2 Cor. 11. S.
. Where, by the way, take notice, that he that takes wages where he does not,
or has not done service, is a Church-robber. It is true, if he work faithfully
elsewhere, and no maintenance is there, without scandal, to be had; and another
place where he has industriously labored, is willing to afford contribution
upon that account: it is not such a robbery as is sin in him; but rather in
them, who put him upon it, (as Quakers and others would now do, the Ministers
of the Gospel:) for they refusing to maintain him, do what in them lies, to put
him upon robbing others.

Let no man hence conclude, I. That Christ meant to starve his Apostles when he
sent them out to preach; or, took not sufficient care for their provision. For,
by their Ministry, He so wrought upon those to whom he preached, (if sons of
peace) that his Apostles wanted nothing Luke 22. 35.
: and that upon this account, That the labourer is worthy of his meat, (says
Matthew) Mat. 10. 10
, of his hire (says Luke) Luke 10. 8
. This is then, allowed to those who are commissionated by Christ to preach the
Gospel; but not to usurpers and false Prophets that run before they be sent,
supposing gain to be godliness. Unto such Priests that so teach for hire, and
to such Prophets as so divine for money Mic. 3. 11
, a woe is due, which will be accomplished on them.

Nor, Secondly, That it is hereby intended, that it is unlawful now for
Ministers of the Gospel, to have more or better allowance than Christ, or his
Apostles were pleased to take (when they were first to plant the Gospel) until
men were better instructed and satisfied touching the Ministers dues: but, that
God has provided better for them, which they might lawfully receive and enjoy,
when once his people are thoroughly convinced of their duty.

All that is inferred hence, is but this: that it cannot be thought, that
either Christ or his Apostles ever thought of allowing, or owning the Lands
given to Cathedral Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. when neither he, nor his
Apostles ever accepted of Houses or Lands for themselves; and when the
enjoined, and the other observed the injuction, that neither Silver nor Gold
should be provided, for supplying their wants beforehand, in those times of the
first plantation of the Gospel, wherein it nearly concerned those that were
employed in the planting of it, rather to suffer want of things necessary, than
to give offense in the unseasonable demanding of supply.

2. As to the matter of Ordinance and Institution for the maintenance of
laboring (not loytering) Gospel Ministers, it is not necessary here to say
much. I have, in the second Edition of this Treatise, made it out, that Tithes
are the most proper and settled maintenance, set out by Christ himself for all
his Ministers; although for brevity, it be here omitted. Only take notice,
that seeing Christ has been pleased to own this rational proposition, that the
labourer is worthy of his meat, or hire: Surely, he intended such hire as might
be suitable to the state and condition of the Church, in the several ages and
vicissitudes thereof, wherein his laborers took pains in his Church. With this
nevertheless, that (whatever the maintenance should be) it must not be urged
from his assertion, that Bishops and Cathedral men should have Lands; till they
can show better Title to such Lands, than either the Priests and Levites had
(over and above their definite Cities and Suburbs) to keep Lands in their
possession for ever: or, than any rule, or hint in the New Testament will
undoubtedly warrant them to do. Not that it is unlawful for Ministers of the
Gospel to possess Lands falling to them by inheritance, or purchased with their
money: for such Lands they hold, not as Ministers in right of the Church, but
as Civil Proprietors of an estate, of which it is, without question, lawful for
them to dispose, as they please. But that which is here spoken, is in reference
to the particular Texts produced to prove that the New Testament affords
Commands for giving Lands to Cathedrals, which to aliene, is Sacrilege.

But, if none of all this satisfy, to warrant Cathedralists to hold Lands, and
to prove Gods Charter for it, yet it is hoped Church Lands, etc. pa. 4.
, that of our most blessed Savior will do it fully, where he says, Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own Mat. 20. 15.
? where the Interrogation has the force of an undoubted Affirmation; as if he
had said, Questionless, it is.

Ergo, he hopes, Lands may be given to the Church. No doubt they may, as the
forty eight Cities and Suburbs, were to the Priests and Levites. But, not by
force of that Text now produced. For, that is not spoken of men's giving unto
God; but, of Gods free gifts unto men. Besides, it is to laborers, not
loyterers, in his Vineyard: not to such laborers as would work where, when,
and how they list; but, as the Lord, or his Steward should direct, and command:
not, for beating their fellow servants; but, for giving them their meat, in due
season. Briefly, you may observe in all the places quoted by the Advocates for
Cathedral Lands, that nothing is precisely and positively vouched, which in
terms, or equivalency, imports the giving to God, and his accepting of Lands
for Cathedrals; but, long fetched, and hard strained Interrogations, or
inferences rather forced upon the Text, then naturally flowing from it; which,
in the issue, comes to no more but a bare begging of the question, and of an
admitting what they say upon such begging discourses, to be an unquestionable
truth.

But especially, great use is made by the same Champion for Cathedral Page 5.
Page.18, 35 and alibi.
Lands, that he doubts not (and, if he doubt not, who dares to do other?) but
that this (which he undertook to prove, viz. that lands may be given to the
Church) is the opinion of the Assembly of Divines lately sitting at
Westminster, and of all learned Orthodox Divines in Christendom. Confidently
spoken; but not, for want of ignorance of what he so speaks.

Touching his so often vouching the Assembly of Divines (whom he afterward
Page.71.
unchristianly revileth;) know all men by these presents, that either he
knows not what he says, or wilfully imposes upon them what they never held
out. It is very true, that some Members of that Assembly, joining with some
others, did compile some Annotations upon the Bible; which many take to be the
work of the Assembly. But take this for an undoubted truth; those Annotations
were never made by the Assembly, nor by any Order from it; nor after they were
made, ever had the Approhation of the Assembly; or were so much as offered to
the Assembly at all, for that purpose, or any other. Therefore, whatever is
alleged by that Author of Church Lands not to be sold, he must go look
somewhere else for the Compilers of those Notes; and, forbear to charge them
upon the Assembly, which never took the least notice of them. And when he has
found the right Authors, he may, if he please, send to them to own what he
alleges out of them, and thank them (whom he scorneth) for helping him to
Arguments, which (as he thinks) make against themselves.

Touching all the learned Orthodox Divines in Christendom, which he, lays
claim unto, to be of his side; it moves not, beyond a vapouring flourish, till
he produce them. And, were they all of his opinion, yet what is that to what he
undertook to prove out of Scripture? Indeed he makes use of some bits snatched
out of Calvin, Beza, Deodat, and sundry others, whose words he either wresteth,
or alleges to no purpose. But let him make what advantage he can of them:
yet, they are but men, subject to the same infirmities with others; of which,
an appeal may safely be made to his own Conscience. Therefore, however they may
be made use of in some cases, especially against themselves, and their own
party (as by that Author they are) yet it cannot be thought needful, or equal,
to answer to every passage alleged out of them; unless it be quoted, to stop
their mouths who seem to allow them dominion over their faith. This is spoken,
not to wave any thing materially alleged out of them; but that there is
nothing produced, that comes up to the proof of that, for which that Author
undertook to allege them: and so no Answer can be given to them.

Here might we stay, if men would be persuaded to rest in the Scriptures. But,
because much is produced out of Antiquity for the proof of men's giving, and
Gods accepting of Church Lands, we must go on further; and see what use is made
of Antiquity herein, and upon what grounds. And this, the rather, because it
may be better known, when, and upon what terms, the maintenance by Lands began
to take place in the Church.

The first news we hear of any lands conferred on the Church, was in the time
of Pope Urbane the first, about the year 228. who instituted Platina in Urban I.
, Ut Ecclesias, praedia ac fundos, fidelibus oblatos reciperet, partireturque
proventus Clericis omnibus viritim, nihilque cujuspiam privatum esset, sed in
commune bonum. That he (meaning the Bishop, as we have it in Gratian, and Peter
Crab) should receive the Churches, possessions, and grounds, offered by the
faithful; and, that the profit thereof should be divided to the Clergy, man by
man; and, that nothing should be of private propriety to any, but all cast into
one common Bank for the good of the whole.

For, that is the meaning of our Author. Indeed, Gratian, and the rest of that
Drove of Romish Canonists, tell us of a Decretal Epistle of Urbane directed to
all Bishops; wherein, under pain of Excommunication, he decrees, That none
should presume to alienate ought of the Churches Revenues, etc. But this, more
suo, they have invented for ends of their own; the very phrase, style and
matter of that Epistle being altogether incongruous and unsuitable to the
language and state of the Church, or the Authority assumed by the Bishops of
Rome, at that time. And, be it that Urbane did write such an Epistle, it
appears not when those Lands were given: and, whatever Lands were given to
other Churches, they at Rome had none, in a good while after, as shall
presently be showed.

But, if all this be admitted, that the Church, in those times, had some Lands,
what is this to their purpose, who plead for Church Lands now? There was none
then given in particular to Bishops, Cannos, or to any of the Clergy, to be for
their own particular use, or personal propriety; those Lands were given to the
Church in common: but, that is long since laid aside, and every one pulls, and
hales what he can into his own purse, tanta est hominum rapacitas and libido,
so great is the rapacity and lust of men, faith Platina Ibid.
Now, this rapacity, this lust of covetousness, is that indeed which is pleaded
for, by the sticklers for the continuation of such Lands to the Church, that
is, to themselves.

And as for Pope Lucius I. who sat Bishop of Rome abont twenty three years
after Urbane, (but continued not in the Sea above eight months, says
Eusebius; Marianus Scotus, says, but five months) there is not one word in
Platina, touching his taking notice of Church Lands. All that is to be found,
is in the Canonists, and Compilers of the Councils, steered by the interest of
Rome. So, Crab, and others, found out a Decretal Epistle of Lucius, directed to
the Bishops of France and Spain, to the same purpose with that of Urbane. It is
indeed fathered upon Lucius I. but there are so many expressions in it, of
Benefices, etc. (Names and Titles never heard of in those ages) as plainly
discover it to be a false imposing of it upon that Lucius; for that it better
agrees with, and may more fitly be imputed to Lucius 2. or to Lucius 3. above
900 yeears after the first. And, what likelihood there is, that he, that in the
time of the first Schism, caused by Novatianus, had work enough, could in so
short a space as he sat Pope, do his duty against that Schism, and be at
leisure to make such decrees as are fathered upon him touching Church Lands;
let the impartial Readers judge.

But be it as it will, and let it be granted that such Decrees were made by
Urbane I. and Lucius I. take in also Pius 2. (as some do) who sat Pope 1200
years after; and, let all be admitted which they have decreed, for enjoying of
Lands by Bishops, etc. yet the very best Title to Lands derived thence, is
only from Popes of Rome. If it be said, those Decrees are not produced to
prove the Title, but only to show, de facto, that there were then such Lands
belonging to the Church, which, those Popes took care, should not be alienated:
It is answered, That if any such Lands belonged to the Church, and it cannot be
showed who gave them, the Title can be derived no higher than from those that
first make mention of them. As for the Apostles times, the Scripture declares
plainly what then was done with Lands; they were sold, and the money given to
the Church. This was consonant to the Levitical Rules given by God, touching
Lands sanctified to the Lord; which were not to be kept by the Priests, but
sold, and put into money, at every Jubilee. But, the Popes taking upon them to
be wiser than God, were of another opinion; and so are, it seems, too many
among our selves, upon the same account.

Howbeit, he that shall trace the best Ecclesiastical Histories, shall find
that the Clergy of the Church were endowed with no Lands before Constantine the
Great; nor then, especially in his beginning, (unless, with some Houses and
Gardens:) nor afterward, in his greatest advancements of Bishops, save only
with the profits of Lands. Indeed, in the supposititious Donation of
Constantine, (forged in some Popish shop) it is said, That upon the Churches
which Constantine built to the honor of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul,
possessionum praedia contulit, he conferred the spoils of Possessions, or
Lands, (gotten perhaps in war, for praedium refers properly to such:) yet this,
in the language of Civilians, especially of those times, did not extend to the
Lands themselves, but only to the profits raised out of them.

By some Sr. Hen. Sp Int p. 6.
Eusebius is quoted Eusebius. l 10. c. 5.
, as setting down the Imperial Edicts of Constantine, and Licinius, by which
they would prove, that the Church of Rome had begun to retain Lands, etc. even
before Constantine was sole Emperor; because they made a Decree for restoring
such things and possessions as had been taken from the Church in former times.
But, let it be consideted, that in the Edicts quoted by Eusebius, no Lands are
mentioned, unless Gardens and Houses (...)
, which will not suffice them, who are so zealous for Church Lands,
appropriated to Cathedral Clergymen: The Edict speaks only of things
pertaining to the whole Catholick-Church of Christians in common: which must be
meant of the whole Society of believers. But, to let all men see how unprobable
it is, that the Clergy should possess lands before Constantine, it is to be
noted, that he was the first Christian Emperor, before whose reign the Church
was under fiery Persecutions. Therefore not in case for their Clergymen to
enjoy settled maintenance by Lands, or Tithes.

And even in the beginning of his reign, (he having been born, and, for the
most part, bred in England; and so, unknown at Rome) not only inferior
Christians there, but even that Bishop, or Pope Silvester himself, and his
Associates in the Ministry, when Conftantine first came to Rome, and took on
him the Empire, (not knowing his temper) were so much afraid of him, that they,
for safety of their lives, hid themselves in the Hill Soracte, (afterward,
upon that occasion, called Monte di Sylvestro) about twenty miles from Rome,
until they were better satisfied touching Constantines affection to the
Christian Religion; if that Donation of Constantine be worthy of any credit.

But, to leave what was done at Rome, and, in other Countries (...) S. R. I.
(...)
; it behooves us to enquire how things of this nature were carried in England.
And, as to this, it is pleaded Church Lands (...) page (...)
, that Lucius (King in same part of Britain) being converted to the knowledge
and faith of Christ, about the year 176. (which is a mistake) rooted out the
Idol-Priests; and, taking away their Possessions and Territories, he gave them
to the Churches of the believing Christians, which be endowed with addition of
more lands, and larger Revenues. For this, two learned Authors, Antiq. Brit.
and Armican: perhaps he meant Armacanus; that is, Matthew Parker, after,
Archbishop of Cant. and, Dr. Usher, Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland, are
alleged: But, he that voucheth them, was so wise as not to reser his Readers
to the particular places in those Authors, wherein they may find what he
alleges out of them. So that this (without offense to his Lordship) might be
passed over without answer.

Nevertheless, that it may not be thought unanswerable, he may be pleased to
know, that however Antiquit. Britan. be a very good book, (not now to be had,
because out of print) yet what is quoted out of him, is not clearly, (if at
all) to be found in our ancient Authors. It is indeed acknowledged, that
Eleutherius, then Bishop of Rome (at the request of Lucius) sent him two godly
Ministers, Faganus and Damianus (as some call them) who converted the Britains
to the faith Fox. Act; and (...) part. fol. (...) Edit. 1610.
, although Lucius himself was before a Christian, as appears by his Letter to
Eleutherius. Then, were the Idol-Temples, and all other Monuments of Gentilism
destroyed; and the people brought to serve one God, who before served many.
There were then in Britan 28 Head-Priests, called Flanines; and three
Arch-Priests over them, called Arch-Flamines. Instead of the former, they made
28 Bishops; and, in room of the other three, they made three Archhishops, who
had their seats in London, York, and Glamorgan. But, not one word, of endowing
them, or their Churches with the Lands of the Flamines or Arch-Flamines, either
in Baronius himself, our own Bid, or any other Classical Author yet occurring.

Wherefore, until he that tells this Story, of settling those Lands on the
Church, shall make it more punctually, let it not be offensive, to pass over
that Tale, with the words of the Magdiburgenses Cent. 2. cap. 2.
, Celebratur autem imprimis Propagatio in Britania sub Eleutberio facta: de qua
tamen plerague tam dub e and obscure recitantur, ut propemodum tota haec
historia de fide sua laboret. The Propagation of the Christian Religion in
Britain under Eleutberius, is much applauded and cried up. Concerning which
notwithstanding, things are for the most part so doubt doubtfully and obscurely
related, that almost the whole History thereof labors under much uncertainty
of the truth of it.



And albeit, it be said that Britain continued in the faith above 200 years
after Lucius, even until the Saxons (then, Heathens and Infidels) came in: and,
by their power destroyed the Christian Religion, until Augustine the Monk
converted sundry of the Kings of the then Heptarchy, and reduced their people
to the Faith again: yet in all that time, no mention is made in any History of
credit, of lands given to, and settled upon Bishops and Cathedral men, in this
Nation.

I consess, Matthew of Westminster Flor. Histor. ad. ann. 186. etc.
, tells us, That Lucius conferred upon, and, by Charters, confirmed to Churches
and Ecclesiastical men, sundry Possessions and Territeries, and granted such
Privileges to Churches and Churchyards, that whoever, having offendect, and
fled to them, was to freed from punishment. But, what Churches, Clergymen, and
Territories they were, is not set down: and it is strange, that a Monk should
know more of Lucius his endowment, than Bid, or others that had written of
Lucius long before. I therefore think, this to be one of those corruptions of
which he that printed his Flores, Anno 1570. gives warning in his Preface; and
touching him, and Matthew Paris too, he there passes this censure: Barbaros
esse satcor, nec renuo si dicas, vary corruptos: They are barbarous (in
language) I confess, says he: nor will I oppose, if you say, They are
variously corrupted (in matter.)



And, give what credit you will to that Story, yet it is plain the counsel came
from Rome for the doing of it. Lucius did, as the Romish Instructors taught.

The Original then (and by consequent, the Title) of the Lands of Bishops, and
therest of the Cathedral men in England, cannot, of certainty, derive higher
then the abused Magnificence of Princes, and other great men, nuzled in
Ignorance and Superstition, both before and since the Conquest, in the height
of Popery: whereby Monasteries first, and afterward Cathedrals, have been
endowed with large Portions of Lands, and other Revenues, under the specious
(but cheating) pretense of giving them to God, and Holy Church; even to the
impoverishing not only of particular Families, but of the Kingdom.

Nor were they given indeed to maintain a preaching-Ministry, (for which, all
Church-maintenance was at first appointed by God, even when the daily
Sacrifices were on foot,) to instruct the people in the true knowledge of
Christ and his Gospel, and to quicken them to the power of godliness, (for,
these, most of those men who held those Lands, ever persecuted;) but, for
superstitious ends and uses: and employed (for the most part) to maintain the
Luxury, Pomp, State, and other Excesses and Lusts of Abby-Lubbers, and other
Cathedral Drones and Belly-gods, to the great dishonor of God, and scandal of
the Gospel.

And it is to be observed, that (if any credit be given to Histories) the
greatest and richest endowments of Cathedrals and Monasteries with Lands, in
this Nation, were made when Satan's Throne was most exalted, and his Kingdom in
greatest peace, even in times of thickest Popish darkness; when even Kings
themselves, and their Nobles, scarce knew one letter in a Book, nor the rest
understood any thing of Christ or Religion, otherwise than so many Parrets; no,
nor of the very Municipai Laws of the Nation, further than what the Prelatical
Clergy (whose interest it was to keep all in grossest ignorance) though fit,
for their own gain and advantage to communicate.

The Clergy, being sole Masters of the times, and holding all the chief Offices
and Places of Power and Judicature in the State, as well as in the Church, did
what they list both with King and People. And with their familiar spirit of
Excommunication (the great Mormo and Scarecrow of the Laity, with which they
daily frighted them) they could, and did conjure into their own Churches, to
fill their own coffers, what quantities of Lands, or ought else they pleased.

But in nothing did they exercise so much Tyranny, as in the matters of the
Souls and Consciences of men, which they made perfect Vassals to their Lusts,
according to what was prophesed by their greatly pretended Patron Saint Peter 2
Pet. 2.1, 3.
, who abhorred their wickedness, and therefore gave warning of their wiles and
tricks, whereby, through covetousuess, with feigned words, they would make
merchandise of the people. This they did, not only as they of old, who
swallowed up the needy, in regard of their outward estates; and then, buying
them for silver, and the needy for shoes Amos 8. 6.
; but, as being the Merchants of Babylon, whose Me chandise is not of beasts,
sheep, horses and chariots, or of the bodies of slaves alone, but of the souls
of men Rev. 18. 13.
.

And as they held the people in ignorance, the more easily to prey upon them;
so they purposely winked at the wickedness of Princes, great ones, and rich
men, their adulteries, rapes, murders, and other villainies (so they did not
fall upon the Clergy) till they had, by these means, got them most sure within
their nets, and found it most seasonable to cut large gobbets out of their
Estates. Then indeed, they would fall foul upon them, with a witness;
terrifying them with unsufferable torments; first in Purgatory, and afterward
in Hell, unless they redeemed themselves, and expiated their sins, and that
speedily, by giving such large portions of their best Lands, as those Harpies
pleased. Which if they did, they were not only presently absolved, but declared
meritorious: especially, if they could be drawn to give so large a portion to
the Church, as might also maintain Masses, etc. for delivering the Souls of
their Ancestors, and others out of their imaginary Purgatory fire. By this they
were told they merited Heaven; but, without this, they must exspect nothing but
Hell for their portion. Strong Arguments to weak and silly Souls, when they are
fallen into the pit and pangs of the King of Terrors, and abused by blind
guides.

Which Donations they were made to believe were now vested in God himself, and
in such tutelary Saint, or Saints, as they taught them to devote them unto:
that they were sacred, and highly accepted of God, (because indeed they kept
the Kitchins of those Cheaters warm) whereupon they needed not to doubt of the
pardon of all their sins, and the release of the Souls of their Ancestors, and
of whom else they pleased to nominate, out of Purgatory.

All which Charters so granted to Pope-Holy Church, (for the better grace of
the business) must begin with the sign of the Cross, and In nomine Domini; but
indeed, to the use of the Devil. Therefore when those his Imps had any mischief
of this kind to act, their usual introduction was, In the Name of God, Amen.
This, in Benedictions of such deluded Vassals; in Execrations, when they angered
those hellish ghostly Fathers; and, in all Donations made unto them, was so
common and constant, that it grew to a Proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne
malum. When they had a mind to fleece, or abuse any man, God himself must be
invocated to become a party to own their wickedness, and to countenance their
avarice, and cursed practices: even when God was not, otherwise, in all their
thoughts Psalm. 10.4.
, who were not but for their coveiousness.

Nor can it be imagained that the Donours of those large gifts, would ever have
parted with them, but as being made to believe by those Merchants (the Devil's
Brokers) to whom they gave them, that thereby they made full amends to God for
all their sins, and expiated the guilt of some heinous and outrageous
wickedness by them before committed; the guilt of which, the very blood of
Christ was not sufficient alone to wash off. And, that hereby the Priests and
Monks who were to enjoy those Lands, would take pains by their Popish
Devotions, to deliver out of Purgatory the Souls of their Ancestors and
Friends; or, to curse their Enemies with Bell, Book and Candle, as the manner
then was, the more to please (or rather fool) the ignorant Founders of such
Endowments, as any intelligent man versed in the Histories of those times,
cannot but know.

And lest this should be thought a slander, take some short proof thereof, both
in the Doctrines and Decrees of Rome, and in the Practice thereof accordingly.

First, the very body of the Canon Law, (which is enough to silence for ever
all such as shall allege any of those Popish Canons or Laws touching this
subject, to make good their outcries against sale of those Lands) thus
declares and decrees, Ille qui donat, pro redemptione Anime suae, non pro
commodo sacerdotis offerre probatur Decrct. par. 2. Cause. 12. 4 3. c Pontisices.
. He that gives ought to the Church, does it for the redemption of his Soul,
not for the Priests gain. And this shooing-horn was held out, the more easily
to draw on men's Estates upon their own Churches; which being published as a
Law, or Truth to be believed upon pain of Damnation, who durst to make doubt of
the truth of it, or to scruple the bestowing of the greatest gifts he could
possibly reach unto? For, if a man will give skin for skin, and all that he
has for his life, (as once the Devil teld God Job 2. 4.
) much more will he stretch himself for his Soul, because it costeth more to
redeem Souls Psalm. 49.8
. And yet when all this is done, this is not given unto God, but to their
greatest Enemy Satan, because it takes a man off from relying wholly upon the
death and satisfaction of Christ, (albeit there is no salvation in any other
Act. 3.12
and to trust in his own merits; yea, in that work which God neither requires
nor will accept; and so, in his conceit, to become his own Savior; which is a
Doctrine of Devils. And it had been all one, to have given the same gifts to
any of the gods of the Heathens, which are Devils.

Secondly, take also some instances answerable to the former Doctrine, which
are extant in several Authors of credit.

First, in the Saxons times, after Ina, King of the West Saxons, had built St.
Andrews a Church in Wells, about the year 704 Godwin of Bishops, page 357.
, and dedicated the same unto St. Andrew, not to be a Cathedral, but Collegiate
Church for Monks. There was no Bishop there till about 200 years after.
Howbeit, in the year 766, Kenulphe, succeeding Ina, and others in that Kingdom
of the West Saxons, gave to the Monks of that Church all the Lands adjacent, in
and about Wells and Mendip, as by his Charter appears. In which, he sets
down the Grounds and Motives which induced him to it, in these words Monastic.
Anglican.
: Quapropter Ego Cyenulphus Occi Saxonum Rex, aliquam terrae partem, pro amore
Dei, and pro expiatione delictorum meorum, nec non (quod verbo dolendum est)
pro aliqua vexatione inimicorum nostrorum Cornubiae gentis: Wherefore, says
he, I Kenulph, of the West Saxons King, for the love I bear to God, and for the
expiation of my sins, and also (which is to be lamented) for some vexation of
my enemies of the Cornish people, do give, etc.

That is, to hire the Monks of Wells to curse the Cornish men, which he could
not (it seems) subdue by his sword.

And verily he had need to do somewhat more than ordinary for expiating his
sins, according as the Doctrine of those times (wherein the all sufficiency of
Christ's full satisfaction was concealed) ran. For, albeit in his younger times
he carried himself fairly as to the matter of his Government of his subjects,
(for want whereof his Predecessor Sigebert, was deposed, and he taken into his
room;) yet, as for his more private conversation, he was a man so addicted to
Adultery, that his wife, not able to bear it, left him, and betook her self to
a Nunnery, where she ended her days: and he, after this large Donation, could
not be drawn off from that sin of uncleanness, but rather grew more bold to
continue it, which in the end cost him his life.

For whereas in the 26 of his reign, he bestowed that Charter upon the Monks of
Wells, yet he still haunted a Concubine or Strumpet (some call her a Noble
Person) at a place called by some Meriton, by other Merton, or Marton, or
Mariton, within his own Dominions; and there, in the 30 year of his reign, was
slain: not by the Cornish that were in rebellion, (as was lately conjectured,
upon the account of Simon Dunelmensis, quoted by Speed and Isaacson; which
Simon being consulted, sets not down the names of the Murderers) but, as
Johannes de Brompton, Matthew of Westminster Ad Ann. 280.
, Henry of Huntington Historiar. li. 4.
, Roger de Hoveden Annal. par 1.
, Ethelwerd Li. c 18
, Polydore Virgil Hist. 1.5.
, and sundry others do all affirm, by one Kineard, brother to the deposed King
Sigebert.

This is the truth of that sad accident which befell Kenulph, and this was his
end. Thus we see how divine the endowment of the Church of Wells was, which was
not made a Cathedral until in the year 905. Plegmund, Archbishop of Canterbury,
(who, by command from King Edward, surnamed the Elder, consecrated seven
Bishops in one day, where none had sat before) among which, he consecrated
Adelme Abbot of Glanstenbury, the first Bishop of Wells: by which it became a
Bishops Sea. But it is remarkable, that he who gave Lands partly for cursing of
others, fell himself under the saddest curse, to be butchered in that very
place where he had so often formerly, and then also, committed adultery, by the
hand of him whom he thought he had made sure enough.

Take another instance in Henry the Third. He being pressed by his Nobles,
Bishops, and others to pass the Great Charter, so highly magnified Magna Charta.
and cried up, especially by the prelatical Clergy, in the ninth year of his
reign, (himself being then but eighteen years old) he was hookt in, to grant it
thus: Henry by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. To all Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. Know ye, that we, to the honor of God, and for the salvation of
the souls of our Progenitors and Successors, Kings of England, etc. have given
and granted, etc. To which all Bishops and many Abbots, as well as others, were
of Counsel, and Witnesses. Hereby it appears, that this Charter was granted
chiefly to merit salvation. So as, however the honor of God be mentioned, yet
the dishonor of God and of Christ lay at the bottom of that grant, in
reference to the foundation laid in the heart of that King by the Prelates. The
like instance may be given in Edward the third, and many more: but because
there will be occasion to mention some of them, upon another account, they are
forborne here.

That this was the Highway wherein the degenerate Clergy of England, long
before (as well as since) the Conquest, constantly travailed, take one proof
(for all) out of Gildas (surnamed Sapiens) who being a Britain Presbyter,
sharply declaimeth against the ignorance, covertousness, idleness, voracity,
thievery of the Clergy of his time, which were said to be continued from the
time of King Lucius, in Britain, now England; for which God had brought many
sad judgments upon the Britains by the Saxons, who, (at their first coming
especially) being Idolaters, continually oppressed, and tyrannized over the
Britains. Yet nothing would prevail to reduce the Clergy to duty. Whether he
continued till Austin the Monk came into England, some doubt, others deny. Yet
Oraeus Nomenclat. l. G.
, and others affirm it; of which, see more in Vossius De Hist. Latin. 1.2. cap.
21.
.

But, it is on all hands agreed, that he sharply rebuked the great
exorbitancies and abuses of the Clergy of his time. Those abuses were, some of
them, such as concern the business in hand; which, he thus reproves In
Ecclesiast. Ordin. acr. Corrept.
. Britania habet sacerdotes, sed non nullos insipientes; guamplurimos
ministros, sed multos impudentes: Clericos, sed quosdam raptores, subdoles:
Pastores, ut dicuntur, sed occisioni animarum lupos paratos; quippe non commodo
plebis providentes, sed proprii plenitudinem ventris quaerentes: Ecclesiae
Domos habentes, sed eas turpis lucri gratia adeuntes, etc. Britain, says he,
has Priests; but, some of them fools: very many Ministers; but many of them,
impudent: Clergymen; but, Thieves and Cheaters: Pastors, as they are called;
but, in truth, Wolves, ready to slay and flay the souls of the sheep: for that
they seek not the good of the people, but the crambing of their own gutts: they
have the houses of the Church (that is, where the Church met for worship) but,
resort to them for filthy Lucres sake only.



And, that he might let all men see, that he excepted not the Bishops of those
times, nor such as sat chief among the Clergy; nay, not the Pope himself; he
adds, Sedem Petri Apostoli, immundis pedibus usurpantes, sed merito
cupiditatis in Judae Traditoris Pestilentiae Cathedram desidentes. They usurp
the Apostle Peter's seat with unclean feet; but, through their covetousness,
they rather sit indeed in Judas his Chair of Pestilence. This, with much more,
that old Britain, so highly accounted of, lays to the charge of the British
Clergy of those times, which future ages did not make better.

For, since the Norman Conquest, the Prelates and Monks have been higher than
before, and grasped more Lands into their hands (upon the same account of
redeeming Souls) than all their predecessors. Insomuch as the Cathedral Clergy,
Chauntries, Monks, and Nuns, being not a fortieth (nay, not an hundredth) part
of the people, had, by these wi es and devices, gotten (as some intelligent men
have computed) a third part (if not two) of all the best Lands in the Nation,
at what time Henry the eighth began to seize the lesser Monasteries. All which
estates were obtained upon that rotten ground, of meriting salvation by giving
such large gifts to the Church: which false Doctrine they continually
inculcated upon the people, to draw them on to such Donations.

Yea, sozealously bent were the Prelates of those times to augment the Churches
Patrimony; that, by a Provincial Constitution Lindw. 1.5 tit. de poenit and
remiss. cap. cum anima.
, made by Richard Withershead (alias Wctherhead) Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the reign of Hen. 3. it was forbidden to all Physicians to administer any
Physic to any Patient (be his extremity and danger never so great) under pain
of suspension ab ingressu Ecclesae, till the Patient were shrived by a Priest.
The pretense was, to visit and physic his Soul first. But, the meaning was, to
get a collop out of his Estate to some Church, Chapel, or Monastery, to
increase their own Revenues: Upon which, the Priest absolved him; but, not
before. And this was that which occasioned the multiplying of Chaunteries,
Obiits, etc. and afterward, the abrogating of them, in the reign of Edw. 6. to
whom they were given by Parliament, I. Edw. 6. 14.

Nor were the Kings and Parliaments (especially after King John) so hood-winkt
or cowed, as not to see and take notice of, and provide against those excessive
gifts of Lands to the Church; that is, to the Clergy, whereby they greatly
robbed the Commonwealth, and ruined many particular families.

Therefore, the same Henry the third, when he first granted the Great Charter,
and therein confirmed the Right and Liberties (which does not necessarily, if
at all, import Lands See Cook. Instit. 2. C. I.
) of holy Church (as that Idolized Crew was then termed) did, in the same
Charter, enact Cap. 36.
; That it should not be lawful from thenceforth to any, to give his Lands to
any Religious house, and to take the same again to hold of the same house
Because Lands so held were freed from all Tithes, Taxes, and Eschetes;
Therefore many did so convey Lands, to cousen the King, and other chief Lords.
Nor shall it be lawful to any house of Religion to take the Lands of any, and
to Lease the same to him of whom he received it. And that if any from
thenceforth gave his Lands to any religious houses, and thereupon be convict,
the gift shall be utterly void, and the land accrue to the Lord of the fee.

Here then was a Law against voluntary gifts of Lands, and a liberty granted to
others, to recover them back, notwithstanding their pretended giving them unto
God: whereby it appears, that some sorts of giving, and accepting and receiving
Lands for the Church, is not a duty, but a fault, which deserves punishment,
not a reward.

Next after Hen. 3. succeeded his son, Edw. I. who, in the 25th of his reign,
confirmed the Great Charter; and, in it, the clause, or Chapter, last
mentioned. But, before he did that, even in the seventh of his reign, he made a
strict Law against Mortmain (by advice of the Prelates as well as others,) to
make all gifts and purchases of Lands without special License from the King) to
be null and void; and the Lands to be forfeited to the chief Lord, if he took
the advantage within one year and an half; or else to the King, in case the
chief Lord neglected the time therein appointed and limited.

It is true, that Edward 3. a popular Prince, at the importunity of the Clergy
(of whom he was necessitated to make much use in his wars) did somewhat
mitigate the rigor of former Statutes of Mortmain; who, in case of breach
thereof, enacted, that instead of forfeitures, parties offending should only
pay a Fine. Howbeit, in 15 Rich. 2. that Statute De Religiosis, 7. Edw. I. was
not only revived, and set on foot again; but, made to extend to all Lands
privately given for Churchyards, or Glebes of Vicars, etc. or to Guilds,
Fraternities, and Corporations, without special License from the King. And that
if any, before this last Statute, had bought, procured, or received such Lands,
without License, they should either procure his License, or sell those Lands
away for other uses, by the next Michaelmas following; else the Lands to be
forfeited, and seizure to be made of them, as in the aforesaid Statute of 7.
Edw. I. de Religiosis was provided. This indeed was the main quarrel which
Thomas A undel then Archbishop of Canterbury had against that King, for which
he conspired with Henry of Bullingbrook (afterward, Henry 4.) to depose, and
ruin him.

By all which it is manifest, that neither Kings nor Parliament, no not Bishops
themselves in Parliament, ever took all Lands given to Churches upon men's
private devotions and liberality, to be sacred, or, holy to the Lord, and
thereby to become his propriety; or, so much as lawful for the Church to hold
them, without special License from the King, and other chief Lord, or Lords of
the sea. Yea, these Acts of Parliament declare plainly, that such voluntary
giving of Lands, was in it selfagainst Law. For there being required a special
License for legitimating thereof, it is manifest that the thing could not be
done, without dispensing with the Laws made against it. The unlawfulness
whereof is declared to be, that the King and Kingdom was thereby defrauded of
such taxes and payments (when the Lands once were in Mortmain, or a dead hand,
to wit, the Church) as formerly had been raised out of them, for defense of the
Realm; and the chief Lords of the Fee, were deprived of their chiefRents,
Services, Reliefs, Fines of Alienation, Eschetes, etc. which being an apparent
wrong to all, occasioned the making of those Laws against that lawless Liberty.

And yet our Advocates for Church Lands, will needs contend, that every thing
voluntarily given to Holy Church (be it for what use it will, Superstitious, or
not) must needs by that very Donation instantly become so sacred, that it may
by no means be alienated; and, that God accepts it for his own, although given
contrary to the Laws of those men, to whose Ordinances (even to every one of
them, not contrary to Gods) we are commanded to submit, for the Lords sake;
whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that
are sent by him, etc. I Pet. 2.13, 14.


Thus we see what, in truth, the Title of the Lands of Bishops and other
Cathedral men in England, was; whence, derived; upon what grounds; and, in what
manner procued, and enjoyed: which sufficiently argues them (even in
construction of Scripture, as well as of humane Laws) to be far from being
sacred, or Holy to the Lord, so as, upon any account whatsoever to entitle him
unto them.

CHAP. III.
It is neither Sacrilege, nor other sin, to aliene, or purchase such Lands to
any common use, especially since the Statutes of 17. Car. I. cap. II. and cap.
28.

THis is evident from the premises, and is here added by way of Antithesis, to
obviate those Two confident Assertions of the Letter Answerer Page 25. his 3.
and 4. Propositions.
before mentioned, viz. That to invade those things (given to the Church) be
they moveable, or immovable, is expressly the sin of Sacrilege. And, That this
sin is not only against Gods positive Law, but plainly against his Moral Law.
To charge a man with Sacrilege, is the highest accusation for the greatest
crime, next to the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost: for, it is ranged
with Idolatry it self, Romans 2.22. yea, in the judgment of some (quoted by this
Answerers Second, and Repetitioner) Church Lands not to be sold, page 14, 15.
; it is a worse sin: a sin that is not only a breach of the Positive written
Law, but against the Law of nature also. The very Heathens have made it death
Plato de Legib. dial. 9.
and, such a death as is due to a Parricide, or murderer of his father Leg. 12.
Tabul.


This goes very high indeed. The evidence to prove it, had need therefore to be
very clear, full, impregnable, and manifest by express Scripture; not by
strained consequences drawn thence by wit, or by the authority or suffrage of
men; as thinking to make good by number of voices, what cannot be made out by
strength of Scripture. This were no better then the banishing of Aristides from
Athens, by the Law of Ostracismon, as being very likely to be guilty of
Tyranny; which in stead of proving, they made good by the Votes of 6000
Citizens Plutarch in Arist.


Now, it will concern these Accusers to make out their charge, upon pain of
incurring the same punishment which is due to a Sacrilegist. If any man
unjustly accuse another, the Lord once made a Law touching False witness
bearing against ones neighbor, which was this Deuteronomy. 19. 16, and co.
; The judges were to make diligent inquisition; and, if the witness were a
false witness, and bad testified falsely against his brother, then should they
do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: no eye might pity
him: but life should go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, band for band,
foot for foot. It is well for these bold Censurers, that this Judicial obtains
not in England. Yet let them know, that the Equity of it is perpetual, and the
Justice of God will (without repentance) find them out.

To prove this to be expressly Sacrilege, one of them tells you a fair tale out
of the Schools and Casuists, Aquinas, etc. which is all the Argument he brings
(unless the Etymology of the word, and Nebucbadnezzar's abusing the holy
Vessels, and the burning of the Temple:) but, out of an express text of
Scripture, declaring and dooming the Buyers of Cathedral Lands, expressly to be
Sacrilege, (...) quidem, not one syllable. And can there be such a sin, unless
he produce some Scripture that forbids and condemns it? Is notthis to become
(...) the Accuser of the Brothren? Nor, are proofs of the other as to this
point, any better, but Quotations of such Scriptures, of which none do mention
lands; but, he seeks by Circumlocutions, Interrogations, confident Assertions,
to fasten such a sense upon them; sometime contrary to, always incongruous and
aliene from the genuine sense of them. As by occasion has been in great
partalready demonstrated; and, further may be, in this or the next Chapter.

In his other Proposition, he affirms, that this aliening of such lands, is
against the Positive and Moral Law of God; because all Nations, even Pagans,
hold Sacrilege for a sin: and, for his better grace, he voucheth (but cites not
the place, whereby it might be examined) Lactantius, to prove that, in all
Religions, God ever avenged this sin. But does he tell us out of Lactantius, or
Scripture, that selling or buying Cathedral Lands is that sin? Yes: he voucheth
Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But, wherein? Here he is
silent: for it makes not for his purpose. but rather against him. What was it
indeed? God himself tells them; (not, in Lands, but) in Tithes and Offerings.
And this is granted him. And what gets he by it? but, the countenance of some
Scripture-words against the sense. But, that (notwithstanding all objected, or
alleged) to sell, or buy such Lands, because once voluntarily dedicated to
God, is no Sacrilege, appears thus.

First, by that very Scripture, Levit. 27. (alleged to the contrary) if
rightly understood. For, if it were lawful to make a singular vow, of a person,
a beast, an bouse, or some part of the field of his possessions; and, (after
such sanctifying of it to the Lord) to redeem or buy it back again for common
uses: then, the bare Dedication, giving, or consecrating of a thing unto God,
does not, eo ipso, make the redeeming, selling or buying thereof, for any use,
to be Sacrilege; unless, where God himself has expressly forbidden such
redemption, sale or purchase. But, in diverse cases, and particularly in the
cases of Houses and Lands, God allowed a redemption and sale: so as, the buying
of them back, for private uses, after the sanctifying of them to the Lord, were
done within the time allotted by God for the doing of it, as has been before
more largely opened. Therefore, to sell, or buy Cathedral Lands, is no
Sacrilege, nor any way sinful, in the case before propounded, because once
dedicated to God.

It is true, that where God has laid an express prohibition against redeeming
or buying, it is Sacrilege to redeem or buy. As for example: Ifa man
voluntarily offer, a beast, which God has allowed for Sacrifice, he may not
redeem, buy or exchange it; no, not for a better, verse. 10. no more may he
redeem or buy, nor so much as sanctify the firstlings of beasts, whether ox or
sheep; because that is so the Lords, that a man cannot make of that a free will
offering, verse. 26. but, if it be any other beast, he may redeem it, and employ
it to what use he pleases, verse. 11, 12, 13. and verse. 27. So in sanctifying
an bouse to be holy to the Lord, it might be redeemed for private use without
sin; yea, with Gods allowance, verse. 14, 15. And the like allowance was given
for redeeming of fields and lands so sanctified also: verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
therefore no sin or Sacrilege to buy it for common use: only, in two cases, it
was not lawful;

1. If he redeemed it not before the Jubilee, as was before noted.

2. If he had sold it unto another man, verse. 20. If either of these were the
case, then, it was holy to the Lord as a field DEVOTED; that is, with Anathema,
or a Curse denounced by God.

This, God after repeateth, with some enlargements, verse. 28. to let us see,
that nothing devoted, under his curse, might be bought or sold. Howbeit, all
things confecrated, are not so devoted. Nothing could be devoted, but in the
cases above mentioned: and this was done, by God himself, not by the men that
gave it. For the fields were not to be given with an Anathema, denounced by the
Donors. But this was added by God, long after the Lands were out of their
possession, and not redeemed. And had the Donors first given it, with a curse,
they had made themselves for ever incapable of redeeming it; before the
Jubilee, which God himself not only allowed, but, in a manner, required them
to do; that so there might not be an utter alienation of it from the Tribe and
Family, to which it belonged by Divine lo:; against which God made a Law, Number.
36.7.

If it be now objected: But, Church Lands were given with a curse upon all that
should aliene them: This is soon answered. There is no warrant or example
hereof in Scripture: but, rather of the contrary. Sure we are, there is no
warrant for it in the place alleged, Lev. 27. 21 and 28. But, of this more, in
the next Chapter.

Secondly, proceed we from voluntary Consecrations, to things set apart by the
people, at Gods own command, for the Priests and Levites; which will further
clear this Point. It has been already showed, that there were by Gods
injunction 48 Cities with Suburbs of lands for the Priests and Levites set out
by the several Tribes of Israel. Here the Levites had houses to dwell in; and
lands for their Cattle.

Howbeit, I. The Levites might sell their houses, without sin: For, when God
made a Law for confining a man that sold a dwelling house in a walled City, to
redeem it within a year, after the sale; or else, it might not be redeemed till
the Jubilee, Lev. 25.29. He gave further liberty to the Levites, if any of them
sold an house, he might redeem it at any time, verse. 32. And if a man purchased
of the Levites, then the house that was sold should go out in the year of
Jubilee: for the houses of the Levites are their possession among the children
of Israel, says the Lord, verse. 33. This plainly implies and proves the
lawfulness of buying, and detaining, without sin, even the house of a Levite,
until it were either redeemed, or returned at the Jubilee. Therefore, it is not
Sacrilege to buy Church-Houses of Bishops and other Cathedral men; no more then
it was, in a Levite to sell; and in an ordinary person to buy a Levites house,
for private use.

2. As for the lands of the Levites: those I mean, which were annexed to those
Cities (for other they had none) they might not sell them, so long as their
Priesthood lasted. For so, God expressly, The field of the Suburbs of their
Cities, may not be sold, for it is their perpetual possession, verse. 34. Their
houses were their possession; but the Lands, their perpetual possession: that
is, to remain unalienated, so long as their office remained. Those Lands were
the same in effect, with our Parochial Glebes. The Levites could not be without
them for their cattle and goods; no more can faithful Ministers of the Gospel
be without these. And if it were expressly forbidden to aliene those, while the
Levites officiated in their places; it will nearly concern all who have
aliened. or shall aliene any of these, to consider his warrant from God (and
not from man only) to exempt him from the guilt of Sacrilege; or, at least, of
a very great sin.

Howbeit, when the Levitical Priesthood ended, the Levites might as lawfully
sell their lands, as their houses. Else, Joses (surnamed Barnabas) a Levite, of
the country of Cyprus, had (in the common opinion of the most) committed
Sacrilege; for that he (after that Priesthood was changed by Christ) having
land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the Apostles feet Act.
4.36, 37.
. Had this been Sacrilege, the Apostles would never have suffered such money so
near them, nor would they have accepted of such a gift, although given for
supply of the then persecuted Church of Believers. It was therefore no sin in
him: but is recorded by the Spirit of God as an eminent act of his Faith,
Piety, and Charity.

If any shall say, That the Land sold by Joses, was not Levitical, or
Church-land, but a temporal Estate: 1. This appears not from the Text: nor, 2.
is it asserted by any Expositor, in terminis. Indeed, Lyra In loc.
seems to incline somewhat this way, when he says, It was land that he had in
Cyprus, where he was born: the Levites, as he says, being then dispersed (but
not by reason of persecutions at home, as he conceiteth) and that he was to
have none in Judea, save what is before mentioned, which was wholly Levitical.
But this is but his own single opinion, to which we may oppose Tostatus In Lev.
27.4, 36.
, who plainly proves that neither in one place or other, might the Levites
enjoy any lands, but those about their Cities. And be it, that Joses had lands
at Cyprus. He was now at Jerusalem, which was distant from Cyprus 160 miles,
says Strabo Com. Geog. 1.14.
. Little likelihood therefore he should make a journey to Cyprus, to make a
sale there: and less, that he, at such a time, should get so large a revenue in
a strange Country. Wherefore, more probable is that of Gualter In Act. 4.
; that Joses, being a Levite at that time, and converted unto Christ, then so
much hated of that order, ( eo quod Christus illorum quaestui and honori
plurimus derogaret, upon this very point, that Christ did much derogate from
their gain and honor) did show so much charity and bounty to the Saints at
Heirusalem, as to sell his Land, and bestow it on them. Which Land, says
Alexander the Monk In Vit. Barnab.
, lay in Judea, not in Cyprus: nor could he, in the opinion even of Cornelius a
Lapide, have any in Judea, unless pascuales duntaxat ad alenda pecora, ut patet
Number. 35.3. only pastures for feeding cattle, as appears Number. 35. 3. which a
Jesuit would hardly be persuaded to acknowledge, were there any color of
probability to the contrary.

But let this Land be where and what it would, it is a clear case that it was a
Levites patrimony, and a Levite sold it; yet he that bought it, sinned not.
Yes, says one, he that bought it, might sin, although he that sold it, might
therein not sin, by reason of the necessity of the times. So Hezekiah did
lawfully in delivering the Treasure and Ornaments of the Temple to the King of
Assyria 2 King. 18.15, 16.
, to redeem himself and Gods people from his violence; but, who can suppose the
Assyrian less than sacrilegious in accepting and detaining them? To which, I
answer: If the one might lawfully give, the other could not sin in receiving
what was given. At best, it was but doing evil, in giving way to another to
sin, that good may come of it. Hezekiah cannot be excused from sin, if he do
that which makes another to sin. Therefore if Joses might lawfully sell, it
could not be sinful in the Purchaser to buy. Moreover, the Shewbread, in case
of extremity, was given to David and his Company, by Abimelech 1 Samuel 21 6.
; which Bread was not common, but hallowed; nor was it lawful for any but the
Priests to eat of it. Yet who will say, that David sinned therein? In
extremities, if God will have mercy. and not sacrifice; how can it be unlawful
to buy and possess what others are forced to sell? If there were no Buyers,
there can be no Sellers. And if there cannot be buying without sin, how can he
escape guilt that makes the sale? In cases of this nature, buying and selling
are relatives; one cannot be without the other: therefore they must both share
alike in guilt, if either be faulty; unless the Buyer compel the Seller by
violence to do out of fear, what he would not do without force.

Nor need this seem strange Doctrine, if we consider, either, first, the
Canon Law, whence the whole troop of Declaimers against such Sacrilege fetch
their Arguments: or, secondly, the practice of Bishops, etc. in this Kingdom:
or, thirdly, the Judgment of the Pope himself declared to Queen Mary, touching
those Lands which had been aliened from the Church by her Father and Brother.

1. The Canon Law has sundry strict restraints upon Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, not to give, exchange, or sell, and aliene the revenues
of the Church. Yet withal, in one of the strictest of those Canons, beginning
thus, Sine exceptione Decret. 2. Cause. 12. q. 2. c. 52 sine except.
, it is allowed to be done by a Bishop; if, for the profit of the Church; and,
with advice and consent of his whole Clergy: without which, they make such
giving, exchanging, or selling, to be Sacrilege. Hence many, not taking notice
of the Exceptions, run away with the former part; as if it were Sacrilege
simply and absolutely; though for the profit of the Church, and with consent;
as that famous Martin. de Aspilcueta Dr. of Navarre Tom. 1. Com. in Cap. non
lic. a. 12 q. (...) 7. and 8.
, shows.

Therefore, he distinguishes of Ecclesiastical Goods, of which some are more
solemnly consecrated with a special Benediction, and serve immediately for
Divine Worship. These cannot be profaned (that is, converted to common use) no
not by the Pope himself, while they continue in the form in, and use for which
they were consecrated. Other goods are consecrated by a sole Donation, and
disposal of them for the sustentation and maintaining either of men, or things
employed in, and about Divine Worship; without such a solemn Benediction. These
last may be alienated even by inferior Prelates; as, says he, not only
movables, but immoveables, daily are, so often as upon just cause, and with
due solemnity, venduntur laicis, vel alias commutantur cum eis; they be sold
to, or exchanged with Laymen: referring to the Canon last mentioned.

But, whitherto tends this? To show that, in the judgment even of those from
whom our sharpest Censurers draw most of their water to drive their Mill, all
alienation of Church Lands is not Sacrilege, upon this simple account, that
they are voluntarily consecrated, and given by men, as holy to God, or Christ:
for, if any thing may, in the judgment of the parties interessed in the
profit, be gained by it, it is no Sacrilege nor Sin, but lawful; and, daily
practiced by the greatest sticklers against what they please to call Sacrilege.
Yea, hence may be inferred further, that whether the alienation be
advantageous, or not, to the Church, it is no Sacrilege: for, if such
dedication and consecration, or hallowing of a thing afterward stolen,
purloyned, or aliened, makes such stealth, sale, or purchase to be Sacrilege,
as all seem to confess: then, the profit by, and consent to such a sale, cannot
extenuate, or take off the sinfulness of it. Therefore, however the alienating
thereof to disadvantage, and without consent, be an injury, (if not done by
lawful authority) yet it can be no Sacrilege: unless, men wilifreely
acknowledge that they do indeed judge such sales by their own damage, not by
the Dedications of the Lands unto God.

2. If it be considered what the Bishops have counseled, and joined in, with
the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, it will appear that the aliening of
such Lands is, in their judgments no Sacrilege. Witness, (1.)the Acts of
Parliament formerly mentioned 15. Ric. 2. 6..5
, made and enacted with consent of the Lords Spiritual, as they were called. In
one of which before cited, they make all Lands given to the Church without
License, to be forfeited, and to be seized by the chief Lord, or the King,
unless they procure a License, or sell away those Lands within a short time
therein prefixed and limited; which could not be, if it were Sacrilege, after
they be dedicated and hallowed, to sell, or aliene them. This shows plainly
that it was not lawful to receive or enjoy such lands without license; but,
lawful enough to sell them, if any such they had: therefore no sin, but a
lawful Act, to buy and purchase them for common uses, although (in their
language) given to God by men; and so, no Sacrilege. And, (2.) in 1.2. Phil.
and Mariae. The Bishops themselves then in Parliament, yea as well as the rest
of the Lords and Commons, prayed all the Clergy, then in Convocation,
Confirmation of all sales and alienations of Church Lands (as well of
Bishoprics as of Monasteries, etc.) before that time made, as appears by that
very Act of Confirmation it self, cap. 8.

To which may be added, that Bishops Lands especially, were (as before is
showed) declared in open Parliament (the Bishops being present) 25. Ed. 3.
Stat. dc Provis.
, to be given to maintain their State and Magnificence, as Lords, with special
reference to State-employments. For thus, says the Statute, was this Church
founded in the State of Prelacy, for that the Kings were wont to have the
greatest part of their Counsel, for the safeguard of the Realm, when they had
need of the said Prelates and Clerks so advanced. All which Civil Employment in
State Affairs (for which they were advanced so high) is wholly taken off, by
special Act of Parliament, with the Royal Assent. Yea, their very Functions and
Offices, 17. car. 1. cap. 28.
as to all. Jurisdiction, are by the same King and Parliament, plucked up the
roots, 17. Car. I. cap. II. Their Lands then, must needs Eschete and revert to
the Commonwealth; (the proper Heirs of the first Founders and Donors, being
dead many ages agone, and their memory perished from off the earth) and
therefore now as lawfully sold, as heretofore in the case of Mortmain, Lands
(not by license received) might be seized and alienated by the chief Lord of
the Fee, or by the King; and, converted to what uses they pleased. Of which,
before.

3. If we look into the judgment and resolution of the Pope himself in this
case, we shall find that he durst not to damn those of the Laity of the last
age, as guilty of Sacrilege, that were possessed of Church Lands after the
dissolutions made by Hen. 8. and his Son, Edward the sixth. For Queen Mary (one
of the Popes great Zealots) after she was possessed of the English Crown,
desired the resolution of the Pope, whether she were not bound in Conscience,
to do her utmost that those Revenues might be restored to the Church?

To this, the Pope returned an answer in writing (2o Mariae) the Original
whereof (says Dr. Hackwel) Answ. to Dr. Carriers Letter, p. 248.
, was among other remarkable remembrances of that time, preserved in the Office
of the Kings Papers; to let her know, that there was no cause for restoring
those Lands to the Church again; and gives sundry reasons of that his
resolution, which will ask some time to transcribe. Howbeit, because this is
not vulgarly known, yet of use, I shall (as Dr. Haclwel has led the way) set
down the Popes own words, first in Latin, and afterward in English: that it
may appear that there is not, in the judgment of the Pope himself, any
Sacrilege in the alienation of those Revenues. Which, I here mention, not as
placing confidence in the Popes opinions; but as retorting upon the late
Writers against Sacrilege, the opinion of them, who were the first Founders of
the Doctrines delivered by these: whereby they may yet further see on what
sandy foundations their Discourses of Sacrilege, are built.

The Judgment of Julius 3. sent in Writing to Queen Mary, in the year 1554.

ANNO DOMINI, 1554.
Quod omnes qui justo titulo juxt a Leges hujus Regni pro tempore existentes,
See Doctor Hackwel's Answ to Carrier, cap. 2. page 249, 250, etc.
habent aliquas possessiones, terras, sive tenementa Monasteriorum, Priortuum,
Episcopatuum, Collegiorum, Cantariarum, Obituum, etc. sive eadem pecumis suis
perquisiverunt, sive per Donationem, vel per mutationem, sive alio modo
legitimo quocunque, in sua possessione hujusmodi remanere possint, and valiant,
and easdem suas possessiones ratas and confirmatas sibi habere, ex
confirmatione and dispensatione sedis Apostolicae.

Causae and Rations quare hujusmodi dispensationes, cum honor and conscientia
recte concedi possint.

1. Status Coronae hujus Regni been sustineri non potest, ut cum honor regat
and gubernet, si hujusmodi possessiones ab illa separentur, quod hodie maxima
pars possessionum Coronae, sit ex hujusmodi terris and possessionibus.

2. Complurimi homines pecuniis suis acquisiverunt ingentes hujusmodi terrarum
portiones, a Serenissimis Regibus Henrico VIII, and Edwardo VI. qui per suas
Literas Patentes easdem Terras warrantizarunt, quibus terris and
possessionibus, si possessores bujusmodi nunc privarentur, Rexteneretur
rependere pecunias omnes in hac part expositas, quae in tantarum summarum vim
and molem sese extenderent, ut a Corona difficillime restitai possent.

3. Magnates and Nobiles hujus Regni, quorum plerique vendiderunt and
alienaverunt antiquas suas haereditarias possessiones, ut has novas obtinerent,
and, in suo statu vivere non possunt, si hujusmodi possessiones abillis
auferantur.

4. Acquisitores vel possessores hujusmodi terrarum and possessionum, propterea
quod easdem habuerunt ex justo titulo, juxta ordinem Regum hujus Regni,
habebant, and etiamnum habent bonam fidem in illis obtinendis.

5. Possessio hujusmodi terrarum adeo est communis cuique statui, and ordini
hominum, Civitatibusque, Collegiis, Incorporationibus, ut si ab illis
tollantur, and auferantur, subitam quandam metamorphosin singulorum statuum,
and magnam Ordinis confusionem in universo regno hinc inde sequi necesse sit.

6. Cum bona and possessiones Ecclesiae ex authoritare Canonum, pro redemptione
Captivorum alienari possint, Idque per illam Ecclesiam solam, ad quam illae
possessiones pertinebant, aequum est dispensari pro continuatione possessionis
jam acquisitae, propter tantum bonum publicae concordiae and unitatis
Ecclesiae, ac preservatione istius status, tam in corpore quam in anima.

In English, thus:

That all such as by just Title according to the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, for the time being, have any posseisions, Lands, or Tenements lately
belonging to Monasteries, Priories, Bishoprics, Colleges, Chantries, Obits,
etc. whether they have purchased them for their money, or are come to possess
them by gift, grant, exchange, or by any other legal means whatsoever, may
retain and keep the same in their possessions, and have the same ratified and
established unto them by the confirmation and dispensation of the Sea
Apostolic.

Causes and Reasons why such Dispensations may be justly granted with honor,
and conscience.

1. The State of the Crown of this Kingdom cannot well be sustained to govern
and rule with honor, if such possessions be taken from it: for, at this day,
the greatest part of the possessions of the Crown, consists of such Lands and
possessions.

2. Very many men have with their moneys bought and purchased great portions of
those Lands, from the most excellent Kings, Henry the VIII. and Edward the VI.
who, by their Letters Patents have warranted the same: of which Lands and
possessions, if the Owners should now be dispossessed, the King should be bound
to repay unto them all their money; which would arise to such an huge Mass,
that it would be a very hard matter for the Crown to restore it.

3. The Nobles and Gentry of this Realm, most of whom have sold and alienated
their ancient inheritances, to buy these new, cannot live according to their
degrees, if these possessions should be taken from them.

4. The purchasers, or Owners of such Lands and possessions, inasmuch as they
came to them by just Title, according to the Ordinance of the Kings of this
Kingdom, have held and do still hold a good and justifiable course in obtaining
of them.

5. The enjoying of such Lands and possessions, is so common unto every state
and condition of men, Cities, Colleges, and Incorporations, that if the same be
taken from them, there will necessarily follow thereupon throughout the
Kingdom, a sudden change and confusion of all Orders and Degrees.

6. Seeing the goods and possessions of the Church, even by the authority of
the Canon Laws, may be aliened for the redemption of Captives, and that the
same may be done by that Church only, to whom such possessions do belong: It
is fit and reasonable that such dispensations should be granted for continuing
of possession already gotten, for so great a good of public concord Mark this
well.
, and unity of the Church, and preservation of this State, as well in body as
in soul.

Lo, here a Pope (more concerned in such alienations from the Church by others,
than our sour Masters) is so far from making the selling, or purchasing of
such Lands to be Sacrilege, that he gives many weighty reasons against the
restoring of them, and for warranting the holding of them. As for his addition,
that men should take his confirmation and dispensation for it, (less than which
a Pope could not propose,) we leave to them, that hold that needful.

But, it is considently affirmed that Dr. Burges (before he was engaged Object.
in buying Bishops Lands) openly acknowledged at the Bar of the House of
Commons in Parliament, in his Answer May 11. 1641.
to Dr. Hackets Speech, then and there (in the Names of all Deans and Chapters)
made for preventing the alienation of Cathedral Lands; That, to take away those
from the Church, is Sacrilege; or words to that effect: concluding with the
utter unlawfulness to convert such endowments to any private persons profit
Hist of the Church. Cent 17. Lib. 11. P. 179.
.

So indeed the novel flashy Church-Historian, upon hearsay only, has
reported him; of whom Dr. Heylin in his Animadvers. on that Hist. p. 225. thus:
If it once be made a fame, it shall pass for a truth, and as a truth find place
with our Authors History, though the greatest falsehood.

Tam facilis in mendaciis fides, ut quicquid fama liceat fingere, illi esset
libenter audire Minut. Foelix.
. But this is an unjust Aspersion: Indeed Dr. Burges did declare a concurrence
with Dr. Hacket, in admitting the alienation of any thing, settled by Divine
Right upon the Church, to be Sacrilege: but, nothing else. It was far from him
to grant, that all which Cathedral men enjoyed, was theirs by Divine Right; or,
to admit, that it was Sacrilege, to aliene any other thing that was theirs, not
by Divine Right.

He intended no more in that Answer, than what he had long before An. 1625.
published, in a Preface to a little Tract of Personal Tithes, where he thus
expresses himself: To that Tenet ( viz. that Tithes are due, jure divino) I
subscribe affirmatively, ex animo. But, with Cautions. 1. Tithes (I say not
ought else) are due by Divine Right to Ministers of the Gospel. 2. I never was,
nor (I think) ever shall be of that opinion, that all Tithes within such or
such a Circuit of ground, now by positive Law made but one Parish, are
absolutely and without all exception, due by Divine Right to the person of one
single Incumbent there: but, to the Church Or rather to christ, her Lord, and,
thereby to her.
, in whose Name he receives them.



Had he granted more, he had deviated from the truth. And could it be proved by
an hundred witnesses, that he fully concurred with Dr. Hacket, in this point:
and, that sundry who then heard him, so understood him; yet, this cannot make
Sacrilege to be, in the true nature of it, of larger extent then it is indeed:
and therefore if he did so speak, he must, and does renounce it, as an error.

But, is it not said, Numb. 16. after Korah and his associates were so object.
dreadfully destroyed, for making and using Censers to burn incense withal;
that God commanded Moses to speak to Eleazer the son of Aaron the Priest, that
he take up the Censers out of the burning, (and scatter thou the fire yonder)
for they are hallowed. The Censers of these sinners, against their own souls,
let them make them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: for they offered
them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed? verse. 37, 38.

Out of which text, many things may be observed, viz. Answ.


First, that men may offer some things before the Lord, and to him, which he
has not commanded.

Secondly, that such things, so offered, are hallowed; how wicked soever they
be that offer them.

Thirdly, that upon such offering, and hallowing of them, they may not be
employed to any use, but what is holy and sacred.

Fourthly, that therefore to employ them otherwise, is Sacrilege.

This carries in it a show at least of greater weight than all that is urged by
most of those that would make Sacrilege as wide as the Canonists and Schoolmen
do. But it is yet capable of an Answer sufficient to satisfy impartial men.
For,

1. What here is first observed from that text, is denied: because, the text
holds out no such thing. For, albeit Korah and his company sinned greatly in
taking on them to oppose Moses and Aaron; yet their Offering of Incense at that
time, was not without some command: for Moses thus spoke unto them, before they
attempted any such matter: This do, take you Censers, Korah, and all his
company, and put fire therein, and put incense in them before the Lord to
morrow, verse. 6, 7. And, as if this were not enough, he doubleth the same
injunction, verse. 16, 17. whereupon it is said, verse. 18. And they took every
man his Censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood in
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, with Moses and Aaron.

This, Moses enjoined; not, as approving what they were to do; but as bringing
them to the trial, whether they had not sinned very hainously against God, in
charging Moses and Aaron, with taking too much upon them; upon pretense that
all the congregation were every one of them holy; that is, as fit as Aaron to
do that service which he did before the Lord. They therefore were to offer
incense, Aaron also should offer too: and then the Lord, by the issue, would
show who were his, and who was holy; and would cause him whom be chose, to come
near to him, as approving of him and his service, and rejecting and punishing
the rest, who were but usurpers, Therefore, there was a command, for that act,
at that time, for that end.

Again, these Censers were not of Korah's own making or dedicating, but
belonged to the Tabernacle. For, it cannot be imagined they could be made in
such a sudden; and, in such a seditious hurry: for they were to use them, the
very next day after the command given; which was, not to make; but, to take
every man his Censer. There were many Censers belonging to the Altar Numb. 4.
12.
The sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abibu, took either of them his Censer, when they
offered strange fire Lev. 10.1.
. Soloman, when he built the Temple, and made many Vessels and Instruments;
amoug them, he made Censers of pure gold 1 Kin. 7. 50.
, which before were of brass how many, is not certain; but, in probability, for
every Priest, one. This may appear by the abuse of 70 of them at once by the
ancients of Israel (which were all Priests Hicron. in Ezekiel. 3. vulg. Gloss,
aliique
) and by Jaazaniab Ezekiel. S. 1 1.
(the chief Priest Interlin. Gloss.
who is supposed to be the Ringleader of the rest. Therefore every Priest had
his Censer to offer in, when his turn came about.

So that, these Censers were not Vessels offered to the Lord by Korah and the
rest of those Conspirators, as a free will Offering, without a command; but,
made and hallowed by Moses, for the use of the Altar, according to the pattern
showed to him in the Mount Exodus 25. 40.
.

Therefore, that Collection, that men may offer, and God accept, some things
not commanded, has no sooting here.

2. The next inference from the same text, that such things so offered, are
hallowed, how wicked soever the Offerers be, will also now fall to the ground.
For, if those Censers were of Gods own appointment, then it follows not, that
they were hallowed upon the account of a freeOffering without a command. Those
Censers were hallowed before that time wherein they thus mutined: so the text,
verse. 38. They offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed. All
the Priests offered incense in their turns; which they could not do, without
their Censers. Here then, is no argument to make good the second Observation or
Collection from the text in hand. That which misled that great Tostaius herein,
was the Addition of the vulgar Latin Translation at the end of verse. 37. where
it is said, the Censers were hallowed in mortibus peccatorum, in the death of
those sinners: which Addition is a gross corruption of the Text.

3. As to the third, viz. that which is once offered, and thereby hallowed, may
not be employed to common, but only to holy uses, will be more proper for the
next Chapter; therefore it shall be but briefly touched here. We must
distinguish both of things offered, and of their hallowing thereupon. 1. Some
things are offered voluntarily, some by command: some are offered to be made
use of in the very worship of God at the Altar; as, the tongs, the snuffers,
censers, etc. others were to be employed in more remote service; as the
hangings for the Court of the Tabernacle, etc. the Curtains of Goats hair for
the Tent over the Tabernacle; etc. The offerings of the first sort are so
hallowed, that they must not be profaned by sale, or purchase to a common use:
but those of the later, may, when there is an end of their use. We see this in
not only the bangings of the Court, and the Curtains, but in all the holy
vessels, together with the Tabernacle it self.

For, so soon as Solomon had finished the Temple at Jerusalem, the Priests
took up the Ark, and brought it up out of the City of David; and, with it, the
Tabernacle, of the Congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the
Tabernacle, even those did the Priests and the Levites bring up 1 King. 8. 3, 4.
. But, when the Priests brought in the Ark of the Covenant unto his place, into
the Oracle of the house to the most holy place, even under the wings of the
Cherubims, within the Temple; neither the Tabernacle, nor vessels, nor ought
else, was brought into the Temple, save only the staves of the Ark; which
staves they drew out, so as the ends of them might be seen within the Holy
place, but not without it Verse. 6, 7, 8.
. The Tabernacle, and most of the things belonging to it, were now of no longer
use: no more were the old vessels: for Solomon had made all new 1 King. 7. 48,
etc.
. Now let some of our severe Censurers inquire, and tell us what uses the
Tabernacle, the Curtains, the Vessels, were put unto: (for, to the use of the
Temple they were no longer employed) and then we shall be able to say more to
the fourth deduction, viz.

4. That, to employ to common uses, things once offered and hallowed, is
Sacrilege. This inference is no way deduceable from Number. 16. for that there,
the Text speaks of hallowed things, which were of use to cover the Altar from
the rain and storms, while that Altar was used: and, of such things as
originally were of Gods own appointment, and his own goods (the Censers) abused
by Korah. To have diverted these to other uses, before the building of the
Temple, had been Sacrilege. But, after the Temple was built, the Ark put into
his place in the Temple; the Tabernacle, old Altar, and vessels were of no
longer use, nor longer employed in the worship of God; let them that can, prove
the laying them aside and employing them to other uses, to be Sacrilege in
Solomon. And, could this be demonstrated, yet were it nothing, to prove the
alienating of Cathedral Lands to be Sacrilege, they being not (as those last
spoken of) appointed and commanded of God, nor ever so hallowed: but, the
offerings and gifts of men without warrant from God, or acceptance with him. If
Antagonists allege Luther, Calvin, Knox, Sir Edward Coke, etc. to prove that
such Church Lands cannot be aliened from the Church without Sacrilege; this
will be no concluding argument, unless they prove it by Scripture; which they
have not done. They, being but men, we may not swear in verba Magistri: Truth
is the friend we must own before, yea, against all other. They that urge these
worthy Authors against us, can, and do despise and scorn them in other things:
they allege them to serve their own turns, not to honor the Authors: nor will
be concluded by what those men say against them.

But, it is happened to some of our rash Censurers, as once to those Oxen, of
whom Columella De Re rustic. lib. 2.
notes, that, feeding upon some rank grounds, they ran mad with the fatness of
their Pasture.

This might suffice, were it not ever too true of too many, Non persuadebis
etiam si persuaseris. Thou shall never bring me over to thine opinion, although
by reason thou sufficiently convince me. Therefore, some Answers must now be
given to such plausible Objections as seem to carry any strength, or color of
reason in them, against the former Positions, and not before obviated, or
prevented.

CHAP. IV.
Answers to such Objections and Arguments as are brought to prove the Sale of
Cathedral Lands to be Sacrilege, not before answered.

ANd here, exspect not Answers to any bare Magistral Assertions of men of
highest rank and esteem, whether Fathers, Schoolmen, or Protestant Divines of
greatest note in the Church; be the allegations out of them never so many,
plausible, or peremptory; unless they bring Scripture, or sound Arguments
thence, to back, and confirm them. Nor shall it move, if others please to decry
this Treatise, with, and by the multitude and noise of great Names that have
declared to the contrary: or to censure it as they please upon such a weak
foundation. Let every such Opponent take that to themselves, which sometimes
Austin wrote to those that read his Books de Trinitate Lib. 3. in Prooem.
, Noli meas literas ex tua opinione, vel contentione, sed ex Divina Lectione
vel in concussa ratione corrigere.

1. It is objected, That Bishops were Ministers too, and preached, as well
Object. 1.
as others; and were moreover of great use, for the good Government of the
Church, and support of the truth, which since their Ejections, has extremely
suffered. Therefore, as Ministers (at least) they and their means should be
continued.

Answ. Admitting (but not granting) all this to betrue: yet what Answ.
they really did as Ministers, they might have done still. It was their usurped
Dignity, not their Evangalical Ministry, that is taken from them. Now, their
Lands were given and fixed (as is before showed) to their elated Episcopacy, as
Barons and Peers in Parliament; not to their Ministry: to their state of
Prelacy, not to their Presbytery, as themselves diftinguish this from the
other. If any of them had (as very few of them had) a mind to preach the
Gospel, (as that learned Archbishop Usher did, so long as he was able, and was
therefore encouraged while he lived, and honored being dead) they had their
liberty so to do; notwithstanding the abolishing of their Episcopal Authority.
Perhaps they cannot stoop so low as to ascend a Pulpit, as ordinary Parsons or
Vicars: let this lie upon their own account, and not be charged on the State.
Others, as good, have done otherwise. Miles Coverdale, made Bishop of Exeter by
Edw. 6. and after condemned to the fire, says Isaacson, (from which he was
saved by mediation of the King of Denmark, yet banished) in Queen Mary's time;
after his return, in Queen Elizabeth's reign, was content to accept of the
Parsonage of St. Magnus London, (not clearly worth 100 l. per annum, when it
was at the best) and to spend the rest of his days in preaching there.

But too many of our late Bishops were so far from preaching, while their
authority lasted, that they did their utmost not only to decry Preaching, but
to advance Profanation of the Lords Day, which they should have spent in
Preaching, and other Divine Offices of the Day. No wonder, therefore, if now
they refuse to preach.

Was not King James his authority abused, to tolerate sports upon the Lords
Day; to which purpose, a Book was compiled by a Bishop (now nameless, because
dead) to justify that Profanation; and all Ministers commanded to publish it,
to make them thereby to eat their own Preaching? And did not the succeeding
Bishops in King Charles I. his reign, move, and procure the reviving of that
Book, causing it, by his Authority, to be reprinted, with a stricter command
for the publishing of it? Yea, some of them would needs have those sports acted
in their own sight, and rewarded the grace-less Actors. Afterward, strict
enquiries were made in their Visitations, whether every Minister had read and
published it to their Congregations in their several Churches, as was then
enjoined: and, such as had not done it, were either punished, or severely
threatened with Suspension.

Some of them also can tell by whose means preaching was prohibited in the
afternoons of the Lords Days, and the Minister, in room thereof, was to ask the
Children a few Questions (if he would) in the common Catechism: but, if he
expounded them, this was interpreted to be preaching, and an affront to
Authority. Why? but because such Expositions held the people too long from
their sports.

Not content with this, it was the great industry and contrivance of some of
them yet alive, to put down all Lectures on weekdays also. For effecting
whereof, an Order was procured from his late Majesty, that whosoever would
preach a Lecture on the weekday, he must first, read the Book of Common Prayer
in his Surplice and Hood of his Degree, (although he then preached not in his
own Church, but elsewhere casually at the request of a friend:) and, not none
have been brought into the High Commission-court, and there canonically
admonished, for refusing so to do.

Moreover, how were conformable Ministers (how able, pious and peaceable
soever) scorned and jeered as Praters, (not Preachers) for their often
preaching! Was it not piacular for any Animalculum praedicabile, or Preaching
Cox-comb, (as Dr. L. styled Bishop Usher himself, for his frequent preaching)
that is, for any saithful Minister to preach twice a day? which, by another
Bishop, was in scgff, therefore likened to Virgils Cow, that ( bis venit ad
mulctram) came twice a day to the Pail.

And as for the Bishops own preaching (especially at last, after Archbishop
Land designed to re-gain all those places and offices of Trust, Power, and
Judicature in the Commonwealth, which the Popish Bishops in former ages held)
it became an unpardonable offense to mind them (publicly, at least) of their
duty in preaching, which many of them had laid aside, as too mean for their
greatness, or at least as a thing unnecessary, and inconsistent with their more
weighty Affairs, as they pleased to call those avocations.

For this, Dr. Burges preaching a Sermon in Latin, to the London-Ministers,
Anno 1635.
in Alphage Church, near Sion College, (by appointment of the Governors
thereof) was brought into the High Commissioncourt, and threatened with both
Deprivation, and Degradation, beside fine and imprisonment. The main quarrel
was, his over-pressing (as it was then interpreted) of all, to diligence in
preaching. And among other Arguments, his urging what had been anciently
required even of Bishops themselves. For, after minding them of the Third part
of the H mily against the peril of ldolatry, wherein it is said, of the
Primitive Bishops, That they were preaching Bishops, more often seen in
Pulpits, than in Princes Palaces; more often occupied in his Legacy, who said,
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel, than in the Ambassages of
Princes:

herecited an old Canon of the sixth general Council in Trulle, with Zonaras
his Note upon it; which Canon enjoined Bishops to preach often; at least every
Lords Day, or to be Canononically admonished: whereupon, if they reformed not,
it was further ordained that they should be excommunicated, or deposed.

Hereupon Articles were exhibited against him, chiefly, for that he seemed to
tax and accuse diverse Prelates, and Reverend Bishops of this Kingdom, for
neglecting to preach often: and for alleging to that purpose, that the autient
bishops were frequent and diligent Preachers; quoting an old Canon, that every
Bishop should preach every Sunday; and, if negligent herein, he should be
admonished: upon which, if he reformed not, he was to be excommunicated, or
deposed: without considering their many and weighty Affairs.

Whether he were not a Bishop (yet living) that, in scorn, calls Christ's
Ordinance of Preaching, that most adored piece of Gods service Church Lands not
to be sold, page 32.
, (which he intimate; thereby to be idolized by all, that press, use, or
frequent it) himself can best tell. But be he who he will, God will one day
make him know, (what now he pretends to be ignorant of) That preaching is the
chief work of a Bishop; and, that this is the chiefreason why he is to receive
Double honor 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.
.

Yea, his own great witness, Calvin, in the same Book De nices. reform. Eccl.
, quoted by that Concic-Mastix Page 16.
, will tell him thus much: Nemo ex Christi praescripto, Episcopi aut Pastoris
nomen vendicare sibi potest, qui gregem suum non pascat verbo Domini: No man,
by the prescript of Christ, can challenge to himself the name of a Bishop or
Pastor, who feeds not his flock with the Word of the Lord.

What need many words? was Timothy a Bishop? had not he charge to govern 1 Timothy
32 and passin.
? Yet Paul conjureth this Bishop to preach: I charge thee before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and
his Kingdom, Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exho t, with all long suffering and Doctrine 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
.

But perhaps Timothy was a young man: and so might better do it: ours are old,
and so, unable to persorm it; why then not discharged, as well as the Levites,
at fifty years of age? Answ. St. Paul was an old man too, even Paul the aged
Philem. 9
: yet, says he, of himself, A necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me if
I preach not the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 16.
, even when he had the care of more Churches upon him, as an Apostle, than all
our Bishops set together 2 Cor. 11 28.
. And as for the Levites, their service required more bodily strength, in
killing and laying upon the Altar, and there, burning so many fat bullocks
every day, beside other duties of bearing the Ark, etc. none of which is laid
upon our Bishops, who, if they have been good Stewards, are well stored with an
old stock, and, can bring forth out of their Trcasury things both new and old,
as becomes wise Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 13. 52.
, with much more ease, gravity, authority than when younger men. Therefore the
case of the Levites, and theirs is not alike. That good old Robert Grosthead,
sometimes Bishop of Lincoln, in the days of Henry 3. was far from such opinion,
when in a Letter to Pope Innocent 4. he not only refused to admit his Nephew
(or Bastard) to be a Prebend of Lincoln, as the Pope had commanded, (finding
him unfit to preach) but tells the Pope to his head, Post peccatum Luciferi,
etc. there is not, cannot be a sin so repugnant to the Doctrine of the Apostles
and holy Scriptures, nor to Christ himself more hateful and abominable, than to
set over his flock ignorant or idol Shepherds, to kill and destroy the Souls of
Christ's sheep, by defrauding them of the Pastoral Office and Ministry Matthew.
Paris ad Ann. 1353.


And as our late Bishops grew not only negligent in the proper and chief work
of the Ministry, I mean Preacbing, (here and there, one or two black Swans
excepted:) so did they as much overlash and become eccentrick in the other
extreme, by being too far engaged in Civils. And, if at any time they were
excluded the Parliament, or not honored in it to their minds, both Parliament
and King, and all should hear of it on both ears. For so had their Predecessors
done before.

One of their zealous sticklers remembers them out of Mr. Seldom, Dr. Heylin
Animadv. on Hist. of Church, page 70.
that at a Parliament at Northhampton, under Hen. 2. the Bishops thus
challenged their Peerage (of the Lords temporal.) Non sedemus hic Episcopi, sed
Barons: Nos Barons, Vos Barons: Pares hic fumus seld. Tit. Hon. part. 2. c.
5.
. We sit not here as Bishops, but as Barons: We are Barons, and You are Barons;
here we are Peers, or equal with you.

And so, says the same Author, did John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury (as
he remembers) having fallen into the displeasure of King Edward 3. and being
denied entrance into the House of Peers, made his protest, that he was Primus
Par regni, the first or chief Peer of the Realm, and therefore not to be
excluded, etc. But, if for this high perking, their Lordships, together with
all jurisdiction, be (as it is) legally taken from them; and they refuse or
neglect the chiefpart of their Office, namely, Preaching: they may thank
themselves, if the double Honor of maintenance be withdrawn also.

2. It is objected further, That admitting they were justly ejected, yet so
many direful curses have been denounced against all such as should aliene,
sell, purchase, or employ those Lands to other uses, that it may justly make
any man afraid to meddle with them.

To this a short answer may sussice. Where God bids curse, (as in Deuteronomy. 27.)
there is cause to fear cursing. But here it will be replied: Grant this, and I
warrant you we shall reach you. Does not one of those curses run thus Deuteronomy. 27.
17.
; Cursed be he that removes his Neighbors Landmark: and all the people shall
say, Amen? Here God and man join together in cursing him that shall remove but
a Landmark: how heavy then, will the curse be upon him that removes, or
takes away the Land it self! To this, it is answered, that the Lord speaks of
Land set out by himself, by Divine Lot; and so, he never set out any to the
Levites themselves (as he did to the other Tribes,) much less to Bishops, whom
he never so endowed; of which so much has been said before, as no more shall
be added here. To return, therefore. If an Elijah 1 King. 1. 10, and 12.
, an Elisha 2 King. 2. 23.
, a David Psa. 109.
, a Peter Act. 8. 20.
, acted by Gods Spirit, shall denounce a curse; yea, if a Darius, an Heathen,
shall curse all Kings and people that destroy Gods own Temple at Jerusalem
Nch. 6.2.
, while God was pleased to place his Name there, woe to such as fall under it.
All that were so cursed, became accordingly the people of Gods curse Isa. 34.5.
, because such curses shall surely take effect: God himself owns them, and will
accomplish them.

But, as the bird by wandering, and the swallow by flying, (escape the Nets and
Snares, set by the Fowler to take them) so the causeless curse shall not come
Pro. 26.27
That Providence that preserves the Sparrow from falling to the ground Mar.
10.25.
, till God will have it fall; let the Fowler do what he can: does likewise so
overruled a causeless curse, that it shall never reach him against whom it is
denounced. Yea, God blesses the more, where wicked men belch out most curses
Psa. 109.28.
. Let them then be afraid of such curses, who find a warrant from God for such
cursing. The curses that these men seek to fright us withal, are like that of
Goliath, who cursed David by his Gods 1 Samuel 17.43.
, yet was slain by David notwithstanding his cursing. A cursed people is ever a
cursing generation Romans 3.17.
: and, a cursing generation is ever an accursed people Genesis 27.29.
or children of the curse 2 Pet. 2.14.
.

Who set them on work, or gave them warrant, to curse? Even he who set on
Sbimei to curse David: not God, as David feared; but the Devil, by his Imp
Ahitophel, as David afterward plainly discovered: that 109th Psalm being
chiefly bent against Ahitophel, of whose cursing we never read, but that, by
the mouth of Shimei, when David was in greatest distress, and Ahitophel, his
chief Counselor, joined to Absalom now David's enemy. David nevertheless fared
not the worse for their cursing, because his Prayer to God was, Let them curse,
but bless thou: and, in the issue, the Lord requited good for that cursing 2 Samuel 16.13.
. For, however in David's time Shimei felt not the curse: yet, it came home to
him with a witness, under Solomon 1 King. (...).44.
. And as for Ahitophel, as he loved cursing, so it came unto him. As he
clothed himself with cursing, like as with a Garment which covers him, so it
came into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, etc. witness his
hanging of himself almost immediately after.

And verily, those busy Cursers among the Prelacy, have drawn the effect of
their cursing upon themselves and their successors; even upon the Bishops, and
the rest of the Cathedral Prelacy, many hundred years after those first
Anathemists mouths were so full of cursing and bitterness. Let therefore such
as now again please themselves in frighting others with those curses, beware
they meet not with some further share thereof themselves; and, that the tail of
that storm, light not upon their heads, who now so groundlesly apply them to
their Brethren, it being no other (so used) but an Engine of Antichrist, forged
in Hell.

But, the most generally taking Objection is this: Be it that Bishops be justly
cashiered, their-lands forfeited, and justly taken from them by the Object. 3.
Parliament: yet generally all sound Divines hold that those lands (although at
first superfluously, or superstitiously given) being once given and dedicated
to God, may not be aliened, sold, or diverted to any secular, or private use;
but, continued for the maintenance of the true worship of God, and for their
better encouragement who are employed in the Ministry: or for some other
public use.

This Objection, taking with many of note and eminency in the Church, Answ.
is thought to be unanswerable: yet is it capable of a satisfactory answer, to
prudent and impartial men. For,

1. This opinion is not founded on any Scripture, but upon that commonly
received Maxim transferred from hand to hand, without due examination, which
was first cast in the Popes Mint; Semel Dicatum Deo, non est ad humanos usus
ulterius transferendum. Which, wherein, and how far it holds, has been above
declared, and needs not to be repeated. Things once given to God by his
command, warrant, or approbation, may not be aliened to other uses, while the
use appointed of God continues: But, this holds not in ought else that men
pretend, or say they give to God. As in persons, so in things, such only as
the Lord chooses, are accepted, and holy Numb. 16.7.
, let them say, or think what they will to the contrary. The vilest wretch that
is, says, He gives his Soul to God, at least in his last Will. Does this make
him accepted, or holy? No, of things in themselves good, God will not accept
every thing, from every man. David was an holy man, had an honorable and holy
design to build God an house: and Nathan thought he did very well in it, and
therefore said unto him, Go and do all that is in thy hea t, for the Lord is
with thee Sam. 7. 3.
. Yet David and Nathan were both mistaken herein.

Wherefore, to pin Lands upon God, and to proclaim this, because once
pretendedly given to him, perhaps by an Adulterer, a Murderer, a Parricide,
etc. that is made to believe he is damned, if he give not largely to the
Church; and so, gives rather out of fear, than of a willing mind, is, as the
Proverb says, to reckon without the Host: and to put that upon God which he
will not own. It is no better then those gifts of the Israelites in the absence
of Moses, pretended to be offered to God, although in a carnal way (as most of
the gifts now spoken of, by all the Deeds and Instruments of the Donors, appear
to be) when they brake off the golden earrings which were on their ears, and
brought them unto Aaron to make them gods to go before them Exodus 23. 3.
. They pretended they were for God, and what Aaron made, was but to please
their eye by some visible representation of the invisible God, (expressly
against the second Commandment but newly given them:) yet how far these gifts
were from acceptance, or made holy because (as they thought) they had given
them to God; or, from being reserved for holy uses, was manifest by the sad
punishment of that their great folly and wickedness. And what Lawyers say of
gifts to the Church: Quod Ecclefae datur, Deo datur; what is given to the
Church, is given to God, is not spoken in a Theological sense; but only to
show the sense and construction of our municipal Laws; and what such are, in
the account of the Law of the Nation; or rather, of some Levites: not, of Gods
Law.

2. It is apparent that those gifts to Bishops, and other Cathedral men, were
to be no longer continued (had they been theirs by Divine Right) then the
Offices for, and to which they were given, remained useful. If Levi might hold
his no longer, why should Bishops and others, of the same association? Datur
beneficium propter officium. Office and Benefice are relatives; like
Hippocrates Twins, they live and die together. The Suburbs of the forty eight
Cities, were no longer continued by God to holy uses: yet, Tithes were: and
given by God to his Ministers of the Gospel. No reason therefore to conclude
against employing holy things to common uses, when God himself reserved not the
Levites Lands to godly Ministers; but only his own inheritance, the Tithes.
There is a woe to those that call good evil, as well as to those, that call evil
good Isay 5.20.
. Indeed, if these Lands had still continued as a common Revenue to all the
Clergy, or Ministers, as one entire Corporation, there had been some color for
the continuation of them to the rest, when Bishops and Cathedral men were laid
aside. But when (at the instance, and by the laboring of the Bishops
themselves, and their partners) every Order had their several shares
apportioned and laid out unto them, (so as the other could no longer make the
least claim thereto, without coveting what was their neighbors;) the Lands of
Cathedral men cannot be in Law, or Equity, justly required to go to Parochial
Ministers: but, it is in the free dispose of those to whom by Law they do
eschete, by the total laying aside of their former owners and offices, to do
what they will with them, as their own.

3. When the vastness of the revenue, or unlawful procuring of it, is a wrong
to the Commonwealth, or to any particular Family, which God requires not,
especially in times of peace and plenty, to be ruined to enrich him, or his
MInisters: this is not a Dedication that God will own, but rather a robbing of
others of what is more properly their right: and, an abusing of God, by
fathering upon him the acceptance of that, which the Donors ought not so to
have given to him (who hates robbery for burni-offerings Isay 1.8
;) and, a profaning of his Name, by teaching men to take that for a warrant, to
give that, which is not theirs so to give. That position therefore now urged,
if taken in the full Latitude without bounds, would be of dangerous consequence
to such as swallow it, and act upon it.

4. Things voluntarily given, according to Gods own Rules and Directions, to
warrant the gift, cannot be aliened from the use to which he has appointed
them, so long as the use continues. If such things have, by the corruptions of
men been abused, the abuse must be removed, and the things employed to such
holy uses as the Lord himself has directed; not what man shall think fit to
apply them to, without Gods warrant. Thus the Censers abused by Korah and his
Companions, were no more used for the burning of Incense: yet, because they
mere hallowed, they were (by Gods appointment) converted into broad plates, for
covering of the Altar.

But in things not appointed by God from the beginning, this Tenet holds not.
For, to give unto God upon wrong grounds, and for superstitious ends, most
derogatory to God and Christ, to maintain and feed a company of Harpies that
heretofore lay in wait, as he that sets snares and traps to catch men Jer.
5.26.
, thereby to fool them out of their Estates upon fair (but false) pretenses, is
no better accepted then the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, (that is,
then money gotten by whoredom, or by the sale of a dog) brought into the house
of the Lord; which he abborreth Deuteronomy. 23.17.
.

Such are all those gifts of Lands to Cathedrals, pretended to be thereby given
unto God, (many of them being first gotten by rapine and spoil:) whereby
Christ is put out of Office, or at least declared an insufficient Savior; as
if men could not be saved by his merits alone, but they must eek them out by
some works of their own, which they are taught to believe, to be the Saviors
which they must trust unto. God looks no otherwise upon such offerings, then
upon she offering of Swines blood, the cutting off a Dogs neck, or the blessing
of an Idol. When it can be proved that God accepted of such Oblations in the
time of the Law, then also it may be granted that he will accept such mongrel
Dedications in the days of the Gospel.

5. Things dedicated unto God, without his Order and Direction, is a laying as
de Mar. 7.8
, and a rejecting of the Commandment of God Verse 9.
: and a making the word of God of none effect Verse. 13.
. It is the Pharisees Corban Verse 11.
, which they (for filthy lucres sake) taught Children to plead against their
Parents, contrary to the fifth Commandment, when required to relieve them in
age and necessity. If a father, in time of need, demanded this or that thing,
of his son; the son was taught to answer only this, It is Corban, a gift which
I have devoted to God, therefore you must excuse me, I cannot let you have it:
Vows Must be paid, and things once dedicated, must not be recalled, nor the
thing vowed aliened. This, by the Pharisees Doctrine, was a gift irrevocable,
and so sacred unto God, that, if the Child should perhaps be willing to
pleasure his Parents with some part of it, they would not give way. It is holy
to God, it must not be profaned by applying it to common uses: so that, they
would suffer him no more to do ought for his Father or Mother Verse. 128
.

Did Christ allow this for a Dedication, that might not be recalled; and, that
what was so given, might not be any more employed to private uses, without
Sacrilege? Nay, he abhorred it as a sacrilegious abuse of Scripture; and, those
Hypocrites also, who taught such Doctrines. Such are all Dedications proceeding
from men's own fancies and ends, without a rule from God: and therefore, gifts
so given not only may, but ought to be aliened to other uses, that God may no
longer be abused and provoked by them.

6. It is a mistake and error to think, and say, those Lands now purchased by
private men are perverted from public use. For, they were sold for the public
use of the Commonwealth. Now, if by the Canon Law, it be allowed that the goods
and possessions of the Church may be alienated to redeem Captives, as the Pope
himself has confessed; much more then, may such Lands be sold for the service
of the State and Church, in a time of such expense, and danger. Who ever taxed
Hezekiah of Sacrilege, when he gave the King of Assyria (that came up against
the fenced Cities of Judah, and took them) all the silver that was found in the
House of the Lord, and cut off the gold from the doors of the Temple, and from
the pillars, and gave it to the King of Assyria, that he might depart from
Judah, 2 Kings 18. 15, 16? The Parliament then, being so much necessitated,
chiefly for satisfying the vast charge of the Scottish Army, (and that by
occasion of the Owners of those Lands) had a Royal and Pious Pattern and Warrant
for so doing.

Nor is it a perverting of those Lands by Purchasers, to employ them (after
paying for them, upon such an occasion) to their own use, no more than it was
for the Tenants of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. when they had with their
money bought those Lands for lives, or years; yea, in Fee-simple. For, the
granting and employing them for years or lives (and that upon no such necessity
as the Parliament sold) makes no real difference (as to private use) between
that and the sale of them for ever, in a case of such importa it necessity.
For, if it be no sin in a Bishop, or Dean and Chapter to sell a Manor, yea,
an Impropriation for three lives, or for 21 years (heretofore, for 100. 200.
years, yea, for ever) and to put the whole Fine into their own private purses;
not out of necessity, but for gain, and to enrich themselves, to the prejudice
and impoverishing of their Successors, who must get some other maintenance
(that is, some Benefices with Cure on which they never reside; but, at their
Cathedrals, and starve the Souls of those people in the mean time, with 10 l.
Curats) or else they could not bear up the pomp and port of Cathedral-men. And,
if it were lawful for their Tenants, upon such terms to hold those Mannours and
Impropriations, for so long time to their own private use; then surely, it
cannot be unlawful in it self, for the Parliament, (who never put the money
into their own purses) to sell those Lands; nor for purchasers, to buy, and
enjoy them for ever; having paid accordingly for them.

7. The same things now pronounced Sacrilege in modern Purchasers, have been
often done many years past, and still are done every day by the greatest
Censurers of the present alienation of those Lands. For, to say nothing of the
Appropriations and Impropriations made by Popes to Templars, Monasteries, and
other (nicknamed) Religious Houses; nor, of those huge alienations made in
Henry the eighth's time, Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and not none in
King James his days: Even they, who now cry loudest against buying of Bishops
and Deans and Chapters Lands (because in their opinions, once given to God) and
make it high Sacrilege in all that now do it, can yet be well enough content to
hold things of the same kind (in respect of Dedication) heretofore aliened
from the Church. They can well digest Abby-Lands, Canonical Houses; yea, (which
is worst) impropriated Tithes themselves, first made by that Arch-Sacrilegist
the Pope, in favor not only of Covents and Societies, but of his own
particular single favorites and Minions, who neither would, nor could do any
service to their Souls who paid them: and; after their dissolution, devolved to
private hands and common uses, as Cathedral Lands now do.

Here to omit how much of the Revenues of the Crown it self, consists in
Church Lands and Rents; how many Noblemen, and Gentlemen are there in England
(as well as in forain Nations) who now cry out of the supposed Sacrilege of
others, do yet possess many Lordships, Mannours, and Royalties, even of Bishops
themselves, alienated since Henry the eighth began to destroy Monasteries? Are
there not many of those Lands aliened by secret (not to say, Symoniacal)
compact and bargain between Petitioners for Bishoprics and their friends at
Court, to procure such a Bishopric for them?

If any doubt hereof, it is his ignorance. If he desire proof, let him but
inquire into the mutilation of that one Bishopric of Bath and Wells, and he
shall find that since the thirtieth of Henry the eighth, the Manors of Wookey,
Black ford Compton-Dando, Congersbury, Yaton, Cbew, Wike, Puckle-Church,
Wester-Leigh, Hampton, Claverton, Cranmore, Ever-cretch, Kingsbury, Chard,
Wellington, Lidford, Compton Parva, and Chedder; (to omit many Appropriations,
Hundreds, Buroughs, Farms, etc.) have been all alienated from that Church,
and are to this day held by Laymen, to their own private uses, without
scruple, or blame, before ever the late Parliament seized the rest. Yea, this
is not the first time, that the Bishops Manor of Wells was alienated from that
Church. For, in Henry 8. it was by Bishop Clerk himself aliened to him, that
was afterward Earl of Hertford; then, Duke of Somerset: and, by him held
(without clamor of Sacrilege,) until by some violent and sharp proceedings
against him, it Escheted to the Crown: whence, Bishop Barlow procured a grant
of it again, upon some terms yet extant, but never confirmed by Parliament. And
the last Bishop was not thrust out of it, but voluntarily forsook it.

Nor is there any scruple made of late purchasing of several Canonical Houses
in Wells, which formerly belonged to the Canons, and Prebends of that Church:
yet were part of the Bishops Lands, and of the Manor of Wells, of which they
are holden in chief, unto this day. Yet none of the Possessors of Purchasers
thereof, hold it to be any fault in them, to purchase and enjoy those Houses:
while some of them with great confidence and virulency condemn the same thing
in others. I pass the many and vast alienations ofthe Bishoprics of Durham,
Exceter, and sundry more, made by Bishops themselves; the particular enumeration
whereof would take up a Volume.

Let none think to wash all off, by saying, these were things done before their
times, which they could not help. For they can, without scruple enjoy, yea,
purchase those Houses built on the Lands of the Church. But an Accessory in sin
long before committed, must share with the Principal, or first Actor, in the
punishment 2d. Command.
. No house built upon the sand will become stronger, or better by long
continuance on that foundation. It is a known Maxim, Non firmatur tractu
temporis, quod de jure ab initio non subsistit. Time will never make that to be
no sin, which from the beginning was sinful: nor that lawful, which originally
was unlawful, and inconsistent with the Law. They therefore that thus Censure
others, are themselves inexcusable: for wherein they judge another, they
condemn themselves, because they that judge do the same things Romans 2.1.
. If this satisfy not, yet it behooves such Censurers to be quiet: and, to
leave it to others, who are without that supposed sin, to cast the next stone
at the Doctor.

Zech. 8. 19.

Therefore love the truth, and peace.

A WORD by way of Postscript, to Dr. Pearson, and his No Necessity of
Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the Church of England.
SIR,
ALthough your Tract be of another Subject, which wise and learned men hold
unworthy of Answer; yet finding a little wast Paper at the end of this
Treatise, I am content to fill it up with a few words touching your No
Necessity, etc. to save further labor about it in another way. You are pleased
(under the guise of a Brotherly temper, and Christian Moderation) to make sport
with the Authors of the Reasons of a Necessity ofReformation of the Public
Doctrine, etc. wherein you set up Shawfowles of your own (calling them ours)
and then shoot at them as you list, which you call Answers to Us. But, he that
judiciously compares both, cannot but hold him a weak man that shall foul so
much Paper, as to give a particular Reply to all your out-leaps, and fictions,
which deserve neglect, rather than punctual Replications. Therefore, at
present, take these Generals, till you more rationally make out your
Particulars.

1. We place not the Necessity of Reformation, in the not establishing the
Doctrine of our Church, by Law; but, our work is to show, 1. that there is no
necessity of subscription, by virtue of the Act of 13 Eliz. 12. because that,
thereby, those Articles now urged, do not appear to be by that Law established.
2. That as they now stand, and as now worded, they ought not to be established,
until they be reformed. But, you make us speak that we never so much as dreamt
of, nor ever mentioned in our Reasons: and so, you fight only with your own
shadow. Let them part you, that have a mind to it: we have other business to do.

2. We argue a Necessity of Reformation; 1. from the Doubtfulness; 2. From the
Defect of the 39. Articles. But you will needs have us to speak in a sense
contrary to our meaning. We doubt not of the Doctrines themselves, rightly
explained; but of the Words wherein they are set sorth. For, the Words (which
should be clear) being ambiguous, are capable of more senses, than one; and so,
may be, and are wrested to patronize Errors. Therefore they ought to be
reformed by such an Orthodox explanation, as may distinctly and positively
express the true sense of the Church; and not left so homonymous and equivocal,
as to countenance those Errors which we believe the Church of England
disclaimeth.

3. In our particular instances of Defects in the 39 Articles, we deny not any
truths contained in them; but only show what mis-constructions are, or may be
made of them, as now they be worded. Therefore our purpose is not to press the
rejecting of them, as to the matter, but only, as to the expressions, which we
desire may be reformed by amending of them.

4. Whereas we assert that many necessary Doctrines are wanting in those 39
Articles, we intend not therefore to reject any of the Articles themselves (so
far as they concur with the holy Scriptures:) but, the Reformation we desire in
this particular, is only an Addition of those necessary Truths, duly set forth
and explained, as may make the Public Doctrine of our Church complete, before
Subscription to those few, as if they were all which our Church will own. Here,
we say again, that a necessary Addition is properly a Reformation of that which
is Defective, to make it perfect.

5. Whereas you struggle to prove that the 39 Articles do include many, if not
all of those Doctrines which we hold needful to be added; We admit that some of
them are touched upon by name; but not explained as the nature of the things
requires; and, as those points be, which are the subjects of the 39 Articles.
If then, the naming them, on the by, be enough to prove that there is no need
of more; then the bare naming of the Titles of the 39. Articles, had been
sufficient, without the body of the Articles themselves: or else, those other
Doctrines which are but named, ought to be explained as well as the other: Or,
no subscription to be urged, but only to the holy Scriptures themselves, which
are infallible, and contain all Doctrines necessary to salvation. To what
purpose then, is that assertion, that the Creed being mentioned in the
Articles, there is no need of adding more Articles, because they are
comprehended within the Creed; or, named in the 39 Articles?

6. As for your many Quibbles and Retortions, (all built upon these sandy
foundations) I shall value them no more than you value us. Only that mistake of
the Homily in point of Title, may be pardoned, when your self confess the words
themselves: We were far from our Books, and so might mistake the Title of the
Homily. But, so long as we have not falsified the matter, which you dare not to
justify, but acknowledge not to be proper (and which we affirm to be absurd
and false;) we leave it to all to judge, whether that be a godly and wholesome
Doctrine, necessary for these times. And if it be not; then whether there be
not a a necessity of Reforming that 35th Article, as to that point of the
Homilies.

7. As touching the Regal Supremacy, we own and will assert it as far as you
do, or dare. Only we had reason to take notice of the improper Expression in
the 37 Article, that the Queens Majesty has the Supreme Power. For, if the
Declaration fathered on the late King, and prefixed to the Articles, had so
much power with his Printer, that he durst not to alter the word Queen, into
King, even in the year 1642. and, those Articles must be read verbatim, without
alteration or explanation; then, we say again, there is a necessity of
reforming that Article in the expression of it: and not to talk at random what
was indeed the meaning, unless we may have leave, when we read it, ( Regia
Declaratione non obstante) to declare the sense; which the Declaration allows
us not to do.

8. As concerning the Law-part, though you strain hard, yet I hold it not worth
one line of Reply, till you have answered the four Queries propounded in page
61. and 62. of our Book. Not that I would wave ought which deserves Answer;
but, to spare labor where it would be, in the judgment of wise men,
ridiculous to bestow it. This is spoken in love to the truth, and to yourself
also, by

Your Servant (and Brother, if you please) C. BURGES.

FINIS.

