CONSIDERATIONS AND PROPOSALS Presented to his Late HIGHNESS OLIVER LORD
PROTECTOR OF England, Touching the not Warring with SPAIN, or the more
advantageous prosecuting thereof, after it was begun.

By F. B.

LONDON, Printed, Anno* Dom. 1659.

Some Considerations upon the present Expedition supposed for the West-India's,
humbly remitted to his Highness the Lord Protector, and delivered to Secretary
Thurloe, in September 1654. long before the Fleetes Departure.
The Commissioners of the Admiraltie, Navy, and Purse of this Nation know best
with certainly what this Expedition and incident Charge has cost, but of other
judicious men its generally judged to be about two Millions of li. sterling.
1. THe vast and inevitable charges of setting forth the Flects, the continual
pay of Seamen and Soldiers, with supplies that must be sent, till the
Conclusion of the Voyage, which is like to be dilated.

2. Whether in times of so much unsettlement, this Commonwealth can spare so
many Ships and Seamen, which in great part are the security of the Land, to go
so far off from whence they cannot be occasionally had home again upon
necessity, England being surrounded with so What an opportunity did this
Nation lose, in not humbling the Hollander, so as that he might never have
thwarted our interest again, as ever since he bath done, and now Grives for the
Mastery in Power and Commerce. And as we then stood we might have had our own
terms with France, Spain, and all others, and how different our condition now
is may be discerned.
many considerable Potentates, and they for the most part in affection
adversaries, which upon all opportunities of advantage, will injure us,
notwithstanding any capitulations to the contrary, and the States Power being
formidable, and at hand, will still awe them to a better Compliance.

3. They go to a place where they must not only fight men upon disadvantages,
the scituations helping still the inhabitants in Countries that How was our
Army beaten by a few despicable Mongrel-Spaniards, Shepherds and Blacks, that
waylaid them in places of advantage, through which they were to march.
have not commodious Ports of disembarking an Army, and difficult ways to
march, but which is worse, with a Climate not at all suiting with our English
constitutions, particularly of Soldiers, which may be justly feared will sweep
away the greater part of them that go; more especially, if Provisions come to
decay, or lose of their natural Most of the Soldiery, and many Seamen perished
for want of Provisions, or eating such as was spoil't, and not agreeing with
the Climate.
virtue, as they are subject to do in such extraordinary heats as they must
there meet with, and liquor being the chief, is not to be had at all times in
an enemies territories, and ships being thronged with people, diseases will
increase and endanger all, then those seas and air with the piercing Sun, will
destroy our English and Dutch-built ships both in Hull and Tackling, Some of
the Ships were lost, and the rest came home in a decayed, tottering condition,
whose repairs was sufficiently chargeable.
more in a months time, then in our own Northern Climates in a year, beside the
worm that eats under-water, will render them incapable of future-service.

4. In case of a repulse, (to which all attempters are subject) in an enemies
dominions, and so distant from relief, which will daunt many a swelling spirit,
this Commonwealth will be Involved out of honor and interest to a second
engagement, Beside, our Army being so dishonourably repulft* and dispirited at
Sancto Domingo, what supplies of men and other necessaries have, to little
purpose, been since sent to Jamaica, is rather felt then duly considered, or
rightly known.
that must be more costly, and necessarily burden the subject, which will be
the more resented, when success thwarts the great expectations first
entertained of the design, for undoubtedly the enemies so long time of
advertisement, will give them time to provide largely for defense, and retire
with their riches to inaccessible places, which must render the business more
difficult, and peradventure altogether fruitless, and of disrepute.

5. Let it be granted, that the place intended be surprised, yet before it can
be put in a thriving way, what an endless treasure must be disbursed, beside
the loss of men and shipping, and it is questionable whether ever the benefit
from thenee will pay it again, these designs promising great matters, but in
effect come to nothing, we have the example in hand of New England, Barbados,
Christophers, etc. The success we had in the India's fully answers this
particular.
the first Planters whereof were all undone, and yet they were void lands,
purchased without the price of blood, and little expense of money, and the
Proceedings of the Holland West- India Company in Brazil, may be pettinently
recited, which have not only been baffled by their enemies, but outed of more
wealth then ever they had from thence, the sea reprizals set aside, but here is
hope of silver and gold mines; it may so fall out, that there are such, which
yet is doubtful, give it for granted, and let attention be had to the trouble
in bringing them to perfection, and the extraordinary expenses upon slaves and
other people that must work in them, with the materials requisite to such a
task, and it will appear that we have By our traffic, Manufactories, and
employment of our shipping, were we furnished with the India-silver.
easier, and more profitable ways to draw into England that treasure, and if
accounts were deliberately made up, it would be found that the King of Spain
himself is not such a great Gainer by the India's, as many in the world have
conceived, though he have all in possession.

6. It were to be wished, that the people allotted for this attempt, or others
in their room were rather applied to Ireland, and more near Plantations, which
would not only bring greater gains to this Government, then any place they can
possess in the India's, but also be formidable, to assist in any honorable
atchievments near at home, that may in time be thought requisite.

7. And if we must have to do at the India's, let a more opportune time be
waited for, which may be at any other better then now, for the Spaniard seeing
that we proceed not, will grow careless, and our ships being already sheathed,
and warlike Provisions The Merchants of this Nation lost in the year 1655. by
the Spanish Imbargo: which was made by reason of this Fleets Proceeding to the
India's, above 500000 li. sterling, to the ruining of many able men and their
families.
fitted, may insensibly be put forth to fall upon them, when not so warned, and
consequently armed, as at present they are, and Merchants, though not made
fully acquainted with the intentions of States, may moderate and draw home
their adventures in the Interim, and a years possession more or less of the
places intended, cannot import by too great a quantity what may be lost, in
that the Merchants of this Commonwealth have trade in all the dominions of
Spain, and great estates there depending, that cannot be so suddenly withdrawn,
the intercourse having been of long continuance, that has contracted many
debts, and occasioned the transmission of goods for sales, from one place to
another, yea, many to the very India's, though in Spaniards names, all which
will undoubtedly be seized on, if this Fleet fall upon any of that Kings
territories, and will be of far more value then is to be feared will be had
from the India's in many years: and to him will prove a good Exchange, to have
so many ready effects for his present occasions, in stead of an Island that
yields him little or nothing of revenue.

8. Falling out with that people, the greater part of our Manufactory here must
cease, whereof that Country vents more then any other Nation with whom we have
Commerce, which will deprive a great number of poor Tradesmen of livelihood,
and this Commonwealth of its Custom and Excise of all Commodities exported
hence, and brought from other places of those dominions, some whereof do in a
years time pay the greater parts of their value, if not the whole, to this
State, as can easily be made manifest, and with those Manufactories comes into
this Nations Much of our Manufactory has ceased for want of vent to our
Commodities in Spain, and the scarcity of coin in the Nation, in part bespeaks
this truth.
possession, a great part of the Plate that arrives from the India's, for which
this Commonwealth is neither at charge nor hazard: and men are enabledto
undergo the burden of taxes, etc. but if trade fail, their estates must
decay, and be inabilitated to contribute toward the maintenance of Fleets and
Armies, which are so chargeable.

Doubtless his Highness will have deeply weighed what business may be
undertaken* especially of such importance, yet Was not the Jesuits hand in
this design, aiming at the ruin of our Fleets and men, with the disrepute of
the Nation, and indeed its to be admired that such a Conduct should be
committed to a person that had never been out of England, and scarce heard of,
much less experimented, what People and Country he was to deal with in
America.
forasmuch as this is a matter that falls not into the reach of all men, and
that heed must be given to such as pretend to know most in it, it is to be hoped
that those private persons will not eye more any particular end of interest, or
revenge of wrongs received, before the good of their Country, which his
Highness is beseeched to examine, as also that their Drifts be not to scatter
the Nations forces, that are now terrible to its enemies, into many places for
their destruction, which otherwise cannot be so easily wrought.

Some Considerations humbly remitted to his Highness the Lord Protector, in
order to the better Prosecution of a War with Spain, delivered about November.
1655.
IN the Bay of Biscay, among others, are the chief Ports of Sansebastian and
Bilhao, being the inlets of Commodities that furnish the Northern parts of
Castile, and other Provinces of Spain, especially with Fish, of which that
Country vents great quantities, They have enjoyed as free a Trade, as when we
had peace with Spain, putting their Commodities at what rates they pleased, and
prohibited the bringing in of ours.
and will be supplied by the French and Dutch, with whatsoever they have
occasion for, except this State prevent the same, by keeping men of War upon
that Coast, but four or five Frigates will hinder all their trade, and deprive
the places aforesaid of other conveniences, to the loss of the Kings Customs,
and Livelihood of the inhabitants, which will make them clamorous, more
particularly when they cannot sell their Country goods, as Wools, Iron, etc.
nor receive grain from foreign parts, of which many times they stand in great
want, and the said Frigates What damages the Pirates of Sansebastians and
Pasage, have since done this Nation, all Traders too well know, which might
have been prevented of such a Squadron, if our Frigates had been allotted: and
the subjects of Spain would have been made sensible of a War as well as the
English.
will hinder the attempts of the men of War of Sansebastians, that otherwise
may be very offensive to our English Merchants ships, and these Frigates may be
sheltered in the Coast of France, or in St. Antonio, an open Port of the
Spaniards near Bilhao, upon occasions of bad weather, and may happily meet the
Hollanders, that are now lading the Spanish Wools, there appertaining to the
Asentistas, which are to go for Flanders to help pay the soldiery.

In the Provinces of Galicia and Asturias, seated between Biscaya and Portugal,
the said King of Spain has a vast revenue out of the salt that is brought into
those parts from South Spain, by Hollanders and others, of which they may be
totally deprived, by keeping five or six Frigates about those parts, which is a
good Coast, and they may harbor themselves in stormy weather, in the Islands
of Bayona and No ships being ordered from hence, the men of War sailing out
of Galicia, have surprised many of our vessels, trading for Portugal, Barbary,
the Canary-Islands, etc.
Donis, and there refresh themselves with water at pleasure against all the
power that Country can make, and the taking of the said salt will not be only
the Kings loss, but the whole Country must be driven to great extremities,
and not be able to follow their Fishing trade, which is the greatest
maintenance the common people have, and said Frigates will lie opportunely to
secure our Traders against the Sally-men of War that usually frequent those
Coasts, and Dunquerquers that are already there, and will every day increase to
prey upon our Merchants ships, that go for Portugal and other places.

The Canary-Islands have great dependencies one upon the other, which are in
all seven, for Corn, Cattle, etc. especially, great part of their There was
never a Frigate sent for the Canaries since the Wars, except General Blakes
Fleet, rather the Spanish Pirates have there surprised our Merchant men: and
Natives sold the Wines of the Country at double the value of what it was
formerly worth in time of Peace.
subsistence consists in a Fishing trade, which they drive in small vessels for
the Coast of Barbary, but two or three nimble small Frigates will take most of
their Boats in a short time, and reduce them to much necessity, and the trade
of this Nation failing, which is the chief support they have, those parts will
in a manner be ruined, and the said Frigates may refresh themselves at all times
in the Madera Island, belonging to the King of Portugal, about seventy Leagues
distant from the Canaries.

Malaga-Alicants, and Valentia within the Streights, are places abounding with
Wine, Oil, and Fruit, the greater part whereof was brought for England, and
that trade failing, the generality of For want of such ships in the Streights
mouth, have we lost many a rich vessel, trading in the Levant, etc. and the
enemy there was never interrupted by any that went for the purpose.
people will be brought to hardship, the rather if we have men of War upon
their Ports, to examine all strangers, and deprive them from carrying
Provisions, without which they cannot well subsist, and Commodities lying in
the inhabitants hands: as they must if strangers bring them not hither, will be
for the most part lost.

But the grand business of all will be to have a Fleet near the Bay of Cales,
to hinder that place Sevilla and Saintlucar from Commerce, and to beat the
Armada they have now out, which being done, in long time will not that King be
able to make a power sufficient to encounter our Fleet; nor bring home his
treasure from the Indiaes, and it were to be wished that said Fleets might
consist of a competent number of the old Navy ships, the better to handle
their Galions which are strongly built, and have great Ordnance, and into this
Fleet may, upon any urgent Occasion, be drawn the other Frigates from the Coast
of Galicia and Biscaya, being so near at hand, the putting off which in the
aforesaid stations, is reasonably to be judged, will be of more prejudice This
Nation has lost by the Pirates of Sansebastians, Pasage, Galicia, Majork, etc.
near 1000. Sail of Ships, which beside disappointment, and weakening the
Commonwealth, are reputed to be worth above two Millions of pounds sterling,
occasioned merely for want of having men of War in the parts desired; the
charge of which would have been borne by the Custom and Excise due to the State
of our lost Goods.
to Spain in a short time, then the loss of the Plate Fleet, and the charge of
this State will be small in the doing thereof, and by this means likewise will
the King of Spain be deprived of having his Galions, that are now providing in
Biscaya, Naples, and other places, to join with his great Fleet, or Ammunition
and other necessaries for the same, that in great part is furnished from
Sansebastians and Pasage.

A strict charge were needful to be given all Sea Commanders, for the examining
of Ships bound into the Spanish Dominions, concerning Provisions, Cordage,
Sail-Clothes, All Hollanders, French, and others, have been tolerated, though
our Fleets lay there, to carry in Provisions and Ammunition without disturbance.
Masts, Tar, Arms, etc. in that therein will depend their being able to set
forth a Fleet of Ships or not.

And forasmuch as many English and Scotch Seamen, do in too great numbers,
frequent Biscaya, Dunkirk, and other Pirating places, to the encouragement of
Rovers, it Such have very much strengthened the Adversaries, in furnishing their
ships, and putting them upon such matters, as of themselves they could never
have accomplished, to our great prejudice.
were a matter worth consideration, whether it may not be convenient to set out
a Proclamation, inviting home all such as appertain to this Commonwealth, and
if after a set time they continue in the service of any Prince or State in
enmity with this Nation, to be proceeded against according to their contempt,
if taken: the sooner a good Squadron of Ships were sent to the Coast of Spain,
is conceived would be the bettet, considering We had above twenty Sail of good
men of War ready at Portsmouth, in December. 1655. and had they been sent away
for Cales, would have taken and spoilt their Plate-Fleet, that arrived there
about March following.
how many Merchants vessels we have abroad, that are subject to be surprised and
taken by the Spaniard, as many have lately been, which will be a great
encouragement and strength to them, and loss to this Nation.

These and such like courses being taken, will deprive the King of Spain of the
greater part of his Incomes, and render his people incapable to pay taxes,
which are heavy upon them, and consequently his Armies and Garrisons On the
contrary, instead of oppressing the Spaniard, the English have in so high a
manner suffered by our ill managing the War, that most of the Stock and Trade
of the Nation is lost.
will be neglected in pay and Provisions, some of his remotest territories will
revolt or be taken from him, and a general Calamity overwhelm the whole, and
then this Nation may take advantages to fall upon the skirts of of some of his
Dominions, or compel him to a Peace with this State, that may be made to the
glory of God, and welfare of the Commonwealth.

Given to a Statesman the 9th. of May 1657. to be delivered the Protector, a
Paper of the following Contents.
The condition of the Island of Thenerife, in regard the inhabitants are
numerous, is scantie in point of Provisions, being in part ordinarily supplied
from the rest of the Islands of the Canaries and other places, with Corn, Fish,
and other necessaries, without which they cannot well live.

Now the Spanish Silver Fleets being there, will have made an addition of near
4000 men, which with the inhabitants will in short time very They could not
have subsisted six months without supplies from abroad.
much streighten that Island, especially if they be interrupted in drawing
relief from the other Islands.

The said West- India Fleet cannot be there fitted to go upon a new Voyage,
unless supply of Ammunition, Provisions, etc. be sent from Holland, Spain, or
some other places.

In no Port of the Canary-Islands, can those ships lie safe from burning,
sinking, or taking, They were all destroyed by General Blake in Sancta Cruz
road.
a greater power going to fall upon them.

The treasure being in that Island, if this State be not wanting to it self, it
may be reasonably judged, its far more liable to fall into this Nations hands
then formerly, when coming from the Indias, by keeping fourteen or sixteen men
of War small and great, in and about the said Island of Thenerife, to hinder
all Commerce of Foreigners, or sustenance from the neighbour-Islands, which is
a thing feasible, and in few months its probable, such order being taken, they
may be brought to such hardship, as to surrender or give some other advantage
to this Nation, and taking away all Communication of the Islands one to
another, the conveniences of the Inhabitants will cease, and if not relieved by
a strong power from Spain, which is not likely to be afforded General Blake
then lay before Cales.
while our Fleet is upon that Coast, they will be in a manner undone, on the
contrary, if the said Islands be not straitened by our ships will follow.

The access of Biscayners, Dunquerquers, and other vessels, to supply and
strengthen the said Spanish Fleet, and put them into a capacity to take the
advantage of an opportunity to get for some part of Spain, or encourage their
Fleet at Cales to come forth, and make up so formidable a power as to conduct
them home, or fight our Fleet, rendering void the expectations had as to this
matter.

Likewise it is to be feated, that the Hollanders, of which many are going for
Thenerife, will be made use of to furnish the Islands, and fetch from thence
the silver, which nothing Holland Merchantmen, by degrees brought all the
silver, and other India-Commodities from the Islands, of which they might have
bin hindered by five or six men of War, and justly made prize of, as carrying
none but Spaniards Goods.
can obstruct, but the lying of our Fleet before ^, besieging the same, which
will be the only way to obtain our ends, and frustrate the enemy of that
treasure, whereof he has such pressing occasions.

Another Paper was given for the Protector, immediately upon advice that
General Blake had burnt the Spanish Fleet, in the Port of Sancta Cruz, at
Thenerife. viz.
The Island of Thenerife, in regard of the large trade it has of late years
enjoyed, is numerous in people, and of it self for so many is bare of
Provisions, but their largest supplies have been of Corn and Cattle, from
Lancarots, Fuerte Ventura, the grand Canaries Hiero and Gomera, and with Fish
from the Coast of Barbary, by their own Frigates and Ships from England and
Holland.

The late addition of men in the West- India Fleet, will have occasioned a
greater scarcity, which will very much distract the greater part of the
inhabitants that are laboring men, especially if the trade of Wine should be
shortened, or altogether cut off, which is their chief dependence.

The success which General Blake had in Sancta Cruz, contrary to the ignorant
expectations of the Islanders, who having never seen enemy, thought themselves
strong enough to withstand any power whatsoever, will much discompose them, and
the rather when they see their King unable to supply them with necessaries, it
being very probable, that in the last They were possessed with such fear after
the fight in Sancta Cruz, that the Island and Treasure might have been surprised
by a small Army of well disciplined Soldiers and Seamen.
fight they spent the greater part of the small store they had of powder and
ammunition, of which at best they were never well provided.

The riches which the West- India Fleet brought to the Island, and what was
there before, will amount unto so considerable a quantity, that it were worth
the employment of a great strength to endeavor obtaining the same, The Fleets
was worth near four millions of pounds sterling, and the Island for its
bigness one of the best in the world.
but a smaller force well ordered will reduce the place to such streights, as
that in short time it may be taken by force, or necessitated to a Composition,
and the rather when animosities arise among the people, as questionless there
will, when the major part of the ordinary sort shall suffer in harder measure
then the rest, and the truth is, at best those Ilanders being a mixed
generation, will not be very zealous for their King, which looks upon them to
no other purpose, then to oppress them by taxes and levies of soldiers, and
the loss of their men by reason of the Spanish Fleets coming thither, will
heighten their discontent.

Now the ready way, as is humbly conceived, to obtain our ends, if for the
present a full attempt may not be made upon the Island, is to keep about
fourteen Sail of men of War from 40 to 10 guns, reparted in several stations,
where they may most of the year ride at Auchor before the enemies Ports, and
deprive them of all kind of sustenance from abroad, yea, of their very fishing
in small boats in their Never a ship went, nor any other diligence used, as to
this thing.
Creeks, which is a relief unto them.

And these ships will not only curb Thenerife, but incommode the grand
Canaries, Palma and the other Islands, which as it depends on them for
provisions, so do they upon this, for their trade, and supplies of Goods with
necessaries for their defense, the General of all the Islands living in
Thenerife, the reduction whereof will prove the subjecting of all the rest of
the Islands affairs, being duly managed.

Lancarte and Fuerte Ventura, are Islands thinly inhabited, and may with small
strength be brought to subjection, from whence our Fleets may be supplied with
bread and cattle, and a sufficient number of good horses to join with our Army
to attempt Thenerife, in case it be resolved to assault the same.

Moreover, our ships lying there, will be a means to interrupt any vessels of
the Spaniards coming from the West- Indiaes, whereof many are expected, and
deprive them from carrying Wines thither, of which they stand in great want,
especially Two days after General Blake burnt the Calions in Sancta Cruz, came
thither from the Indies a Spanish Ship, worth above 300000 li. which might have
bin taken, had any of our Frigates layn thereabout, and so might many others
that arrived.
now, that no Galions or New Spaines Fleets can go out of Cales, as in former
years, and the Island will be so alarmed, that the people will not be able to
hold out in hard duty, which they must be put upon, being altogether
unaccustomed thereunto, beside, they must wholly neglect their labor, and
consequently the Vintage of Wines, which is near at hand, will be much
empaired; and ships being hindered from fetching away any Wines from Thenerife,
for Holland and England, such a general calamity will possess most of the
Natives, that our designs will still find the better progress, and what
honor and advantage it will be to this Nation to have Thenerife, and any other
of the Islands, is left to consideration.

Several other Papers have bin given in with pertinent and seasonable hints,
as to the securing our Comerce, and offending the Spaniard: who every way as is
shown has done us so much mischief, the contents whereof being fitter for
the States consideration then to be communicated, I forbear to insert, but
nothing was put in execution how useful soever. And lastly, though publicly
enough known, how the Plate Fleet was to return from the Indias, this Spring
it was particularly in time motioned, that a power might be ordered against
them, which would have easily bin made up, by sending a Squadron to join with
Capt: Stoakes, that has done little good where he lies, had this bin effected,
and our Ships taken and destroyed that Fleet, as in probability they might,
with small charge to the Nation, what advantage it would afforded us, and loss
with disappointment to the Spaniard may be judged, but they are safely got home
without disturbance, which occasions not only the Spaniards, but most other
Nations to deride us for keeping such Fleetes, as since the War we have done
abroad, to so vast an expense, only scouring the Seas when we had not visible
enemies to Encounter, and to withdraw them as we have done at the very time,
when we should watchfully attend such of the adversaries Fleetes, as assuredly
we had advice were a coming, insomuch that after this contest, we have
obtained little of value from the Spaniard, more then what taken by the
Squadron left with Cap: Stayner, and that by mere accident, when the great
body of our Fleet was retired to Lisboa for water and provisions, the which
kind of proceedings, makes many good Englishmen suspect the War was
undertaken rather to destroy the strength, purse, and trade of the Nation, then
to offend the enemy, which with half the power sent out, and charges we have
bin at, wisely ordered, might have bin ere this time reduced to a different
condition then that he is in, but in this covetous age, have not our Councils
secrets bin opened by the Spanish Golden Key, at leastwise contrary to the
practice of the wisest Nations. Among us, has not the management of the most
weighty transactions of State, and Navies bin committed to persons
unexperienc't, as if some of the present generation, beyond all former, were
borne capable of such high emploiments, without being educated and gradually
instructed thereunto, let the causes be what they were, the instruments are
known, and this Nation is made too sensible of the Spanish War, and other
transactions, by its continual osses and sufferings, God grant those now in
Authority, Abilities, Intentions, and Endeavors, more prudentially to carry on
affairs for future, so as the general interest of the people of this Nation may
precede all private respect^ what^^ver, and be restored to their rights,
Religious and Civil, that have bin so long clouded.

FINIS.

