A TRAGEDY OF COLA'S FVRIE, OR LIRENDA'S MISERY

Written by Henry Burkhead, 1645.

Printed at KILKENNY, 1645.

And are to be sold at the sign of the white Swanne, in Kilkenny* M.DC.XLVI^*

THE NAMES OF THE CHIEF ACTORS.
Pitho and Berosus. Angolean Governors of Lirenda. Osirus. Lieutenannt General
of the Angolean Forces. Cola. Serjeant-Major General. Tygranes. A Noble Man.
Albinus, Celar, and Tibernus. Angolean Commanders. Belfrida. A Spy to the
Angoleans. Athenio, Mineus, Are^as and Dora. Noble Men of Lirenda. Theodorike
and Lentimos. Lirendean Commanders. Cephalon, and Ruffus. Lirendean Gentlemen.
Abner. General of Stelern. Caspilona. General of the Horse. Lysana. General
of the Angolean Horse. Florilla, Dulis and Pulchrina Ladies of Lirenda.
Elleonora and Barbazella. Two Gentlewomen. Mars, Pallas, Mercury, Queen of
Fates* Bellona, and Nymphs. 4. Angolean Soldiers.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD SOMMERSET LORD HERBERT,
Baron Beaufort, of Gresmond, Earl of Glamorgan, Son and Heir apparent to the
most Honorable HENRY Marquis of Worcester.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
It Is a principle of Nature, that Creatures of weak condition, aiming at
security, do direct their course for shelter, to the wings of the more potent,
so Principalities and states of inferior note, do manifest their solicitude,
to gain the patronage of some Royal Majesty: This little work by reason of
its means, dares not adventure to be exposed to the public censure, unless
it be protected under the Scepter of Honorable Authority; and whether shall it
betake it self, if not to your Honor, whom God has established on Earth, as
a particular image of his glory: assuredly the rays of honor originally
issuing from your countenance, the general esteem of your unparaleld worth,
and your matchless zeal and Christian fortitude in your weighty undertakings,
are no less arguments of your incomparable merit, then incentives to the
learned, to adorn their Chronicles with the luster of your deserts; The
subject of this small work being drawn from the historical records of Foreign
countries, and fitly applyable to the distempers of this kingdom, may the
rather be admitted to the favor of your noble patronage, forasmuch as your
Honor out of the generosity of your nature, have been pleased with a glance of
real compassion to view and survey the model of its sad afflictions, having
with unspeakable toil, charges, and dangers adventured hither (not unlike to
NOAH'S Dove, with an Olive branche of Peace) to appease the raging fury of our
intestine harms; This enriching the Diadem of your renown with a particular
Jewel of rare merit, are not these issues and offspring of a boiling and
bleeding heart, boiling with impregnable love and loyalty unto his Majesty,
and bleeding for the continual distempers of his kingdoms. Pardon then Right
Honorable the Authors presumption, who making humble remonstrance of his real
observance and duest respects, builds not upon the worth of this subject, but
wholly relies on the favor of your noble acceptance, assuring himself, the
characters of your name engraven upon its frontispice will not only impart a
particular luster unto it, but will (moreover) yield it accaptable to all
readers: Why then, as the glittering beams of your unspotted loyalty (true
effects of a generous heart) have given a full reflection on the dark brow of
this distracted age, so posterity hereafter may bless, praise, and admire,
your zealous noble undertakings, whose felicity can never equalize the hearty
wishes of

Your Honors most humble and most obsequious servant, HENRY BVRKHEAD.

To my loving and respected frriend Mr. Henry Burkhead Merchant, upon his
Tragedy of COLA'S FVRY.
I Once did study Navigation
Thinking to draw my speculation,
Unto the Practique: when (alas) I found
Safer (then set to Sea) to stay on ground.
But thou (my friend) upon a fair pretense
Reserved Art and prosperous Confidence
Have lanced forth into a raging tide,
By thee not known (till now) nor ever tried
Yet got into the main, through Cruel Rocks
Trough Read-Sea-Sands, and shelves, and boisterous shocks,
Of murdering billows, Cumbred with sad fears
Of frighted and selfe-moaning Passengers,
Do steer thy Course. Thy Card and Compass show
Thou do a plain, smooth, and direct line know.
Thou have fresh gales and Sea-roome: for who shall
Behold thy doleful Pinnace rise and fall
Midst such deep dangers (as herein appears)
Weighing the misery shall with sighs and tears.
Supply the Ocean: with most glad desire
Sit in thy steerage-roome: will there admire,
Thy newfound skill: and with a dextrous ease
Learn to sail with thee, by like Winds and Seas.
Thy assured welwisher, William Smyth.

To his dear friend Mr. Henry Burkhead, upon his Tragedy of Cola's fury.
SOme have writ plays (my Burkhead) that have gained
A large applause unto themselves, not strayn'd,
Nor forced, nor hired but rightly; it is true
They have deserved more, and more is due,
Then can be paid them: some have well expressed
A Politician, others one distressed:
Some lusts and treasons, others Tyranny
And others some the state and Majesty,
Of Lords and Princes; others have well limbed
Th'extortious Soldier, others neatly trimmed
The Curious Courtier. But Sir, you portray'd
Each various humor, variously arrayed,
And suited so each passion to the life
Protheus we thought had been with you at strife
who could produce most shapes, that we must say
(Protheus has labored with you 'bout this play.
What? though of Terence, Seneca, we hear
And other modern Scenicks in our spherare,
You I prefer. Johnson for all his wit
Could never paint out times as you have hit,
The manners of our age: The fame declines
Of never enough praised Shakespeare if thy lines,
Come to be published: Beaumont and Fletcher's skill
Submitts to yours, and your more learned quill.
The most admired Sherly and the crew
Of English Dramaticks cry hayle to you
Phoebus choice darling. Sir, I not admire
The Muses nursed you, and he was your Sire.
Paul* A^ward.

To his dear friend the Author on his Tragedy of Cola's fury, or Lirenda's
misery.
WHen first I read your Tragedy and meet
Truth, wit, and judgment trip with equal feet,
Without the expense of pains, that all may know
They unconstrayned from your pen do flow.
I could not choose, but wonder that your brain
Without great Arts could hit so high a strain,
Such as the power of each line alone
Is able to transform a man to stone:
Nor is it strange, when that therein we see
Such bloody massachers and cruelty,
As does transcend what cruel Nero and
Great Dyonisius acted in each land.
Had Rubens and Vandike lived and at strife
Who should pourtray best, Cola to the life,
Their curious Art, the way could never find
To Paint his body, as thy Muse, his mind;
Thou have so lively him expressed that I
Reading was rapt into an ecstasy,
But straight again perplexed with so great fear
As if that cruel Cola present were,
Dear friend since then this piece so well limn'd
As most would think 'twas by Ben: Johnson trimmed,
That Shakespeare, Fletcher, and all did combine
To make Lirenda through the Clouds to shine,
Enfrranchise her, and let her come th'view
Of public Censure, where the best (be sure)
Will give her welcoms such as shall endure,
Else as a Miser you will be understood
That hoords up gold, and does the poor no good,
Fear not the Zoyly nor the Critic faces
That bark and snarle at the Muses and the Graces,
Their anticque mouths and squinted eyes shall be,
Stopped and obscured when they Lirenda see:
Break through the mists of Envy and dispense
Light, vigor, Motion and intelligence,
To all that Candid art, whose votes shall Crown
The Work and Author, with a smile, not frown
And to augment the Trophies of thy praise
Impale thy brows with wreathes of Delplique bays.
Daniell Breed^.

THE PROLOGVE.
SOme Prologues wish their Audience joyful mirth,
Some with Appelles strive to Painte the birth,
Of their inventions; others not only true,
But pleasing to the kind spectators view;
Such would our Author to, had not his Muse,
A mournful subject whom this age abuse;
Nor can his Novice genius dive unto,
The depth of what he feign would tender you,
Lirenda's Misery, who can forbear,
The Scaene once past from a relenting tear,
When blustering storms of murder, fire and sword
Are the chief Emblems he can best afford,
Your true compassive fancy, look not then for,
A Poets lofty dazeling Meteor,
That to the vulgar eye might seem more strange
Then fertile Luna, in her often change:
Kind Natives of this poor afflicted I Will,
To your oppressions we address the style
Of this our tragic pen, who in effect,
Are the supporters, of that Architect,
Devised by him that never writ before,
Yet honors you, your miseries adore,
Your faithful service, resolution and
The most accomplished virtues of this land,
Sometime styled Insula Sanctorum,
Now the true touchstone, or decorum,
Of Heroical minds, whom envyes dire intent
Endeavored to subvert with discontent:
This Noble, worthy, Auditors the scope
Of what we are resolved to show, in hope,
Your frequent goodness with attentive ear,
Our more imperfect lines will mildly bear,
For which the Muses humbly we desire,
Some heavenly rapture may your thoughts inspire.
COLA'S FVRY. OR LIRENDA'S MISERY.
The first Act.
Enter a Constable and two Soldiers with halberts. 1. Sold. MVst not a
Creature pass?


Constable. No, that is the the scoape of our Commission: Stand; who comes there?


Enter a Citizen. Cittiz. A friend.


Constable. The Word;


Cittiz. Marry Sirs, God bless us all;


Constable. well spoken, yet you must not pass,


Citiz. Not pass? then if you be good fellows, let us chat a while* prithee
what means this sudden tumult?


Constable. The matter seems so strange to me as yet, we can reurne no other
answer, but the state on pain of death commands all men, (thus ready armed) to
stand upon their guard;


1. Sold. You may be sure there is some rank plot in hand, or would the State
at these unusual hours sit in a private Council else:


Citiz. 'Twish a fable; it is but some dronken quarrel thus disturbes our rest:
or the field appointed by some hot furious gallant, whereto the State will not
give way.


Constable. Be it the same, we will not remove from hence, nor you in duty ought to
slight the matter thus, as if your worships wisdom were so ripe to apprehend
the cause;


Citiz. You cannot give more likelier reasons for it:


Constable. You Are mistaken friend, the common report's abroad far different from
your conceit; raised to the highest point of a distracted mutiny, we wot not
what to think or speak, such is the horrid treachery intended.


Citiz. Good Lord forbid; against whom?


Constable. This City Castle; and by a few of Romish Recusants think to subvert
the true reformed Gospel:


Citiz. How? our own fast friends, that were a jest indeed past my belief;


Constable. Be not incredulous:


Citiz. How can I choose, but frame my thoughts like a confused Chaos; to
think, these men who by exterior signs and loving conversations, threw their
hearts into our arms, nay more I might express: but that I see* all proves a
fained friendship, and our joint love's turned to a mortal hate;


Constable. It Is much, much feared, we will find it so e're long, written in
Characters of blood.


1. Sold. Silence: the Lords themselves do come, to give their best advice;


Enter Pitho, Berosus, Mayor, Recorder. Pitho. We called you hither, to make
known the danger, that now, even now is revealed, wherefore so true we
conceive you be, that with all speed you go unto each port, and see them
strongly guarded, with strict command that none on pain of death shall issue
forth, until a true and perfect search be made throughout this City, for as
we credibly are informed, Guyrva with all his rude conspirators, are at this
instant in a doubtful fear to be discovered; the guilt of such a heinous fact
doubtless betrays them; Worthy friends, then slake not your endeavors; the
have which this great business now requires, admitts no leisure to stir your
willingness with th'effectuall speech of our just cause; that touches not
your persons only; but aims at the Crown of our dread Sovereign; and to
imbase this Kingdoms glory, beneath the hollow concave of their Popish
faction; this we thought fit to add unto your now intended care, not doubting
yours, nor these your brethrens love to him, this weighty matter most
concerns:


Record. Sir, we really intend; (far from vain glory be it spoken) to uphold
this Cities ancient fame, that hitherto has nobly borne, the title of a pure
unspotted town; when treason came as nie to cut you off, our fidelity did then
expulse your foes and with the trophies of their bloody spoil returned
victorious, this we did, and are as willing yet to manifest the same so far
as heart and life can show the duty of allegiance:


Bero. Them Noble acts renders you famous to posterity; nor did th'Angolean
princes prove ungratfull for that service, as your fair City charter can
approve,


Reco. It is acknowledged their royal bounty, wherefore we that do live will
strive to give as great a luster to the Angolean nation, as our renowned
ancestors have done, in this we rest, O Lord decree our willing powers may curb
this treachery.


Exeunt omnes preter Pitho and Bero. Pitho. Now kind brother your grave
experience must direct, what is most needful to be done;


Bero. The chiefest care whereto our watchful eye should bar from future
mischief, this strong fort by heavens protection is secured, therein disabling
our insulting foes hence forward to proceed:


Pitho. Then are our fears extinct?


Bero. Not so, dear Sir, the tempest threatens our ruin still; for it is a
maxim warlike leaders use, not to despise the weakness of their foes, which
else might give advantage to their design as many woeful presidents there are
within the limitts of my youthful days: (too tedious now to nominate,) for
sixty odd years past, since first I practiced arms, in the Hiberean wars,
when Tyrona ledd on by some vain prophecy or other, did strive by dint of
sword to assure himself the Northern Crown, with much expense of blood at
length t'h Angolean forces cooled his pride, and made his haughty courage
stoop unto a base ignoble flight, yet now me thinks the terror of this sudden
hell-bred news, strikes near my heart, then all the legions of his furious
train, could at that instant when Black-water-Fort, proved fatal to the most
and best of ours:


Pitho We then like prudent Statesmen must observe, some fit occasion may
endeere the Palans to side with us, until our powers increase with new
supplies from the grand Parliament


Bero Your advice is good, but we are the valiant stout Osirus here, we then
could best proceed; yet fearing least the pilfring Mountaniers do fire the
suburbs, 'twere not amiss, if we employed that warlike Leader brave Carola,
Cola, with whom five hundred of our best and ablest men to front the foe at
home; Now friend; from whence thy news?


Enter a Post with Letters. Post. From Adrohna*


Pitho. How fares the Governor?


Post. In health, an please your Lordship.


Bero. Is the noble Lord Tigranes in safety?


They peruse the letters. Post. The same my Lord:


Bero. It must not be difer'd a minute longer; go have thee to the governor
again, and tell him six hundred men completely armed shall forthwith march to
strengthen him, and further bid him be of comfort, he shall not want, what is
needful;


Post. I will not fail to return your Lordships answer,


Bero. Brother, we must withdraw to hasten what is promised we should incur a
lasting scandal else:


Exeunt A march is beaten, then Enter Athenio, Mineus, Aretas Dora, Theodorike
and Lentimos. Athenio. Now that our army is advanch'd thus far, within the
confines of our trembling foes whilst yet their scattered troops lie all
dismayed, we will pitch a field in view of yon proud town, and stoutly summon
them Within to yield, or train them forth, moved which a bold defiance,
wherein we may express an ardent zeal to right our natives slavery, and stop
the current of their puritan design intended for our total ruin;


Mineus. Brave man at arms, thy invincible spirit adds more fury to the
justness of our cause, then when I recollect a memory of Guyrva's sad
misfortune, through some prodigious star, ominus to poor Lirenda still, yet
if undanted resolution may advance the drooping state, of this our native
Clime, let him not prosper will not prosecute that base, perfidious,
Puritanicall faction, enemies to God, our mild and gracious Sovereign:


Aretas. I will not boast what my intentions are, nor derive an active power
from my own self conceit, No Noble friends and fellow peers in arms, my
ambition's fixed on them powers above, from whence I have a heart both true and
loyal, consecrated to the service of this pious war, in proof whereof,
(vouchsafe me but that honor) i will be the first shall scale those feeble walls
and raze yon lofty turretts to the ground, or dye in the adventure,


Dora. Forbear Aretas promise no more then thousands will beside we are
departed from our home, under the conduct of a happy leader, to whom as to the
public good we owe the tender of life, estate and fortune, for royal Carola
his just prerogatives, wrested from him by an elected crew of shameless
Roundheads; wherefore lets once again confirm our vow in his defense, that
is most dear unto us;


(They draw. Athe. The motions good, join hands and hearts together Now God
defend this kingdom by our powers whilst we are for our gracious king, and
yours: Omnes Crant this, O Lord Amen, Amen, O Lord.


And kiss the hilts Athe. The squadrons now must quarter in due order, Dora
take you the charge thereof, my self, Mineus, and Aretas will see if threats
or promises will best prevail, th'obdurate Newters to side with us:


Enter a Scout. Scout. Arm Sirs, arm, arm, an army of well appointed
Angoleans march directly hither;


Athe. Never more joyful news, come my hearts cheer up; hearken this welcome
March a far off. sound, invites your valor, be not found dismayed although
your foes be armed, the most of ours all naked men, never trained to any
seemly posture


Theod. What troops will you appoint to give the charge?


Athe. Lentimos, and you Theodorike must lead a party forth, we will follow
after with them we shall conceive expedient


Theod. Shine happy stars, propitious fate direct us, Come, lets away, heaven
will I hope protect us


Exeunt alarums A good while after the Alarums begun, Enter Albinus and Celar,
severally their weapons drawn. Celar. Whither shall we fly, Captain Albinus
make have away, or we are lost for ever, our ranks are broken by the bloody
foe that like so many cruel Tigers rage and slaughter all they meet, with ruth
full groans of dying men the air is filled, and death in triumph waits upon
our vanquished forces.


Alb. I scorn to flinch, or leave my harmless men a prey to them whose
cruelty extends beyond the bounds of human nature; of my estate they have
deprived me else, so most of those we have now seen lie dead then to revenge
that wrong I led them forth, and to that end i will stay; my life's no more but
lost a^gments the sum of their large score:


Celar. Our Sergeant Major has forsook the field,


Alb. More Coward he;


Celar. Shall we submit or yield;


Albin. Neither; you may in that your pleasure do.


Celar. As you resolve so I will stand to it to;


Enter Theodericke and Lentimos. Theo. See where Albinus stands, as if he meant
to conquer all.


Alb. Come on Traitor.


Theo. Thou lie. base slave, that proud word shall cost thee dearly.


Lent. An equal match come, man to man;


Theod. Fall back good Sir, do you pursue the rest that flies amain: Exit.
Lent. have at you Sirs. They fight, Celar flies, and Albinus is killed. pack
hence thou wretched soul, go down to stix, there learn of Tantalus what
is it to strive, against the stream, for which he starves alive.

Exit.
The body is taken off, then enter Pitho, Berosus, Osirus, Cola, and Tibernus.
Pitho. When first this unexpected news was brought us we little thought it
would clime to that height, or that there were such tyranny intended, against
the miserable Northern Subjects but since we do (unto our griefs) behold the
sad disaster of our dearest friends


Cola. Expect no better measure at their hands if their emperious pride be not
abated;


Pitho. 'twill come too late I fear,


Osir. 'twish a fable, let damned Medaea raise her spiteful charms, from the
depth of the infernal sootie caves, or from grim Pluto's court conjure a
number of armed furies, this horrid crew, were they more strong then hell is
deep, our just cause, cries at th'impartiall throane of God for aid, to
affront and keep in awe, these bold usurpers of our Soveraigne's power;


Pith. Most nobly spoken:


Bero. To think otherwise we should wrong our selves, had we not lost our
expectations for some private guilt, against the deity my cause of knowledge
being sad and heavy, for the late army we sent forth they say, received a
fatal overthrow,


Osir. Be not dismayed, think not the dismal sight of our defeated troops,
shall strike us silent or rent our fortunes with an odious term of Coward
fear, it is a base deformed object* a scandal for posterity to blot our fame,
No my Lord, as yet my hopes has life, by the same president in other stout
commanders, witness Bellona's darling, invincible Caesar (whose fame and
valor did spread over the girdled orb, unto the Antipodes) Darius, Priam, the
Macedonian King, with infinite others impertinent to nominate these potent
conquerors I say, were subject to the like misfortunes, yet notwithstanding
afterward have been victorious; And why not we?


Bero. Our case, my Lord, is weak and desperate;


Osir. For shame cast off them looks of sadd despair, it ill beseemes your
calling, time, or place an occasion seldom less needful, without a further
consultation: come, let us go immediately claspe on our coats of steell, and
dare the traitors to their face, whilst I do animate and lead up the rest of
our decayed forces: Courage as then, a little spark may lighten all again:


Pitho. Since your undanted spirit must needs forward, then be as prosperous as
Hannibal when he conveyed his army over the mounting Alps, or like the son of
Jove, when Giants impudence did invade the heavens


Exeunt omnes preter Cola. Cola. My hearts, as good as theirs, had I equal
power, i would tear the fabric of this world asunder, my fury like Jove's violent
thunder should blast the earth far worse then Phaeton in his heedles course,
what would I not have done, what Kingdoms ransackt till I had my will of these
on whom I ground my hatred still:

Exit.
Enter Athenio, Mineus, Aretas and Dora: They take their Seats. Athe. To
satisfy the nice conceit of those who judge our actions as their fancies are,
our taking arms shall to the world appear a just and natural defense in us
when to His Majesty, there is not the least conceit of any harm once meant,
either in's Royal person Crown or dignity;


Min. So far we still express our selves my Lord, for in this protection is
laid forth the motives whereon we chiefly ground this war next with a
tender care we do reserve all that concerns our sovereigns right, to the
Lirendean Crown, therein excluding all foreign power, all Princes whatsoever:


Athe. If such a Covenant we had not made; No Caesar, Scipio, Hanniball, nor
that worlds conqueror proud Macedon, were their expired dates renewed again,
could not, nay should not subdue the gentry of Lirenda from their obedience to
the Angolean King, most firm and true since mighty Cheapstow did conduct us
hither;


Aretas. Nor do we now intend a base revolt had Rome's majestique throne
command it so my humble answer says give Caesar's due, to God thy heart and
faith;


Dora. That was indeed the chief occasion first that moved us join with them.


Athe. And will maintain it whilst life breathes in this corpse of mine,


Mine. And mine,


Aret. We are resolved to live and die together.


Enter a Messenger. Messen. May it please your Lordships, one Theodorike
desires admittance to your Lordships presence:


Athe. Go give him entrance, good man his pains, are great to draw the
Commons forth.


Exit Messeng. Mine. Such friends as him we need.


Dora. The more his praise.


Enter Theodoricke. Athe. Welcome Theodoricke.


Theo. Then know my Lords, with pains unspeakable I Have drawn together, of
mine my near allies their servants, friends and tenants, a thousand able men,
at Rufus quarters, in a fit readiness to do you service, when further know, our
scouts for certain do report, that fifteen hundred desperate bloody rogues
under the command of Sir Daretas, at Medra haven are landed, beside one
Collonell Crambich, (a branch of the cursed tribe in Pickland) is trusted with
the leading of a thousand chosen men, all Citizens, with whom, by true
intelligence, Sir Carola intends t'expulse us from our native dwellings, with
such a savage spleen, men, women, infants on their mothers pape, are vowed to
be killed;


Athe. That project crusheth all, Notwithstanding cosen, and Collonell (a title
not worth the least of thy applauded meritts,) return, with such small forces
as you have give Cola a manfull skermish, and we shall speedily unto your aid.


Theo. To my grief I speak it, the camp has scarce a dozen pound of powder.


Aret. Heaven will strengthen thee.


Athe. Here take this sword, and use't against our foes.


Theod. Upon their carcasses i will spare no blows, farewell my Lords, Theodorike
will go, expose his fate against your powerful foe;

Exit.
Enter Florilla, Dulis, Pulchrina and Ellenora. Ellen. Yonder they are Madam.


Dull. My thinks they lack them pleasant smiles of mirth, that like so many
radiant beams of Sol, gave comfort to the gloomy shade of our disquiet
thoughts.


Flor. Why therefore we do now presume this visit hoping we may at least
disperse them cares that we suspect does seize them unawares


Dora. Behold my Lords, who comes?


Flor. We are discovered; health to your Lorships.


They rise. Athe. Welcome fair Ladies all.


Pulch. Must we demand your license to entrude.


Athe. 'Twere needless; your beauties are sufficient to claim a greater
favor.


Dulis. Sir you know, it is the desire of love, fond women do so much regard,
that overcome with joy, you men esteems it as a needless toy, and may perhaps
our kindness now express in the harsh language of ungratfulnesse:


Athe. Your will my dear,


Dulis. Is only to be merry this new year, for Christmas being now well near
expired without the comfort of your usual mirth, what joy have we, what
sorrows can prevent when in your looks the map of discontent:


Mine. It lies beyond the reach of female wit, to sound the cause that does
occasion it,


Dull. Howsoever some short time we will borrow, to curb the mischief of a sudden
sorrow;


Florill. Our music has of late unto them given, a song, penned by a friend
that does protest he loves this Nation dearly, in whose breast such deep
affection by their kindness came that he does honor and respect the name;


Athe. This makes you to affect it so.


Dulis. Love binds us to it.


Flor. Will you be pleased to hear it then?


Athe. Yes, and with thanks to.


THE SONG.
Come away, O come away,
Courageous youths, O do not stay,
Now Is the time, brave Mars will prove
More powerful then the god of love.
Cast your Venus sports away,
Valor brooks not long delay,
Gods themselves are up in arms
To protect you from all harms.
He that honor thinks to gain,
Fears no danger, woe or pain,
Death's grim look or bloody scarre,
makes the mind more noble far.
Then make have O do not stay,
Dally not the time away,
If you mean for to persevere,
Now Is the time, O now, or never.
Dulis. How like you this?


Mine. A perfect good one, Lady;


Flor. Seeing the Poets fancy has pleased you thus, we crave the like
respect, which granted us, shall not divert you long from them affairs whereto
we see you are inclined to most how like you of a dance my Lords.


Mine. Fairest beauty, none dares deny, when you express the law that keeps
offending lovers most in awe.


Flor. It merits not this complement, your love, in this, is that which we
desire to prove, some music there.


Music and the Lords and Ladies dance. Athe. believe me this was neatly done,


Mine. And gave us much contentment.


Dora. Ladies a banquet. after this to entertain our Noble friends.


Flor. If that small worth you think will please your friend, lead on the way
my Lords and we will attend.


Exeunt omnes preter Ellenora. Elle. Go, go spend the remnant of your happy
days, whilst I with silent grief do vent my thoughts, thoughts able to
dismay a mind most resolute if what a maidens brain conceives will take
effect, our woeful hours are posting on; we may be confident Angolias fury,
armed with a mortal hatreds ready bent to mischiefs, void of pity, with
pretense, this cruel rage is in their own defense, least we who have been
still as slaves to them should now endeavor to regaine our own religion,
laws, and liberty, this, O this it fears me will produce more inhuman acts,
then ever brutish Nero did invent: oh, oh, silly, heart, why do thou figure
forth so strange a form? silence no more, no more, let not the air be private
to thy grief, fearing some fatal star, approves thy speech prophetical;
and make these thoughts in fact a mournful Chorus to the following act:

Exit.
The second Act.
Enter Athenio, Mineus, Aretas, Dora, Theodoricke, and Lentimos. Beat a march.
Athe. This day (dear friends and kinsmen) we must behave our selves like brave
courageous Lirendeans, not regarding the politic stratagems of Cola, wherein
he thinks to find us, in a foul disorder, his Machavillian plots never so
privately contrived, but heaven you see, does send us timely notice, wherefore
we will expect him with spirits altogether void of fear; what though we are
not so well armed as he, nor furnished with that plenty of ammunition, the
justness of our cause will shield us from the spiteful fury of his invading
power; be sensible of your wrongs; the infamous disgrace without respect of
birth or person, how odious the name of Catholic, has ever been unto them? a
hatred there is by inheritance, the loss of your estates by a thousand damned
inventions; beside innumerable edicts against Religion: These torments were not
held sufficient in respect we somewhat yet possess of this our native soil;
wherefore they have contrived the last and worst of evils; to raze us from the
world, No, nor leave so much as one alive, to increase the memory of us
hereafter; (a grudge suitable to hells black purposes.) Reflect I pray, how
near it does concern us then, to venture our lives and fortunes in a noble
virtuous way; that truly tends, to the safety of your wives, children and
friends: Admit gentlemen of the worst may happen, what an they break on ours;
it is no dishonor neither our reputations blemished in it when the advantage of
arms and numbers theirs, May not fortune as well grace our desires when all
her motions are uncertain, should we defeat them now the world would speak
our praise: Come, let us resolve to do them more annoy, then Agamemnon, in the
wars of Troy:


Lent. The grave and learned eloquence of Roman Orators (noble Colonel) could
not more perfect a description give, off those insufferable injuryes, which
captivated our hearts in chains of ice, that must again (perforce) dissolve in
flames of just revenge:


Theod. Our enemies too near approach, else we could enlarge the subject of
this conference with as many material circumstances, which for the present we
abreviate to prosecute our right: lead on Sir, bravely guide the way heaven
will, I hope, grant this our happy day:


Exunt. Alarums Soon after the Alarums begun, Enter Cola, his weapon drawn.
Cola. Was ever seen or heard, such bold, audacious rogues that dares upbraid
my fury, have not I* to their confused shame and loss, caused many towns and
villages to be destroyed in dreadful flames, themselves like dismal fugitives
compeld to fly, and yet they dare affront me still! O impudence! that with
extracted villainy deserves a total ruin, thy harm I seek, and long to
glory in so good an action* motives sufficient does enduce me to it, to hang,
to rack, to kill, to burn, to spoil, until I make this land a barren soil.


Exit. Alarums Allarums: Enter Athenio, and Lentimos severally their weapons
drawn. Lent. Fly Cosen fly, there is no hope of safety else, notwithstanding a
stout resistance, our men (affrighted with the unusual sight of blood and
slaughter) are foully broken on, routed by a number crueller then famisht lions
in The Arabian desert, Cola like a demi-divell or Canniball, cries out kill,
kill, spare neither man, woman, child regard not age or sex, down, down with
them all


Athe. For Christ his passion, do you once more oppose his fury, make good
the trench whilst I persuade our timorous men to face about.


Exit Lent* As Athenio would depart Enter Celar. Celar. Stand traitor,
perfidious traitor, stand.


Athe. Thy foe, a loyal subject, and prove it so; on your guard Sir:


They fight. Celar is killed, Athenio departs, then Cola Enters with Tibernus and
Soldiers. Cola. Tibernus charge, Crambich post unto the bridge where the most
number of the villens are in strife to pass, let not a mothers child escape,
but see due execution on them all:


Tiber. Your will shall be observed effectually

Exit Tiber*
He spies Celar killed. Cola. What stout Celar killed? O damned bowitching fate:
Bear hence this body, then after take the pillage of the town for your good
service.


Exeunt. Enter Belfrida. Belfr. Now as I live its like to prove a mad world, a
desperate time with our Citizens; an' it continue thus, where they did break
by dozens heretofore, we shall have hundreds now at a light rate in faith; such
pretty shifts and sleights are so cunningly contrived these days, under
pretense of safety, as shutting shops, packing up goods and sent, the Lord
knows whither; Coin, Jewels, plate, household stuff, every thing vanishes
like superfluous clouds, to the vast center of the hollow earth; my countrymen
are styled, to discontented gentlemen, well, if e're I did intend to make a
fortune, now is the time to stir my self, a fitter opportunity will never
offer my acceptance, ha, the mischiefs ont, I shall be reputed so, a prime
promoter: tush a blast of breath no sooner blown then gone, honesty cannon
thrive at all times, the proverb says, he must needs dye a beggar that is
known too just: wherefore I will scrue up my wits, to the full height of
knavery, whereby I may demurely insinuate my self, with the good liking of Sir
Carola; whom no sooner's made acquainted with my faculty, but heaps of honor
will fall on me straight, with good Sir, sweet Sir, as I do pass them by,
help me says one I am condemned to dye, there is twenty pieces; another calls
kind Sir, remember my petition you prefer here is expedition for it; thus
'twixt em all, I Am sure to rise, whosoever chance to fall: Enter Tibernus. here
comes the only man in credit with Sir Carola; prosperity wait on your noble
self Tibernus:


Tibern. Thanks honest friend:


Belfr. I have been since these wars desirous Sir, to do the governor some
special service, but since could not the happiness to impart what I am sure
will please and profit him.


Tiber. Relate thy mind to me, and thou shall have a fit reward.


Belfr. To place my low fortunes on the pyramide of his bounty, were a praise
befitting the worthy motions of a generous soul: This did enduce my zealous
love to show, the subtle prankes of some penurious Citizens, that lately
closed up in a wall, at least a thousand pound in plate and cash.


Tiber. There Is some strong hopes in this;


Aside. Belfr. I Will bring you likewise to each papist house, where privately
are kept, trunks wholly laden of rich apparel, coin, jewels, rings
bracelets patents of the rebels lands.


Tiber. That especially:


Belfr. What can you think or name best needful for your use, but I will
straight discover?


Tiber. Surely thou can not miss a brave preferment;


Befr. Under pretense of being bred a Papist, I shall without the least thought
of suspicion conduct your guard where Priests in secret are locked up at Mass,
or in the night as they abroad do creeping pass the street, moreover Sir, if
the army be in want, or that of force you ask assistance from the townsmen
where some may better spare more gold then others, let me alone to search the
difference of those men's fidelity, how able, willing, really affected, Papist
above Protestant I am expert in all


Tiber. Graceless villen that cares not to betray his dearest friends to them
wotes not after he were hanged: Aside* I must dissemble with the knave a while
for my own end; Now trusty friend make good what thou have said, and bless
this hour for ever:


Belfr. Your constant servant I will still persevere.


Exeu* Enter Athenio, Mineus, Aretas, Dora, and Cephalon. Mine. Brother Athenio:


Athe. What says our dear brother?


Mine. Have you not hard of the late proclamation?


Athe. Yes Noble Brother, I perused it over, the treacherous model of a rude
invention, Pitho would thousands give for all our heads


Ceph. No, there is a milder since, full of Clemency, a general pardon,


Athe. To whom?


Ceph. Them will submit to the Lords Justices


Athe. On what conditions?


Mine. Perverse cruelty?


Aret. Perpetual slavery?


Dora. And mortal hatred?


Athe. Very true: these are the glorious titles every faint hearted native will
revolt shall have, which from my heart I wish it him, but to explain my own
particular intention, may to the wise perhaps seem needles; yet he that loves
his Country, or will profess the Characters of Catholiquo in's heart take
notice often, our quarrel is religious, in maintenance whereof we are already
sworn without equivocation, and e're I violate that sacred oath, a thousand
deaths shall one by one invade me, if floods of misery, i will wade them over and
from its raging streams regaine the sho^^ of blessed fidelity.


Dora. May all the world example take by this Lord's goodness;


Cepha. Under favor: 'twere a folly, a most profound madness to seek our
certain ruin by denial of a benefit, so conveniently proffered; when our
wants at the most extreme: both night and day I posted hence the kingdom over,
all parts my wandering thoughts conceived might best supply our wants, did I
return ought but the fruitless labor of a needful journey; can Stelern now
your foes* increase make up two thousand complete arms in field; your
Lordships knows this is no fable:


Aret. Good Sir forbeate, the matter's past dispute.


Enter a Messenger. Messeng. An please your excellence, several gentlemen of
the County, are newly come in post, with some strange news, it is feared by
their sad looks.

Exit* Mess.
Athe. Direct'em hither; some straggling troupers that for pillage scout abroad,
makes false alaruins to afright the Country thus:


Enter Theodorike. Theodorike,* Your news? What, sad upon it?


Theo. Osirus, with a powerful army gathered from all parts at least
consisting of eight thousand foot, and horse, march hitherward; burning of
towns, distroying Castles fair, all to the sword goes that his army meets,
and does intend (the which good God forbid) to make a fatal conquest of this
land.


Aret. What strange, dishonest, base device is this, to publish to the world, a
general pardon, before which time appointed is expired, poor harmless
subjects killed, the kingdom fired, O faithless wicked Cruelty!


Enter Lentimos. Lent. Shift for your selves in have, for here will soon
arrive more sullen spies, then Mercury did charm in Argo's eyes; good my Lords
dispatch, one minutes stay too long may yield you prisoners to untimely ends:


Athe. Dear friends, we now resemble one at point of death, that must perforce
forsake, what he most dearly loved, life, wealth, fair possessions, pleasures
content exchanged to sad expressions, wife laments, children their parents
moan, each has occasion then to sigh and groan; so we, distressed we, must
often among, their doleful ditties tune a mournful song.


Cepha. Let them whose will stand out, I will submit to great Osirus cause its
held most sit.


Aside Exeunt. A March is beaten, then enter Osirus, Tygranes and Tibernus.
Osir. Now through the power and help of heaven we are, in safe possession of
their strongest holts, the foe not able to withstand our warlike troops are
fled, like men full of despair, grief, regardlesse fury that we are thus
strong; themselves pursued with terror of the times, and fearful shadows of
base acted crimes, wherefore we must then cheerfully advance, not doubting but
we truly shall e're long, revenge sufficiently the Angoleans wrong.


Tygra. You speak Sir, like your self, full of maturitie, the hopeful line,
that guides my confidence from the most intricate labyrinth of despair when
Adrohna was at point to perish, and plast the issue of a far event on more
then mortal comfort: that proposes to the wicked, vice, mischiefs, pains
unspeakable, joined with the grim aspect of blood and terror, more deserving
plagues then wilful Egypt felt, when her miseries were at the height of all
extremes


Tiber. It needs must follow so, for in all parts they are environed with
severe Commanders, famous for their valor, your Excellence in Stelern, and for
the adjacent Provinces, men of known integrity:


Osir. It is our chiefest comfort they go on as prosperous as fair Bellona's
darlings when the gods were threatened by a multitude of foolish mortals.


Tigr. But none with that Celeritie like yours, which far transcend theirs
went before as Sol does Luna's spangled Orb, or some bright star, when sable
clouds does veil the sky.


Osir. It Is the noblest of your thoughts are pleased my Lord to speak our
commendations greater then desert can warrant so much goodness:


Tiber. It cannot be denied; your prosperous fate, fame has divulged it to the
spacious world, with doubled Echoes of immortal praise; which makes Angolia to
esteem your actions the glory of her Northern Clime.


Osir. Believe me gentlemen, this will impair your ripe judgment much, what
tidings brings you from the Camp my friend?


Enter 1, Post. 1. Post. To know your Lordships pleasure concerning a prisoner
that immediately is taken:


Osir. How, a gentleman of quality?


1. Post. He names himself Lieutenant Collonell Rufus a Scot by birth, a
Papist by profession.


Osir. Let him be forthwith sent to the Lords Justices,


Tiber. Behold my Lord, here comes another Post,


Osir. Now friend, thy news?


Enter 2. Post. 2. Post. That Lord Sileus, Bathillus, one Cephalon and Sisenna,
with many other prime gentlemen are jointly come to the Camp, in hope of a
free pardon


Tigr. A gibbet fitts them better: good my Lord;


Osir. Patience kind Sir, when time and place will serve each one may justly
have what he deserve till then remit your censure.


2. Post. How will your Lordship have them be disposed of?


Osir. With a strong Convay, guard them presently unto the Castle:


2. Post. It shall be duly done.


Exeunt Posts. Osir. Now we may say, Heaven favors us.


Tigr. Nothing more certain Sir, yet I must ask a boon:


Osir. It Is granted, were it my estate Tigranes:


Tigr. No more then two full Regiments of foot, a troop or so of horse to
augment my former forces, with whom I mean to wast the Kingdom over: chiefly
the Northern quarter, where most my indignations bent, until I pull from
those bold conspirators unsanctified brows the wreath of honor, and force
them to repent, cry, curse the hour, that e're they urged Angolias warlike
power.


Osir. There needs no language to excite thy valor, nor distrust, but thou
may soon accomplish, that pleasing service both to God and man, come then
make choice thy self of them resolved hearts fit to wait on so brave a
leader: Then you for Vlstrand, we Stelern, claspe hands, when Martial men thus
knit, their party stands:


Exeunt. Alarums Enter Tibernus and Soldiers. 4. Soldiers. They call for
quarter, and will yield the Castle if we grant it them.


Tiber. Go, say they shall have it, promise what ever they will demand, until
we gain this place of strength, our loss is much already; when that is done,
gentlemen, and brother soldiers, their lives shall be at each of your
disposalls, as our poor countrymen has been at theirs.


1. Sold. We Will brush the^r gutts in faith,


Tib. You were but fools and cowards else to think the contrary, when heaven
cries vengeance on their sinful heads, nature binds you effect it; were there
no more provoking motions, but the slaughter of your follow soldiers here:


1. Sold. He speaks like a true zealous Protestant:


2. Sold. His words enflames my heart.


3. Sold. Z'blood mine is so too:


4. Sold. And mine is full resolved with this stiff blade, to goare the
traitors throats;


1. Sold. My sword likewise:


2. Sold. Mine shall not sleep when yours is drawn.


They draw severally. 3. Sold. This is as quickly drawn to;


4. Sold. But this did pretty well, and shall again, augment the number of
our foes that is slain.


Tib. I must of force be absent now they yield: least your pretense of being
ignorant I granted quarter, might spoil the jest: you know your charge?


1. Sold. You need not doubt, we do: stand; where would these traitors go?


Enter men women and children. Man. Where God will guide us best.


4. Soul. Where the devil shall your wretched souls molest?


Man. Hold we had quarter promised us.


1. Sold. Believe him not he lies, kill, kill, let not a bastards They are
killed. brat of that unhappy brood, escape your hands.


2. Sold. Look, yonder runs a score, lets follow, follow.


Exunt. Enter Theodoricke. Theo. Heaven grant they perish in the world to come,
that were foul actors of this brutish Tragedy: dear friends and Countrymen,
blame not my love, if I bestow the attribute of Martirs on ye, Martyrs, O
Martyrs truly with good reason too, since for your faith, you sufferd thus;
live then blessed souls securely in eternal rest, whilst we lament your too
untimely loss; Oh that my wishes could an army raise for this poor kingdoms
safety; whereby such cruelty might be no more extended, but oh, oh, these,
these wishes are in vain when fire and sword beyond control does reign
Lirenda, poor Lirenda now farewell, farewell thy former pomp; all is turned to
grief attired in crimson robes of bloody death that none but heavens
compassive motions can subdue: cease then, O cease impatient grief, when God
is pleased, we may expect relief, mean time these breathless corpse me thinks
do crave that tribute which we all bring to the grave.

Exit.
The bodies are taken off. The third Act.
Enter Cola in a fury. Cola. Plague choke him for a graceless villen, not a
minutes ease my restless fancy had, since first I understood my dismal fate,
ha, is this your prophecy, good man halter? is this my fortune? Sir, you will
be lost He reads. in this war, by the hands of one you least suspect, before
you shall return again: Must my labor, my zealous labor be, requited with a
death I most abhor, not that I fear grim death base conjurer, but that a
Lirendean slave should vanquish me, and glory in my overthrow, O, O, O, damned
devils incarnate, if die I must my life shall cost ten thousand lives accursed


Enter Tibernus. Tiber. There Is at least a score of arch-traitors sent to
town, whereof one Cephalon.


Cola. Ha, Brukil^ I hope,


Tibe. The very same;


Cola. God's blessing on thy heart, for this good news; a very rogue in grain.


Tibe. There is another old Commander, whom they call Lieutenant-Collonell
Rufus, one can disclose more then a hundred more,


Cola. I Will scrue it out of his old bones in faith: good Tibernus fetch them
hither.


Tibe. Them all?


Cola. No, none but that pair of cunning rogues: desire the Constable to yoke
the rest, they cannot be secure, Exit Tibe. enough, but these shall to the
rack without redemption.


Enter Tibernus, Cephalon, Ruffus and Soldiers. Tiber. Clear the way there,
for the prisoners, ho,


Cola. Are you there Sirs? have you brought Magna Charta, to reprive you from
the gollowes? ha


Ceph. No, His Majesty's more gracious.


Cola. What, what, to pardon a rabble of disloyal Cut-throates, a nimble actor
of this bold Commotion?


Ceph. I never was.


Cola. I say thou lie traitor* and sat in chief commission.


Ceph. Never in my life.


Cola. Better confess.


Ceph. What I did not?


Cola. The rack shall force thee then.


Ceph. Mercy great Sir supports his royal throne from whence your glories are
derived, and is the admired Emblem of heroical virtue dispersed throughout the
world, wherein his highness like a prince composed of goodness, would not his
subjects ruin, but rather have his mercy eminent, as himself is good


Cola. Rugh curres, now y' are glad to fawn, when hitherto 'twas lofty bragges
ye stood on, a treachery I Will trample into dust, and make you know, before we
part, what homage you do owe:


Ruf. Sir, for my self thus much I will confess, not that I fear thy rack
or tortures Cola, for why they shall no more then what I freely speak, I was
indeed employed by the stat^ of Lirenda, poor discontented Lirenda; to make
known their woeful grievance to his Sacred Majesty, which had he known,
doubtless his royal soul would grieve to hear th'unheard of cruelty; thy
squadrons exercise:


Cola. I tell thee doting traitor they are justly served.


Ruf. How, traitor?


Cola. I traitor to thy face I speak it.


Ruf. Even to thy self I do return the same.


Cola. How captious they thwart me with insulting language; lead them to
execution straight.


Tibe. First use the rack.


Cola. He dies.


Tibe. Let me beseech you Sir.


Cola. At thy request it shall be so.


Tibe. The rack sirs, ho:


The Soudirs fetch in the rack. Ruf. Before that engine of inveterate malice
comes, vouchsafe me hearing; I claim a double privilege; first the benefit of
your late printed Proclamation Osirus promise next I should have quarter, such
as became a martial man to have, which now we humbly offer your acceptance.


Cola. Dissembling Crocodile, thy hidden spleen shall not corrupt justice by
invective flattery, no vipers no, a world of tortures are more requisite.


Ceph. Let Mercy mittigate your rage.


Cola. Presume to speak again, and by my sovereigns hand you both shall hang.


Ruf. That were an act like thy self.


Tibe. Come sirs you must unloose with expedition


Ceph. Is that the recompense of our submission, will neither honor, faith,
nor pity move thee.


Cola. He stirs my choler, will none obey my will I Will tear each limme my
self asunder, unless with speed he suffer?


Tibe. Do not provoke him Sir.


Cephalon is laydon the rack and drawn. Ceph. Heaven grant us patience then.


Cola. A standish Sirs: take now the examination as he speaks it;


Ceph. Hold, hold, for Christ's sake hold; the torment's great.


Cola. Did not thou conspire to surprise the Castle?


Ceph. Yes, yes, I did.


Cola. And went to several parts of the kingdom for powder?


Ceph. I did, I did.


Cola. Wast not thou private to their consultations?


Ceph. Very true.


Cola. Did not you then intend, to extirpate all the Angolean Protestants, to
disposesse our Sovereign of his Crown, to usurp the government of Lirenda?


Ceph. My conscience cannot accuse them so*


Cola. It Is false thou say:


Ceph. O no, no, no:


Cola. Rack up the villen higher yet, till he confess, confess I bid thee.


Ceph. Torments force me, to acknowledge that was never done.


Cola. How, how?


Ceph. I do confess what you demand is true.


Cola. Write that Tibernus, when thy rebellious kinsmen and thy self, would
carouse and feast, you wished my head among you there,


Ceph. We did,


Cola. For which thou shall a twist up higher yet.


Ceph. Then as you hope for mercy Sir forbear, my pains intolerable; oh I
die.


Cola. Now take him off, your turn comes next.


Ruf. In vain you seek to force me Sir, since what I speak shall be through
fear not truth: nor will refuse to answer the least syllable you ask.


Cola. Expect no favor it is denied thee:


Ruf. Such favor may thou at thy last judgment find: Rufus is laid on the
Rack and drawn* O cruel tyrant, will no remorse of conscience enter thy
black soul to see, my aged limbs thus rent with tyranny?


Tibe. Better confess, then languish on the rack,


Ruf. I can no more then what unto the Council else I did.


Cola. Higher with him: confess in have, or by great Jove i will rack thy life
away,


Ruf. Take it, O take my wretched life away, so it appease thy fury, no
toungue can tell what torments I endure?


Tib. He faintes an please you.


Cola. Let him faint and hang to, no great matter, a doting proud obdurate
fool, will not confess, go take them hence unto the jayle;


1. Sold. Your pleasure shall be done.


2. Sold. Zlid, search their pockets.


3. Sold. 'twill make us swill boys, swill boys merrily


2. Sold. Thank me for that, good man dunse, or it should walk to the
Constable again.


1. Soul. His shallow Coxcomb, had not the wit to think on it.


3. Sold. However anon we will be as joviall lads, as cup and can.


Exeunt. Cola. The rest shall be used with like severitie.


Tib. 'Twere wisely done of you.


Enter Soldiers leading in the Countrymen. Cola. Who have you there?


1. Sold. Two rogues with each a bag of salt we took, going to supply their
wants abroad,


Cola. You have done well, to intercept the knaves: go bid the Provost
Marshall execute them presently:


1. Sold. Come away, come an' be hanged.


Man. Where master?


1. Soul. To be hanged that is plain English,


Man. I trow no, for what Agra?


1. Sold. The gallows will instruct you better, come an' be hanged, come.


Exeunt. Enter Belfrida. Tibe. Behold your chief spy is returned Sir Carola.
your Argos, your pretty tell tale Mercury,


Belf. First, arm your grave thoughts with attentive patience, least what I
speak might prove offensive to you, your foes do daily expect from Spain,
France and the Low-Conntreyes, plenty of all fit ornaments of war, as
powder, bullet, match, musketts, petternalls, and such like, moreover many
valiant brave Commanders.


Cola. Hell take them first, abrood of most disloyal vipers, ha, what
peremptory slave durst tell this fable?


Belfr. Them who invoke your happy fates, for certain did approve it upon
oath, and further said, one Dictus went for that expected aid:


Cola. What is he gone to Sea?


Belfr. Yes gone to Sea.


Cola. A blister build on thy tongue foul serpent Tibernus thou love me,


Tibe. My heart and life is yours.


Cola. Speed after good Tibernus in all post, send forth a power to watch at
every coast, perhaps he lurkes in hollow caves abroad, till wind and tide does
serve, whilst this base rascal, (corrupted with a golden bribe,) will not
reveal his private haunt.


Belfr. Sir, if I have offended pardon me:


Cola. By heavens I will not, put him into the Provost Marshalls custody, till
further order comes from us; Tibernus charge Amphilus on his life to scour the
Seas, and let the harvest be destroyed.


Exeunt. Tibe. It shall.


Cola. What Hercules can remove this mountain of enraged passions from my
heart? O now it nothing fitts my care to speak but thunder or take into my
throat the trumpe of Heaven, with whose determinate blasts the wind shall
burst, that blew his sails aloft, and the enraged Seas consume their foamy
waves, that will not let his vessel sink, whereby my care might be dispersed,
void of suspicion, ascending from, this wicked plot unseene, a poisoned plot
sufficient to infect the world; when they do show themselves the worst of men:

Exit.
Enter Elleonora, pursued by a Soldier his sword drawn. Sold. Stay harlot
stay, or by the heavens above, I Will neither spare thee for reward nor love:


Elleo. Pity oh pity friend my woeful case, my parents are by thee already
slain, what would my loathsome life avail thee then, kind heart relent,
relent if any spark of civil grace be in thee.


Sold. Z'blood and wounds, unless thou yields me freely thy virginity I Will
pierce thy breast with this remorselesse steel;


Elleo. I scorn thy hellish motion: hands of rude devil or I Will convince thee
with a chaste denial like virtues darling fair Susanna.


Sold. Here Is needless fustian trow mistress twitle, twatle, what now? nay
friske about the sinquapace, all is one; thou strivest in vain to hinder my
desires, yield, yield speedily.


Elleo. Never whilst I live: help, help,


Enter another Soldier. 2. Sold. I come to help away your maidenhead, if it
be not lost already.


Elle. More furies yet,


2. Sold. And more, if need require,


Elleo. O beastly filthy lewdness, will no compassion move you? O kill me
kill me sooner then bereave me of a modest fame, see these eyes dim with
distilling, tears, that never knew to weep till this sad hour, yet would
some pity crave from your hard hearts, oh honest friends hearken to my
griefs, let not your better sense be deaf unto the woeful plaints of a
distressed maiden


1. Sold. Who has a nimble tongue, and pratles strangely,


2. Sold. And as strong as a witch.


She struggles with them. Elle. Help, help in time, some help from heaven,
help me ye powers divine.


Enter Theodoricke. Theod. Me thinks I hard not very far from hence some
woeful Creatures to lament and greeve, crying a loud for help, as 'twere,


Elleo. Help, help;


Theod. Some ravished virgin did emplore my aid, I Will therefore search this
silent desert through until I find from whence proceeds, this heavy doleful
cry:


Elleo. It Is shame to use a maiden thus.


1. Sold. Zwounds jade talk not of shame to us,


2. Sold. Stab the queen;


1. Sold. Z'life that is the way this pettish harlot will, affront us else.


Elleo. Oh stay thy murdering hand: murder, murder:


2. Soul. A she devil by God: can not kill her troe:


He spies them. Theod. Direct me heaven, O that in time I may bestow my help:
ha, what base inhuman fray is this? I did suppose as much, when first, her
shrill laments did pierce the air, and sent into my soul a deep conceit of
pity, ha, two to one weak creature drench in tears, trust me, the odds is
much, and marvel she held out so long; well name of God, i will forward, fly
shameless villens fly, if not, by heavens I Will force your flight, and thus
revenge her wrong:


He strikes at them 1. Sold. Rascal thou shall dearly repent that blow.


Theod. Release that Lady first, I claim her mine, if not, be sure this
blade's as sharp as thine.


He draws. 1. Sold. We mean not Sir at your request to flinch as if we
feared thy lofty threats, no, no proud loytring scab, get thee away in time, or
thou shall rue the hour, and curse the day, in seeking to deprive us of our
pray.


Theod. Untie her speedily base pilfring rogues, or by them powers above, you will
soon repent, the wrong you do this harmless innocent:


Elleo. Rescue, O rescue Noble Sir, a virgin, ready to be deprived of such a
treasure, once lost, the world cannot repair again.


Theod. Fair beauty be of comfort, I Will fight for thee: Come ruffians come,
come quench your bloody thirst, my heart's the fountain drink, drink till
you are burst, if your insatiate lust be not yet cool, I Will soon extinguish
that in human flame, why gape you thus, whilst valor may be had, charge both
at once.


1. Sold. Z'life sure the fellows mad,


2. Sold. Let him go to, we will cure his frenzy fitts, or make him be more
lunatike in's wits.

They fight, one is presently killed, the other soon after. Quarter, quarter,
good Sir give me quarter,


Theod. The very same that all thy bloody tribe does give my Countrymen, when
they submit their fainting lives upon a faithless promise: go, meet thy
brothers soul poor naked rogue, where greedy Charon waits to waft him ore,
unto great Belzibubs infernal shore; Now be at liberty: give thanks to God
therefore.


Elleo. His Majesty I Will praise for evermore, and you for this excessive
kindness thanks, O thanks kind heart, ten thousand thanks I give thee, wishing
that heavens may shoure perpetual blessings on thee:


Theo. Dear heart relate the legend of thy misfortune.


Elleo. Sir, my griefs would rent a heart of marble, were it sensible of them
gross abuses done (perhaps) unto your own dear friends as well as mine: oh
Cola, that mounster tyrant Cola, his barbarous command, no civil thought but
must lament to think ont, a Turk could not more brutish villain then he, and
to a kingdom (good God,) that raised both him and his from nothing, my aged
Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters all, all my dear friends were basely murdered
by him, when having notice of there bloody ends, fear lead me hither,
supposing I was free from danger, but oh it almost proved a theater of rape and
murder, had not your valor ransomed my hard fate; To these I did a shoure of
liquid tears present in lieu of what they sought, but would not do: when my
chief comfort was the gods, oh they, would then transform me like to Niobes,
my griefs I Would most happy had I been, then Metamorphos'd like that mournful
queen;


Weeps* Theod. Fair beauty do not wast them Crystal streams, that to a
lovers mind more precious is then Mida's wealth?


Elle. Persuade me not,


Theod. I will:


Elleo. Reason enjoynes me to obey your will, with all them dutiful respects I
owe, your most accomplished virtue.


Theod. Then you reward my small endeavors highly: come my fair prisoner,
wherein more freedom we may dispense with fullen, grief a while, prithee
letts to the next adjacent garrison and as (without self spraise) I late did
shield thee from the fury of these slaves, so under God I Will be thy safeguard
thither, whence may proceed, some kind refreshment to poor souls in need.


Exeunt* The bodies are taken off; then Enter four Soldiers. 1. Sold. Come
along brother Soldiers, the round, the round.


2. Sold. Zlid Sirs, where is the best pillage found?


1. Sold. At hangmans lane end, where market-folks with store of belliware, of
force must pass,


3. Sold. Zlid my teeth waters else, there, let us go there boys,


1. Sold. Mass alls but need never so paid in our days, with mouldie scraps
of cheese, and butter, with as many colors as the rainbow in it: well my
heart's in hope we shall feast merrily anon, let us be joviall, a fit of our
own mirth, thento the work my lads,


2. Sold. What shall we have?


1. Sold. What but Lord Pitho's song?


2. Soul. Your voice is best, begin.


THE SONG.
1. Sold. Pitho is doting, we care not who knows it,
The Worst is but thee pence a day if we loose it;
For were he not from God knows whom descended,
He had on poor soldiers more freely expended,
Let us not then boys expect from such men
Any favor whose honor was got with the pen.

Omnes. Cast away care boys, trouble not your mind,
For we shall be paid, when the devil is blind.

2. Sold. It Is too well known sirs such men to get pelf
With strange devices rob the commonwealth,
By a colloging crafty kind of stealing
They are made great ones; O fie on false dealing,
Then let us pray boys, for them will thus palter
May justly be served in their kind with a halter.

Omnes. Cast away cares boys, etc.

3. Sold. No marvel then sirs, we seek after pillage,
In City, suburbs, town, or Country village,
When our grave statesman conceives it good pay,
A soldiers allowance but three pence a day,
Then help your selves boys, O 'tweare a bravado
If we, could but see Pitho, in the strapado:

Omnes. Cast away care boys, etc.


Enter a Traveller. 1. Sold. Silence gentlemen, stand clear, yonder comes a
traveller.


2. Sold. I Will dive into his pocket straight;


3. Sold. His cloak is mine already,


4. And if his felt be worth the taking, from whence come you Sir?


Trav. Who gives authority to question me,


1. Sold. Poverty bids us to examine you, can lend us money friend?


Trav. Not a penny.


2. Sold. Will thou bestow some on us then?


They rifle him. Trav. Forbear, forbear;


1. Sold. We must change cloakes,


3. Sold. Your felt is good I see,


Trave. You will not deal thus shamefully I troe?


1. Sold. Get thee gone, begone, or I will make thee go.


Trav. With a light purse, and a heavy heart,

Exit.
1. Sold. See, see, it is weighty, silver O my conscience well, we will share
anon, good luck attend us.

Enter a Maid servant. Who comes next?


4. Sold. A maid with something in her lap.


1. Sold. Stir not a foot, she comes directly this way* What have thou
here sweet heart?


Maid. Nothing for you.


1. Sold. What need you be so coy? it is never the worse we see it.


Maid. Nor much the better neither: lo it is bread and meat my mistress sent me
for unto the market.


2. Sold. Your mistress put not a crum of this into her chappes by God.


Maid. Thou louzie, filching rogue, let go my meat, or I will to thy captain
presently complain: cannot folks pass the streets for you?


2. Sold. There Is thy napkin, we scorn baseness.


Maid. Baseness. base rougues, what are you else?


3. Sold. Do call us rogues.


Maid. Your actions speaks it so.


2. Sold. Z'life trull begone or I will kick thee home: an angry spider to
grumble for a little victuals thus:


3. Sold. Get home scold, get home.


They beat her off. Enter a Gentleman. 4. Sold. A prize, a prize:


1. Sold. Stand close, for if he spies us he will drop in some house or other:
Save you Sir.


Gent. And you likewise;


2. Sold. Kind Sir, regard a Soldiers want, something to drink, your bounty
Sir,


Gent. There Is twelve pence for ye;


2. Sold. In earnest of a greater sum, your leave Sir;


Gent. Keep off, you are too forward Sirs;


1. Sold. Draw if you dare, an thou love thy life stir not:


Gent. I am a Protestant.


2. Soul. Be what you will, all is one to us sweet Sir:


They rifle him. Gent. Restore my purse, and I Will part with it freely;


2. Sold. An'if we do the King shall know it; ha, ha.


Gent. I must share with mine own,


3. Sold. You look to be beaten. I see that, go to the Council complain,
tell Pitho an himself were here I Would do as much.


Gent. There Is no contesting with these desperate knaves.

Exit.
1. Sold. Ha ha brother, am not I a nimble lad?


3. Sold. Fackings and that thou art,


4. Soul. Grammercy bully, how has learned the trick ant?


2. Sold. Ah to plunge into a well lined pocket, no art beyond it.


3. Sold. Or to whip off a hatt or a cloak and a wey-wit: but say what
occupation likes thee best?


4. Soul. Warr's but a pedling figarie, with a number of lowzie customers,
knocks, hunger, cold, thirst, the captain's-pay, a disease that sore torment
us, it is a most unchristian purgation, some vermen too, la, they creep, bite,
and keeps a damnable quarter on my shoulders, an'I could shrug them off, I Would
never desire'em on again.


2. Sold. No better barrel better hering on us all, we can sing the same
song, to the tune of Lachrimae, but to the purpose.


4. Sold. Faith mine jumpes right with thine Bullie, it is a neat kind of
trade, we only borrow from those can spare it: yet I say it is more gentill far
then three pence a day,


1. Sold. Has hit the nail in the head, come shake hands, this day we thrive
lads, to morrow again boys, a short life and a merry Sirs, follow your leader.

Omnes O brave Timothy, Orare Timothy.

Exeunt. Enter Tigranes and Barbazella with a guard. Barb. If ere I did
conspire with Cornet Brinfort, or knew of his departure, before I was inform,d
he went; O let me never behold, Sun, Moon, Stars, or any Celestial power,
that keeps due motion in their proper spheres


Tigr. Perjured slut, thy accomplices are yet extant, whose own confessions do
approve thy crime;


Barb. Produce my accusers,


Tigr. Them gentlemen that now are in restraint for the same fact speaks thy
accomplished willingness,


Barb. O no. do not cast that foul aspersion on them, so far I do presume
their worth is such, that death cannot urge them express as much,


Tigr. This falsehood shall in thy blood appear,


Barb. Noble Sir: my fault as you have censured it, never deserved the least of
this God knows: if innocence may plead my cause, no soul more wronged then I;


Weeps, Tigr. Them tears resemble Synons treachery against old Priams Troy,
wherefore it is said, vice does her just hate never more provoke, then when she
vailes it under virtues cloak: discover Brinsforts plot immediately or as I
live I Will spare no tortures on thee:


Bar. Enjoyne my sin some other penance, if truth must not appear t'acquit
me from so foul a scandal, hide, O hide, my loathed face, in some nastie
gloomy dungeon; or hang in chains until I eat the flesh, that never
offended, here then my naked breast, ready to receive what you will scribe
thereon; my blood will serve in stead of ink, where if you please record, how
willingly I suffered for my Lord and maker Christ.


Tigr. For lustful treason rather, until thou do confess, i will write in
wounds fit characters to thy rightful sufferance.


Here she is drawn aloft, with burning matches between each finger. Barb. O
kill me, kill me, do but grant that favor, be no more crueller then death,
feel, O feel, your heart's transformed to stone, let my heart's blood
dissolve your self again, else you will become the lively portraicture of
tirannie;


Tigr. Thus I express me yet,


Barb. And yet I live:


Tigr. All the torments hell can boast of shall be inflicted on thee; not
suddenly no, but with a fretting pain vex thy desire,


Barb. Thy cruel thoughts to hell's dark plagues aspire, Jesus Redeemer of my
soul, to thee I must address my pitiful complaint, when men rakes less
remorse on contrite tears then Tigers do, thou know, O Lord; whither my
thoughts were ever guilty of that crime deserving this unheard of cruelty,
but, O eternal wisdom my grief cries at thy watchful ear for every,
vouchsafe it may, abate them torments that will last for aye.


1. Sold. How resolute these pettish Papists are, Aside. she would sooner let her
fingers burn to th'bone, then once reveal a rebels base intention,


2. Sold. Who was her sweet heart, and loved him dearly,


1. Sold. Mas lad an seems so;


Tigr. Speak huswife, speak,


Barb. What would you have me speak,


Tigr. What Brinforts plot was in departing hence


Barb. Ask me no more, I am a stranger in it:


Tigr. Did ever man behold such impudence? I know thou lie;


Bar. O be not thus incredulous, Jews, Turks, Infidells, yes Heathens to, all
nations do commiserate the doleful pains of them like me, nor will not urge
them further, once the fires exposed, but your beliefes more strange then
theirs.


Tigr. Confess, thou foolish wench confess, or I will cause new match to be
applied:


Bar. Do what you please, my God I trust will strengthen me against thy
hellish fury.


Tigr. It Is a folly. to compel this slut I see, go, take her off. until some
evidence comes in against her.


Exeunt. The fourth Act.
Enter Abner reading of a letter attended by two sons. He reads. Unless you
speedily repair unto our aid, the Kingdom's lost beyond recovery. Abner. O
fearful news, news that does rent my heart to hear it.


1. Sou. Why noble father? you have received as desperate tidings often before,
yet made your thoughts contemn the worst might follow, and when occasion
offered, as bravely did perform it, rebuke this passion then Sir.


2. Sou. Good father do, our joys in your contentment.


Abne. Fond youths your yet unripned years, brooks not the lowering jesture
of deserved sorrows, (how near soever it concerns you,) why your spring
o'retops the Autumn of my years, your griefs a weather-cocke, subject to
change at every blast of youthful pleasure; but when dame nature dies your
flaxen curles a reverend gray, experience will confute that fond deluding
folly: this is no common toy (like yours) to grive at, no, no, peruse them
mournful lines, where if you find not cause of lamentation, blame me then:


He gives the letter they peruse it 1. Son. Ha, Lirenda at point to be
destroyed! O brother see, that country whence we are descended, calls for some
timely succor: nature must work a true compassion in us: Father, O Father, by
all that is most Dear unto you, regard this sad complaint:


gives it bake. Abn. Now be your selves the judge whether we ought not pity
them, or prefer their safety sooner then all the fortunes mighty Spain
will give us, value the difference pray: here we be indeed accommodated with
respect and honor, wealth sufficient for our betters, with the grace of
Spaine's Imperial Monarch, what do we lack? nothing, but yet compared to the
affection of our Country, not worth the speaking.


1. Son. Weed' rather forfeit what we have, then stay a minute once our friends
do crave:


Abn. That Is each of your firm resolution,


Ambo. We humbly yield to your mature direction,


Abn. Go haste to your mother and prevail with her for I must yet a while
consult alone:


Exeunt ambo. Abner lays him on a Couch and slumbers: Then enters the Queen
of fates, attended by three Nymphs viz. Clotho, Lachysis and Attropos. Queen.
See where a second Mars lies, Abner named, fair Nymphs respect him, or you will
be all blamed of too, too, coy demeanor; Music, some Solemn music.
music or harmonious sphere descend, descend whilst we his virtues do
commend


Cloth. Fair Queen the gods are pleased you know we should appear unto this
mortal, to unfold their divine pleasure and most sacred will, in heaven
decreed; wherefore we must fulfill the promises of their superior powers
above; and as we do esteem him ours, thus I declare his fortune, in respect
of warlike graces none shall more direct then his mature command: his valor
to, shall make his adversaries blush to know, that from, an infant heaven did
him elect, to be victorious still against their Sect:


Lachy. Opinion Mistress says, a silent tongue, consents to every thought, then
I should wrong, his happiness, if I did not relate, what I am sure will much
augment his fate, heroique valor, virtue a pregnant wit, are them deportments
we conceive best fit, to crown his future actions; this we give, for an
assurance that his fame shall live,


Attro. Grave Matron, from you I must needs borrow leave to speak in's praise,
before to morrow visits the world, this discontented couch whereon he is
stretch, 'tshall witness and avouch these promised happiness.


Queen. You Are all content we see, to raise his fame:


Cloth. The gods themselves does honor Abner's name,


Queen. Let each of you in Sonnets sound his joy, mixed with a dance or some
conceited toy to pleasure him withal; whilst sleeping thus he may receive a
happy fate from us.


THE SONG.
Morpheus we conjure thee hence,
Go to them gloomy shades from whence
All sorts of lurking mischiefs flow
Beneath the infernal depths below*
Go to stix Aver, or whither,
Tell the gods exiled thee thither:
Let no sad thought then mollest him
We from sadness dispossessed him
But contrive for him fit praise
With length of many happy days
So loud fame his worth may sound
Through the universal round,
Them bloody troops that does destroy
His native I Will, like wretched Troy,
In sad laments shall grieve to see
Henceforward them victorious be,
O thy remorseles rage in vain,
Lirenda florisheth again.
As the song is ended, Enter Mars, Bellona, Pallas, and Mercury. Bello. See
where the stately Queen of fortune sitts like Ci^herca daughter unto Jove, to
her we must address our best salutes, all hail fair Queen:


Queen. Welcome dear sister,


Mars. Fair Emperesse we hard your solemn notes ascend up to the highest
point of heavens great arch, from whence we come to fill an empty sphere with
comfort, the discontented Lirendeans.


Merc. The gods and goddesses are wholly bent to vanquish all their former
discontent though hitherto they seemed not to regard 'em, yet notwithstanding
they are now resolved henceforth to let their sorrows be dissolved;


Queen. We knew as much good Mercury, and do applaude that act, which argues
them just gods, it is fit we publish then, what they decreed: Brother Mars, you
must furnish them with arms, and Palla's wisedome' against intestine harms,
our self and you Bellona, in the field, will make the bloody adverse party
yield to the stout Lirendeans, often pursued by them unjustly almost were
subdued; Their Sol thus long ecclipst again must shine, to show the luster of
them lamps divine that best predominate their happy fates, we mean them
stars, which on that Island smile, to see they shooed retain their light a
while by a dark cloudie mist that now is spent and forced to vapor in the
Orient. Therefore resolve as we long time did since with your immortal powers
for to convince as many armed furies as will dare repine at Abners deeds, or
seek to share in them adventures we are pleased to give, a good success
unto; his fame shall live, that once it might be said, dame fortunes wheel,
became soon steadfast, when it most did reele.


Omnes. By Jupiter agreed.


Queen. Dear sister come, take They take their seats. your seat whilst my
chaste Nymphs, graced with these gods do dance.


Music. The Gods and Nymphs do dance, which ended: They rise. Queen. Now
your free bounties are bestowed we see* in each respect as we desired shooed
be, such thank fullness that to your deities due, fortunes great queen does
tender each of you, Now gently, gently, wake him as we go, up to our spheres,
thence view his deeds below:


Exeunt. He is wakned with solemn Music and this following song. THE SONG.
Hence flattring Somnus get away
With thy drowsy leaden mace,
That which makes the brightest day:
Blacker then a Negro's face,
Here Is no biding for thee go,
Once the Gods command it so.
Rise from his tempting couch, O rise
Courageous Abner do not stay,
Lirenda calls aloud and cries
Brave Abner come, O come away,
Him Victoria guardeth still,
Can best assuage our present ill.
Abner wakes. Abner. Is It in a dream I saw this heavenly vision, or is it vain
fancies daseling on mine eyes, sure I slept sound indeed, but never with so
much blessed content before, a dream it cannot be, a blessed inspiration rather;
that yet possess my thoughts, with a most sweet delightful comfort; well, in
few words I am resolved, propitious heaven, now I emplore thy aid, him thou wilt
assist, needs not to be dismayed.

Exit.
Enter Athenio, Mineus, Aretas and Dora. Athe. It Is more then time we look to
right our selves on that foul wretch and tyrant Cola, least suddenly we
forfeit for our slakenes the loss of all our heads, (if taken by him) for
having lost all goodness, and of late grown desperate mad, through turbulent
passions of a distemperd soul; cannot reclayme his wickedness, like one too
far engaged, ever to return to honesty again:


Mine. Honesty my Lord's a stranger to him, and minds no more civilitie, then
Canniballs or Tartars do, being puffed up with pride of them vain praises
falsely given him, by a multitude as basely minded as himself.


Aret. How they do glory in his bloody deeds, and styles him truly valiant
whom the world reputes no better, then a monster clothed in human form.


Dora. Unheard of madness to betray so many innocents, that but for him and his
damned shameless retinue had not be ene executed so;


Aret. How shall we then advise to rid us of so dangerous an enemy.


Athe. Heaven will, I hope, contrive, his overthrow, in this our expedition
though he securely now abides in garrison guarded with five hundred expert
Soldiers thinks Heaven nor Hell, cannot molest him there, or that we dare not
march within a league of his stern countenance, such is the fopperie of his
vain glorious humor,


Mine. Then name of God, This night we will advance our forces where the
besotted tyrant now remains, if we but kill his centrie then, we may more
boldly enter and surprise him napping in his bed asleep:


Athe. That were the safest way indeed to venture on him, or preserve our
troops entire, until our Noble Cosen Abner be arrived


Aret. He Is long expected,


Mine. But will be shortly here,


Athe. Who when he comes, comes well appointed to support this pious war, our
wants with his renowned fame beyond Sea.


Mine. Let Us march directly thither, come loose no time, that in necessities a
wilful Crime:


Exeunt. Enter Cola like one distracted. Cola. Furyes and plagues torments my
restles thoughts with gashly visions of deformed hagges, infernal monsters to
my thinking would perforce deprive me of my vital breath, O that this horrid
night were past away, a thousand millions for one glimse of day.

Flashes of fire, with a horrid noise is hard, then Enter Revenge with a sword
in one hand, and a flaming torch in the other followed by three spirits in
sheets. Ah, ah, they are come again; it thunders, whither shall I go hide me
from the bolts he knocks. dreadful crack: Tibernus, Morton, why Tibernus will
none defend me from these ugly shapes, O how they press on me, give bake rude
furyes or by the hand of Proserpine your Queen I Will force you hence unto the
stygian green


Reven. I am Revenge roused from my silent cave by justice that revenge on thee
will have, for thy base murdring of man, woman, child, wives, widows, nurses,
virgins defiled, all that a tyrant could invent or do, thou most inhumanly
did put them to, wherefore Revenge, revenge from hell is sent to lead thee
to eternal punishment;


1. Sp. I am the soul of him an thou will know that in thy pistol once did
force me blow, gave fire and shot me dead; hell is thy due, for which revenge,
revenge does thee pursue;


2. Sp. We are them two poor harmless country swains, to get an honest
living spared no pains, we to thy quarters went, and would from thence bring
salt abroad just worth some eighteen pence, thy soldiers took us, stripped us,
shrewdly banged us, then after to the gibbet and there hanged us by thy
command; wherefore we do implore Revenge may take, revenge on thee therefore:


Reven. This bloody sword, and flaming torch are them true Emblems of thy
furious stratageme invented chiefly to depopulate distroy, consume, and wast
the regal state of this brave kingdom, or what therein's found, either above
or underneath the ground, such was thy wicked malice, spleen and might for
which we seek a just revenge this night,


Exeunt. Cola. This was a plot of some conjuring Papist to vex me with these
filthy strange affrightments, O that I could with mighty Jove rain down a
shower of maledictions on them, cursed wretches they; the name it self does
vex me more, then all them dismal shapes i have seen before. An Alarm, Enter
Tibernus. What come again, life then adieu? Now Tibernus what makes this loud
alarm?


Tiber. That you may arm your self in have, the rebels march into the town:


Cola. He was a traitor did command the guard this night: go hye thee
Tibernus, call the troops together, cry but a Cola, Cola, I warrant thee
they will fly.


Exeunt severally. Alarums Cola, returns again. Cola. Sa, sa, they break I
faith, Cola, Cola, cry out a Cola;


One meets him and discharges a pistol whereat he falls down dead* Then
enter Tibernus and Soldiers. Tib. Sir Carola Cola slain, O execrable
slaughter! Heaven curse the rascal that was author on it: bear in the body to
be embalmed with tears, that when his mournful obsequies are ended this
Epitaph may on his tomb be engraven, Angolea's glory, Pickland's wonder,
Lirenda's terror lies here under.


Exeunt. Enter Caspilona with a keeper. Casp. Is It the counsels pleasure I
shood be removed from hence; prithee whither?


Keep. Unto the Castle:


Casp. 'Tweare as good I dyed, as to be laid in such a loathsome place, where
surely Mumferret must be my keeper: good friend, desire thy master may return
his writ, I Am sickly, and not in case to be removed, if they conceive me not
secure enough, or fears escape, set double locks on, bar your windows
treble over, any thing but departure, so kind each one of you have been unto
me, that my imprisonment's a pleasure rather:


Keep. My master's willing to afford your Lordship all the favor lies in him,
but that he may not,


Casp. Why friend? 'twill be no prejudice to him, only his labor to inform
the Court, whom I hope are not so void of reason, but will admit a prisoner (my
inferior,) this poor request:


Keep. He dares not do it, once the Judge and Councell's bent against you, for
'twas their express charge to the Sheriffs thus, beware, your prisoner
Caspilona has not more freedom given him, then you may answer, at a thousand
poundle piece.


Casp. Say thou so Roger? well; if there be no remedy, but needs Gives him
money. I must depart: there is for thy dutiful Gives him money. attendance.


Keep. Now heavens protect your Lordship, as I live it pitties me, this
generous Aside. noble Lord, they are much to blame, wrongs so good a soul:


Casp. Honest Roger, I am disposed to rest, if any kind friend comes to visit
me, desire they would repair another time


Keep. Your will I shall observe my Lord.

Exit.
Casp. Thou art always honest Roger, trusty Roger, this is the course of
fickle fortunes wheel, last week reputed for a loyal subject, now in close
prison as a traitor kept, whose thoughts in that respect, is full as pure as
new fallen snow on mount Libanius; but this corrupted age, declares my dearest
friends to be my prime accusers; well, thou God of justice, whose bright
impartial eye, viewes the worlds guilty crimes, see an innocent exposed unto
a sad disastrous fate, if thy great mercy helps me not? O then I suffer shall
with other harmeles men:


Here he walks in a solitary posture whilst an Angel sings. THE SONG.
Cast off that drooping sadness Earl,
Be not dismayed take heart of grace,
Behold a true Ellizean girl
Pityes thy distressed case,
One that will a mortal shape
Take on her for thy escape.
Casp. Some voice my thought did whisper in mine ear, a sweet melodious note
that said, fear not thou shall escape: Alas it is but my fancies Wish it had
been so; No that cannot be, for yet my soul retains an inward joy, the motion
is divine, and makes me happy beyond measure; bright Angel of Celestial
Paradise, to whom the safeguarde of my life deputed is, help me, O help me to
get from, this labyrinth of care, otherwise I never shall perfect that
enterprise.

Exit.
The fifth Act.
Inter Athenio, Abner and Mineus at one door, there meets them, Caspilona,
Aretas, and Dora, at the other door. Casp. My Lord General of Stelern welcome
welcome to Lirenda, thou fair son of Mars.


Abn. My Lord Caspilona, we gratulate your safe escape,


Casp. Most hearty thanks,


Athe. Now we may boldly coape with our insulting dominiering foes, whose
arrogant pride contemned this nation with an infamous report of cowardice; base
rascals, they shall know we have undaunted spirits left to quell their
treacherous malignant power; their breach of public faith, granting quarter
then after falsely murdering them,


Abn. Is It possible, that men who knows the Law of Arms, should be so absurd,
so profane,


Casp. The universe cannot parallel like bloody massakers odious to God and
man,


Abn. Believe me 'twill end shamefully, such actions cannot thrive,


Athe. Ought we not deal with theirs we vanquish so*


Abn. We scorn to imitate their baseness, what we do shall be in a nobler
honest way, true Martial discipline,


Athe. Which they will never observe, A Trumpe^* what means this (...) of the
trumpet sound.


Aret. Some news is posting hither,


Athe. What tidings Lentimos?


Enter Lentimos Lent. Arm good, my Lord, with speed Marquis Osirus, with a
powerful Army, march hitherward, and has already been at Motilin where his
rude, boy sterous followers, put men, women, children to the sword, for
certain it is reported, they bend their forces thence to Fosse,


Abn. Where they, God willing, shall have a bloody banquet, Come cheerfully,
my Lords meet those that came so far to seek your manfull blows,


Exeunt. Enter Lisana, Tigranes, Tibernus and Soldiers. Beat a march. Tigr.
Though we come short in our design of Fosse, or must retreat from that
unlukie town, it is not the brute of Abners hasty march with the whole
strength of Stelern, shooed make us stir a foo^^, did his numbers equal
great Xerxes army, that drank up rivers dry, the world shall testify our
willingness to meet him when, and where he list;


1. Sold. But not with more have then good speed sweet Sir Ieeringly aside. I
think we have been pretty well beaten else, for all good tokens, a witch, a
whore, gave me such a damnable thumpe of a stone, my shoulders feels the
weight out yet,


2. Sold. Curse ont for me: 'twas a plaguie skirmish, they fought like devils
within, an' ye be wise not a word O fighting more


Lysa. We need not urge them to an open field for so it might prove dangerous,
our men you see are not themselves, much weakened by this far and toylesome
journey?


Tigr. Wonder invades me, you should think our forces lost both courage and
experience, as if they had been light brained weakelings, guided by misfortune
where no resistance could secure their lives wast ever known they went a step
to shune their foes, No, nor will not now I hope begin whilst these
undaunted squadrons are reputed Soldiers fit to serve any Prince on earth, men
that regards not toil, travail, penury or sickness, nothing can divert them
from a glorious conquest, the aim a valorous intention levells at:


Lysa. I would you knew the proudest Monarch of the western globe, has been
as circumspect as valorous, least some strange accident might drown their
greatness in Lethaes flowing streams, then why not we, since our auspicious
stars, has made our actions shine like theirs, in equal glory, then I pray;
ought we not be as circumspect as they?


Tigr. You speak as if you stood in fear of them,


Tib. Come leave this different discourse, the question is, whether Marquis
Osirus will toward home, or fall on the next garrisons?


Tigr. With my consent, there should not be a Castle left unlevell'd with the
ground,


1. Sold. Soft and fair: they have gotten guns and powder, will make us smoke
in faith;


Ieering lie aside, 2. Sold. Deckins take them now of late, they are grown
mighty valiant,


1. Sold. Stout fellows,


2. Sold. An I could to my granam once again I Would never come look for land
in Stelern more,


1. Sold. Them wood for me I wish might die a pander,


2. Sold. And with less wit then either goose, or gander.


Enter Osirus. Osir. What serious conference is this between you gentlemen,
are you grown faint of late see the multitude of your increasing foes how
earnest they like venomed spiders have to take us in a tangled web of woe, and
here you stand aloof, like men dismayed, as if it naught concerned to hear or
see, the subject of Lirendas Tragedy?


Tigr. We only wait your honors chief command,


Osir. For shame speed to your several troops, let not your warm blood
freeze in them active veins, whilst such a noble blessed occasions offered. Come
then courageously, and the day's yours in spite of hell, and all malignant
powers.


Exeunt. Soon after the Alarums begun, Enter Lysana his weapon drawn. Lyra.
All, all is lost, our troops are broken basely; O that I had a pair of Dedalus
wings, or mounted on swift Pegassus to pass from hence invisible, my thoughts
foretold this heavy dismal day, I would begone but that I know not whither, and
want a guide, a guide, a guide, a thousand pound for a guide, fear makes them
deaf, they cannot hear the golden offers of great Lestrell's son, well then
I will proclaim it once again; five thousand pound, ten thousand for a guide,
my whole estate to him will be my guide.


Exit. Alarums. Osirus and Abner meets severally weapons drawn. Abne. Vive le
Roy; advance the artillery is ours.


Osir. Not so fast bold Traitor stand:


Abn. Traitor Sir, as loyal to my Sovereign as thy self, and to thy face I
vouch it now proud Marquis They fight, Abner closes within him. Yield sir
yield, you are my lawful prisoner:


Osir. Thine? let him perish yields to any of thy faction.


Enter Tigranes. Alarums. Tigr. Rescue the generall's in danger;


Here Tigranes renewes the fight, Dora steps in and knocks down Tigranes,
Tibernus to his rescue, where after a short skirmish they retire fighting
severally. Exeunt. Enter Abner, Athenio, Mineus, Aretas, Caspilona, and Dora.
Abner. They cannot boast our reputations blemished in the loss of this late
victory so fair lie ours, No the chance of war's uncertain, and no man ought
to grudge at what is past, since them we did encounter last, are fled, laden
with the luggage of your heavy blows and glad to escape so to; but least some
carping Momu's falsely might, attribute to our actions, what destiny, brings
on the stoutest he that lives; were not the gods constrained to hide themselves
in hollow caves of Egypt, when fierce Typheus, did pursue their deityes; and
mighty Caesar to was glad to fly from stout Lord Nennius in the Brittans war,
then wounded with his own infected weapon: how many like examples could I
mention of powerful armies overthrown by fate; witness Xerxes, Hanniball,
Darius, the Grecian Troops at Troy, Troyans themselves, Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, men whose aspiring thoughts mounted above the clouds, yet were
brought low, and raised again, as wavering fortune went, which best becomes a
Soldier, and proves him truly valiant, that will slight, the frowning chekes
of proud Bellona's height: since nothing can be more commendable, then an
undanted generous spirit, (the square true warlike virtues measured by,) I dare
assure the meanest of this nation will maintain it, that posterity may have a
pattern sit for them to imitate, briefly, let us bravely forward that we may,
regaine more then is lost another day;


Exeunt. Enter two Soldiers merrily disposed, singing the following Song. 1.
Sold. In days of yore, not long before
The last wars here were ended
with maid and wife, a Soldiers life
was most of all commended:

2. Sold. For why they fought, not then for naught,
Not one among thrice twenty,
But had good drink, with store of chinke,
Their pockets seldom empty:

1. Sold. But now adays, that ioviall praise,
Is turned topsie turvie,
To sweat to dirt, to a louzie shirt
To scraching itch, or scurvie,

2. Sold. Nay one thing more, does grieve us sore,
VVeyes me that I can say,
Sir reverence, without offense,
It Is called the Captains pay,

1. Sold. Which Lord forbid, if our foes did,
Crave vengeance come with quicknes
They never could, no if they would,
VVish a more hellish sickness,

2. Sold. If pilliage wood, do us some good,
Commanders, are the boulder,
That plundring Dicke, has taught the trick
You must not this good Soldier;

1. Sold. Thus we are served, and almost sterv'd,
'Twixt one disease or other,
The best of us, can well sing thus
Shake hands with me kind brother:
hang melancholy, a pound of sorrow will not pay an ounce of debt, so mad cap
so:


Claps him in on the shoulder. 2. Sold. Zlid I have sown all my wild oats
already:


1. Sold. VVild as a bucke, or tame as a ducke,
Or sillier then a coxcombe,
No land, no wealth, no thanks, (...) health,
And is it not therefore all is one?

2. Sold. This riming humor likes me well:


Enter another Soldier. 3. Sold. News, news,


2. Sold. And what is thy news good man fool,


3. Sold. Brave news. our general Sir Vavasiro:


2. Sold. And what of him?


3. Sold. Says we shall have old cutting throats anon, and pillage boys,
pillage till ye sweat again,


1. Sold. The Castle is not yielded yet,


3. Sold. Within an hour it will at farthest, where if we do not dance
attendance quickly, others will play at sweep stakes all.


1. Sold. Very true, an honest lad;


2. Sold. A very, very arrant -- honest lad


Exeunt, A short Alarm, Enter Soldiers dragging in men and women whom they
kill, then falls off, Enter Caspilona, Dora, and Lentimos. Casp. You see this
doleful object gentlemen and perceive what need our friends have of some swift
assistance, that peradventure might redeem more then is held expedient, we are
not therefore come to loose time in a tedious consultation, seeing your worth
and valors known already, then name of God charge home: lets have away,
Heaven will assuredly grant this our day,


Exeunt. Alarums with Drum and Trumpet, Enter Vavasiro, pursued by Caspilona.
Casp. We thought Angolean sparks could not tell how to run before; proud
Vavasiro dies:


Vava. O spare my life victorious Caspilona, and I will faithful submit thy
contrite prisoner.


Casp. That but immediately did bucher those, without remorse or pity, go
learn to be a penitent, and know we use mercy to them, does ours more often
abuse.


He leads him of, a prisoner, Exeunt. Enter, Athenio, Mineus, Aretas and Dora.
Athe. Now he perceives his mischievous intention, will not take, makes him the
more adventurous or rather desperate, that no advice (from his best friends)
can persuade him once to slake, what lies in him to execute, though it sink
him deeper then the worst of evils, or that he may be disapointed, yet will
not seem to know it, so far, a bloody passion does transport him, that he
reflects on nothing but revenge; whom to surprise or murder, (though innocent,)
he makes no scruple on it more then Cola did before he fell under the weight of
his own vices:


Mine. A Tiger, truly by name and nature, a slave too, that torments himself
worse then he can do us, how good a face soever he puts on, or that rude
multitude does follow him: we are become their betters in the field heaven
favoring us with good success, that now their malice shows not half the
violence that hitherto it did, though no good will be wanting to effect it, if
they could, wherefore it is certain then, he that will steer black envies
bark, in a warm Sea of blood, must justly perish in that fatal flood


Aret. To witness this let me present unto Your memory a few in Stelern only,
that like a torrent of impetuous fury went raging down the steep descent of
death: and lost themselves therein; Albinus, Celar, Daretas, Philanax, with
their Rabi, ringleader, Sir Carola Cola, (for whose dear sake they yet lament,
whereby it is palpable, heaven grieves at our reproach.


Dora. We could rehearse as many more sufficient to amaze the most obdurates
Roundhead of them all, but to express; that we regard Tygranes forces less,
then may be spoken of, whilst we can wield these arms, such cutting weapons
that can soon decide, the best of eithers right


Enter Lentimos. Mine. Behold Lentimos with some sad news it is feared


Athe. It shall not work in us the worst may follow, Now Cuze, how goes
squares abroad?


Lent. That Lord Tigranes with his army does commit all kind of cruelties, and
march directly hither:


Athe. What strength can you discover him to be?


Lent. About five thousand, horse and foot,


Athe. Were he ten thousand strong it matters not we will expect him at Lesterne
passage, go take a hundred musketeers along with you, and make it good before
his van arrives: we will follow after in all convenient Exit Lentimos. speed:
We are not ignorant, noble kinsmen, how insolent, bold, and audacious these
forlorn wretches do contest with us* for what is our birthright and
inheritance, that in defense of that, or what is dearest to us, we are to
expose our selves to death, the wrong done our poor harmeles people, all the
most studied torments was inflicted on them, for which we chiefly move,
attired in arms to rouse their stupid conscience that will strictly answer
for it; whilst now each goodness does forsake them; it cannot pass so current
but we may give an end to their vain hopes, heaven yielding us that
privilege, though not worthy yet we need not doubt it; Then let us arm, as
well interior, as exteriourly, to be in a fit posture against he comes. let
trumpets sound, strike up our Martial drums:


Drum and Trumpets as they depart. Enter Tigranes and Tibernus. Tigr. Where
lies their Camp?


Tib. At Lestern passage some some three miles distant hence,


Tigr. Are they strongly fortified.


Tiber. Impregnable, and hardly can be forced, without great loss of ours,


Tigr. Have they artillery think you,


Tib. Yes some small piece they have,


Tigr. Which shall be mine, or mine theirs ere bright Titans rays decline,
go, bid the officers be ready, for intend to march against them presently
Exit Tibernus. a Curse on his life for me, that will not break on them, or use
the most extremity he can devise, a storm of tortures, until the mountain
of their vicious will are brought to nothing; O that it lay within my power to
cut off root and branch together, if not, be sure, I Will do my best endeavor.

Exit.
Soon after the Alarums begun he returns with his weapon drawn. Tigr. All
will not do, some horrible wicked destiny befriends them, our men drop down
on every side, whereat they seem to scoff, and floute, not giving ground an
inch, well, well, Tigranes shall not be affronted thus I Will sooner die, and
fight it out to the last man, death shall not hold me.


Enter Tibernus. Tiber. Remove your standing Sir, I do beseech you Sir
withdraw your person to some other place: for hence I can descrie a piece right
levelled to give fire at you;


Tigr. That man is cursed in his mothers womb, will shun a Canon shot * ah, I
am wounded, wounded, A shot is given forth. beyond recovery, Now, O now I feel
the painful seizures of untimely death, on the remainder of my vital breath,
vain world adieu, farewell brave Soldiers all be not dismayed, at Lord
Tigrane's fall;


Tibe. Heaven's blessed messenger, receive thy soul.


Soldiers steps in. Sold. But is he dead indeed?


Tibe. As cold as stone;


1. Sold. We that have loved him when he lived, and found his open heart, a
Magazine of bounty, must (if nature be not too ungrateful,) shed brinish
tears,


Tiber. That were effeminate, and indiscretion too, Now he is lost, if in the
view of our adversaries we seem to grieve, it may occasion greater evils,
having the advantage of our general loss; then silence best becomes you, for
the present all that is requisite must be to bear his body hence unto his
tent; so sadly on, that when true sorrow's in the hearts of all his Corpse may
have a noble funeral:


Exeunt. Beat a march, Entet Abner, Athenio, Mineus, Aretas, Dora, and
Lentimos. Athe. Thus through the help, and furtherance of heaven our most
malignant enemy's overcome glad to play least in sight, went sneking home, who
not long since, for oaths, and threatenings might terrify the gods, or subdue
the world, that neither Heaven nor Hell was thought on once, or what was spoken
of them were but fictions which lead them to the gulf of desperation.


Abn. We must pursue this blessed victory, making our withered hopes, bud
forth in blessomes of never fading honor:


Dora. It adds unto our comfort Noble friends, that Caspilona goes on bravely
to,


Abn. Yes, and God willing we intend so to, until we purge the Kingdom of
these drones, them viperous Locusts; Come follow me,


Lent. But stay my Lord, here comes a Post with letters to your Lordship;


Enter a Post With letters. Abn. How letters? let me see; had they deferred it
but one fortnight longer,


Athe. What news do them import?


Abn. A proclamation, for one whole twelve month and a day's Cessation,


Lent. This works in us a greater admiration that being in the full height of
our conquest as prosperous as might be expected brave Abner's shining virtues
like the Sun out of a new Horizon, all the graces delighfull Mars could give,
or we deserve, must through this needles fond cessation, rest on the drowsy
Couch of dark Oblivion; it is a pill few Soldiers can digest;


Athe. Which best approves our loyalty,


Abn. But you. and we must yield obedience to it, though not so well contented;
howsoever your forces must unto their garrisons, And if our wrongs be not
repaired thereby we will again, renew this Tragedy.


Exeunt. Solemn Musick's heard: whilst an Angel appears to perclose the
Scaene, with this following Song.
Peace to this bright resplendant sphere
Blessings numberles be there,
Endless joys that does abide,
In Elizeum too, beside
Nothing present may defile
This victorious sacred I Will.
Come ye Gods and Goddesses,
That affects Peaceful bliss,
Help Victoria to disperse,
Each blessing on this Universe,
That dissentious broils and iarres,
May end with these uncivil wars.
Haste, O haste delightful Queen,
With your Lawrells fresh and green,
Grace this nation with a Crown,
Of perpetual renown,
Since their warlike merits are,
Past the limitts of Compare.
Music as the Angel vanishes. FINIS*
THE EPILOGVE.
LEast any worthy here misliks this play,
Our Author for himself desired me say,
That wilful error made him not ascend
PARNASSVS or mount IDA, to offend
Or give the least distaste; his thoughts are free
And void of such a gross impuritie,
Desire of your contentment was the cause,
If he did violate the Muses Laws:
But such a Noble, worthy Audience
In their grave judgments will I hope dispense
With such, if any be, since true affection
Submitts before it traverse a correction:
All we request then, as the case thus stands,
In token you are pleased, do but clap hands.
Laus Deo, Virginique Mariae*

