The King of France HIS MESSAGE TO THE Queen of England: PRESENTED To Her
Majesty by Colonel Goring, at the Hague in Holland, in answer to her Letter
sent to the French King at Paris by the foresaid Colonel Goring.

Wherein is declared what Forces are raising in Flanders, Artoys, Normandy and
S. Mallo, for the assistance of the Malignant Party against the Parliament in
England: the Copy whereof was sent from M. Burlacey at the Hague in Holland,
to a Merchant in London, November. 29. 1642.

Also the Parliaments Instructions to Sir Edward Rodes and Captain Hotham,
with power to pardon such as shall submit within ten days.

LONDON, December. 9. Printed for T. Wright. 1642.

The King of France HIS MESSAGE TO THE Queen of England: PRESENTED To Her
Majesty at the Hague in Holland by Colonel Goring.
SIr, I have received your Letter, with the news therein enclosed, for which
remembrance of me I thank you, I cannot return you any from these parts, being
quiet: I could wish England were as quiet, and in so good a posture of defense;
but that cannot be, so long as the Queen is so great an enemy to it; for she
says she will be revenged, and told M. Strickland the Ambassador from the
Parliament, that there should never be quietness in England so long as liberty
of conscience was not given to the Catholics. Her Majesty is merry, and by no
means would have the King yield to the Parliament upon any condition: she is
making ready to come for England, and will bring with her great store of
ammunition, money and soldiers. We conceive her Majesty's departure will not
be too much lamented for.

Colonel Goring has been lately at Paris with the King of France, he was
accompanied by Monsieur Montgomery to his lodging, and after three days respit
he was sent for and accompanied with diverse Lords and Gentlemen to the Kings
Court, and was bravely entertained, before whom his Majesty delivered a short
speech, much to this effect.

Je a considere vostre. Message a le request de ma sore, vostre Roigne and
Madam, a que par l'advice de mon Conseil, Je le vou prome autant come Je peu,
en be tans excuse moy pour le presant. Two weeks after the Colonel received
his Message, with a Letter to the effect following.

That his Majesty, the King of France, has considered her royal intentions,
and the troubles and vexations of the Catholics in England, for which in so
just, so honorable, and so good a cause, I have by the advice of my Privy
Council given consent, that what forces may be conveniently spared out of
Flanders, Artoys, Normandy and S. Malo, I have given consent that they shall
be withdrawn from their garrisons, leaving but a sufficient number of
soldiers therein, to that end the King has sent Letters to the chief
Governors and Commanders to deliver up both Officers and Soldiers that can
be well spared. As for Ammunition, Colonel Goring has brought with him ten
thousand men's arms, besides all sorts of ammunition, and furniture, with
saddles for horse, besides 20. pieces of Ordnance: as for money, the King
cannot supply her Majesty for the present, in regard of his vast expense which
he has been at, at the late siege at Arras; but nevertheless, as it is
conceived, there shall be a collection thorowout the whole Kingdoms amongst the
Catholics for their liberal contribution in this kind. The Prince of Orange
has gotten great strength at Breda in Brabant. The Prince of Conde at
Durmount, who is thought to go for Ireland, and what more for this time, I
cannot certify you for truth.

Hague 29. November. Stilo novo. Your obliged friend, Miles Burlacey.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THat Master Hotham, and Sir Edward Rodes, and other the Committees for raising
of money, Plate and Horse, for the defense of King and Kingdom in the County
of York; And such as they or any two of them shall nominate shall, be
Commissioners for the advancing and raising of Moneys Horse, and Plate upon the
propositions, and shall have power to appoint Commissaries to value the Horse,
and Treasurers to receive the Moneys and Plate.

That Master Hotham and Sir Edward Rodes, shall have the like instruction as
other Counties with this addition that they shall have power to seize and
apprehend all Delinquents that are so voted by the Parliament, and all such
others as Delinquents, as have or do show themselves opposite and disobedient
to the orders and proceedings of Parliament.

That the 4 Article of the L. Generals instructions, shall be extracted and
sent to Master Hotham etc, with power to them to publish it. viz.

You shall publish and declare, that if any, who have been so seduced by the
false aspersions cast upon the proceedings of the Parliament, as to assist the
King in the acting of those dangerous Counsels, shall willingly within ten
days after such publication in the Army, return to their duty not doing any
hostile Act within the time limited, and join themselves with the Parliament
in defense of Religion, his Majesty's Person, the liberties and Laws of the
Kingdom and privileges of Parliament, with their persons and estates, as the
Members of both Houses, and the rest of the Kingdom have done; That the Lords
and Commons will be ready upon their fubmission to receive such persons in such
manner as they shall have cause to acknowledge they have been used with
Clemency and favor, provided, that this shall not extend to admit any man into
either House of Parliament who stands suspended, without giving satisfaction to
the House whereof he shall be a Member; And except all persons who stand
impeached or particularly voted in either house of Parliament for any
delinquency whatsoever, Excepting likewise such Adherents of those who stand
impeached in Parliament of Treason, as have been Eminent persons and chief
Actours in those Treasons and except the Earl of Bristoll, the Earl of
Cumherland, the Farle of Newcastle, the Earl Rivers, Secretary Nicholas Master
Endimion Porter, Master Edward Hide, the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of
Carnarvan, the Lord Viscount Newarke, the Lord Viscount Faulkland, one of the
principal Secretaries of State to his Majesty.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

