A DISCOURSE On the Memory of that Rare and truly Virtuous Person Sir Robert
Fletcher OF SALTOUN:

Who died the 13. of January last, In the thirty ninth year of his Age.

Written by a Gentleman of his Acquaintance.

2 Samuel 3. 38. Know ye not there is a Prince and a Great Man fallen this day in
Israel. EDINBVRGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, Anno Dom. 1665.

TO THE READER.
SVch is the Force and Tyranny of Custom, that Somewhat must be prefixed to
the following Discourse.

The Occasion was told in the preceding Page: At which time Love and Regrate,
were bringing to the Authors Remembrance, many Instances of that Excellent One
his Worth and Virtue.

He feared least in that Crowd, many precious Relics of his dear Friend might
be lost. He thought therefore, that to digest them into a Regular Composure,
would be the surest course to preserve them.

In which attempt, He had also an eye at the satisfaction of some Others, but
did intend nothing less than the Press. Else may be He would have been more
Backward in it.

It was in have He wrote it: and you have it here with the same defects, which
at first dropped with it from the Authors Pen: for neither his Leisure, nor his
Humor, could well allow him a serious Review of it. Only some Amendments were
made by the Pen of another: Yea, He could heartily wish, it had been guilty of
greater Errors and Faults; That so, both It and He might have been excused
from this Penance, which the Importunities of Others, to whom neither the
Design nor Discourse was unpleasing, has enjoined.

If the Undertaking be thought Unusual, all the Answer intended for That is,
The Person was Extraordinary.

Some will, may be, say too Much is said of Him. Well! But Others think there
is too Little. And I know, with great Truth, More might have been said.

Some will call it too Flaunting, Others, too Flat: The Author knows of a
Sanctuary from all Censures, that is, a Careless Indifferency.

May be it will find favorable Reception with some, if it be not more
Unfortunate in Print, than it was in Writ. Sure it will not be unwelcome to
those to whom that Rare Person was not Unknown. For as in the absence of the
Sun, these Rays which are reflected, though from the uneven and spotted
surface of the Moon, are not ungrateful: So that shining Soul being now gone
from our Horizon, This Representation of Him, although the Rude Essay of an
unpolisht hand, will not be disdained, except in spite that so good a Them
should be ill managed. The Author will detain you no longer: but leaves the
Discourse to your Perusal, and Himself to your Charity, And so bids you
Farewell.

A DISCOURSE On the Memory of that Rare and truly Virtuous Person Sir Robert
Fletcher OF SALTOUN.
AS a River when cut in many Streams, loses in strength though it abound in
Channels: So Mankind becoming fruitful, has multiplied, by those many
productions and diffusions of Humanity; mean while the Vigor of the Rational
Soul, has suffered great Decaies, and by a daily and lasting Degeneracy is
mouldred almost to nothing. So that however the Face of the whole Earth, be
covered by Swarms of Men; Yet most of them are of that Temper, that naught but
their Shape does entitle them Such. Their Spirits are so emasculate, their
Strength and Vigor so effoeted: That save a Skelete, nothing of a Man shall be
found amongst whole Droves of Mortals. Yet in this Rabble, there are some
Erected Souls, who like Saul amongst the People, are from the Shoulders upward
higher than the Rest.

Shall One of these engage in the search of more of his Kind, long will he
weary himself with fruitless labor, ere he espy a person truly Virtuous: But
if He discover any such, Suddenly that sight will snatch him to Admiration, and
anon fix him to Attention. With what pleasure will He consider all the Treats
of these wel-featured souls? Whose Beautified looks will quickly conquer the
hearts of all true Judges thereof. Hence follows such an Union of Noble
Minds, that no Force nor Craft can unty the Knot, which their entangled
Affections cooperating have sublimated beyond the Bond of ordinary friendship,
into that of Indissoluble love. Whence flow the truest Joys that Frail
Mortality is capable of.

But while this Pair of Souls (or rather One enlivning Two Bodies) does grasp
one another in the closest Embraces, and with a Disdainful Smile laughs at
Misfortoun, as not within its reach: Like a Ship carried by the prosperous
gales of a Favorable Wind, through smoothed Waves to the desired Harbor. Lo,
of a sudden the sturdy blasts of boisterous storms, together with the swelling
Billows of an enraged Sea, will force those, whose hopes had set them beyond
danger, to their Long Home amidst the Waters. Thus Divine Providence, not
allowing us Repose while here below, having reserved our Happiness for another
State, when nothing can undo that entangled Knot; in a trice, Deaths dividing
Sword is sent to cut it: The Halfed Soul finding it self fallen from its rest
and Felicity, into a gulf of misery, will fill Heaven and Earth with the
doleful resentments of its Desolation and Woe.

BEing now, by a sad Arrest, widowed of Him, whose Charming Conversation has
so often relieved and refreshed us, by the delights of many a pleasant hour: It
is but just we pay to his Memory, the Tribute of a Tear, and besprinkle his
Hearse with such fragrant flowers, as may make Others relish that wherewith we
have been much glutted yet without hazard of loathing.

Descend we then into a Charnel-house and in this Mournful Vault may we see
the Ruins of a Noble Fabric, which the Hands of the Great Architect had
reared up: But now the Soul is dislodged, the House unfurnisht, and the
Structure fallen to the Ground. If to a searching eye, there appeared in Him,
an unsampled glory, even while He was in His traveling clothes; Sure now,
when apparelled with the Garments of Salvation, he shines with a luster bright
and orient. While he sojourned here on Earth with us, he knew his Soul was
sequestered for Heavens service: and hating Sacrilege too much, he would not
invade Gods Propriety, nor bestow it on profane uses; But paid his Love and
Obedience in a constant Annuity to Him whose right it was. And having the
stock, His Soul, ever in his hands to yield up when demanded, The term is now
come and the sum paid, which was so vast that it has impoverished us all,
even to the point of being bankrupt; for, There is a Prince and a great Man
fallen this day in Israel.

A Sublime Mind joined with a Noble Extraction does justly entitle one Great:
Begin we then with the latter of the two. If we consult the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, He will tell us that in true Heraldry the noblest descent is Heavens
Pedigree; Each of whose offspring resembles the Children of a King.

Titles of Honor among Men are but a mean piece of Pageantry: the Blason of
whose Coats in Solomon's style, is, Vanity of vanity, all is vanity; being a
borrowed light, as that of the Moon, which when it shines most brightly, does
most discover its conspicuous spots. Can the Glory of an Ancestour, ascribed
him many times for an Action in it self not Justifiable, and eclipsed rather
than decored by the intervention of many degenerating Descents, add ought of
real worth to any? Whence does the Root of Earthly Honor spring, but from
Earth? What though the Pretenders to Nobility could ascend in their Genealogies
to Adam? Sure, there would they terminate, even in red Earth. But to be the Son
of God is an Original so noble and sublimely Divine, that the desire of being
accounted such, did make the Heathens so to begod themselves, that could they
but derive their descent from a God they were content to do it by Histories,
that not only degraded them from the dignity of being such, but immersed them
into a gulf of Eternal Infamy and imprinted on their Memories such Characters
of Disgrace, as, in succeeding ages could never be defaced. In what a Goatish
shape do the fables represent their adored Jupiter? Did not the Grecian
Conqueror conquer his Reason by his Pride, in conceiting himself the Son of
Jupiter Hammon?

But Christianity has taught us that as all Souls are first the Breathing of
the Divine Spirit, So by the power of that same Eternal Spirit we are born
again, not of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible by the Word of God, which
lives and abides for ever.

The Spirit of this Just Man now made perfect, would stoop to no Meaner state:
But by a raised and noble Ambition, did choose for his Branch, Him that grows
out of the roots of Iesse. Which, as it taught him such a Contempt of that
which the World calls Honor, as being but a Gilded Ratle for Children to play
with; So it scarce permitted him to bestow on the Worlds greatness, so much as
a Reverent Thought. Yea, it was to him a Penance, and that none of the least,
to converse with those, to whose state and rank Civility commanded respect to
be paid, when a Virtuous and Rational Soul did find nothing in their persons
that merited esteem. This he often complained off, as one of the great Toiles
of his life, to find discourse and entertainment suitable to the misshapen and
bedwarfed souls of our Gentry. Who like Vmbrelloes of true Worth swarm every
where, and bate fouling, Gaming and the Pedling affairs of the world,
understand nothing either of their Maker, or of his Works. But how pleased was
he in the conversing with and cherishing, of such as carried Heavens Liveray,
and were begotten to the Image of God: Those Excellent Ones were They, in whom
was all his Delight, how mean soever their Condition in the World had been. In
such company Time did seem to fly, howbeit at other occasions it seemed to
craul like a Snail. With Them Midnight was past, ere he would believe it to be
Late. With others the first approaches of Darkness were taken for Night. With
those he complained of Night, as the Interrupter of his Quiet; willing rather
to deny his body Rest than his Mind Repose. With These he waited for the
shadows of the Evening; even more than the Watchman does for the dawning of the
Day. And therefore it is but just we conclude, That, There is a Prince and a
great Man fallen this day in Israel.

There is no grosser Soloecism, than an Ignoble Prince: To be the degenerous
brat of an Illustrious Parent, is as great a Reproach as the foulest mouth can
devise. A low and mean Soul, set in a high rank, is, as an Ape upon a Pole.
Yea, as a small Imperfection, in an, otherwise rare and Well-featured Beauty,
will be espied by all; when the same, if not a greater defect would in an
Ordinary face pass unregarded: And the Stumblings of Princes will be marked in
History, when the falls of their Subjects will be ingulfed in Oblivion: So,
when a Soul, by the dispensation of God, comes to be exalted into a Higher
region, How unseemly will it be for such a one to trip? especially considering
that thereby, the Wicked get occasion to Blaspheme the Name of God, and load
Virtue with obloquy; And the sincere and tender hearted Christian is much
scandalized. Nor is it only Vnbecoming but questionless perilsome, seeing the
Jealous God by His All-seeing eye observes well the Motions of his own, and
accounts those errors, which by a holy connivance, he may wink at in others,
in Them, crimes deserving chastisement.

The true Grandieur of a Soul then, is the Emerging thereof from the sink and
Kennel of Passion, Interest and Self-love, and the fixing of it on God and
Divine Objects.

Passion is a Fever in the Soul, which having agitate the Vigor of the Mind
into Fainting Heats, makes the Thoughts, the Pulses of the Soul, move Quick,
High, and Unequally: for Reason being dethroned, every Paultry Passion in its
tour will usurp the Chair, and according to its Imperious Humor, make that
Faculty lacquey up and down, Which, in the Strictest Justice deserves the
Precedence: Thus Folly is set in great dignity, and, Servants are on horses
when Princes walk as servants.

Reason is the Supreme Power of a Man, on which, in Legible Characters is
engraven the Image of God. And although it be crusted over with a gross and
foeculent Film on which is stamped the visage of the Foul Fiend of Darkness;
yet is it much like that of the Artist, who imbossed his Masters Name with
Plaster; but had underneath, engraven his Own in Stone: knowing that Age and
Tempests would wear of the one, whereas to other would weather out all Periods
of Time. For after the dew of Heaven has washed of that superscription of
Satan, then will the goodly and glorious Image of God, conspicuously appear in
a purified Reason. In regard that, as that skillful Statuary did engrave his
Name in Pallas Shield, with so deep a stroke, as could not be defaced while the
whole Statue were undone: So God did Imprint so lively treates of the Divine
Nature on the Soul of Man, as the remains thereof are yet to be seen even in
the greatest Monsters of Mankind, which the Earth does bear. But Man since
that first fall is so unplum'd and so robt of that gayety, which at first did
adorn him, that all his Faculties are become soft and languide.

A company of Passions, like so many Birds of Prey, having divided the dominion
of the soul among themselves.

Reasons first work then, is to vindicate her Liberty from the Tyranny of these
insulting slaves. And even Lame Nature in the unhallowed Heathens has made
strange attempts for the re-enthroning Reason and regaining that undisturbed
tranquillity of mind, which man was once in possession of: But alas! Man
though mounted on his tiptoes, will not reach this fruit of the Tree of Life,
it hangs too high for him; and it is Jacobs ladder only by which we must essay
to climb up to Heaven. Our Heroes was behind few Mortals in this atchievment.
Did we not see an unclouded sweetness and serenity so possess his Looks, that
easily we might conclude, how little his thoughts were disturbed? For being
ever the same, the elevations of Joy did not transport him, neither could the
depressions of sorrow crush him. Hymen's pleasures had not so mastered his Soul,
as to make him neglect the duty he owed his God. Neither did the death of his
deservedly beloved children, imbarasse his Spirit.

Those who by injuring Him intended his disturbance, missed of their Design;
for he knew that no man could wrong him, and that Malice and Revenge only
bricole on the Doer, without prejudging the Party against whom they are
directed. For then only does one suffer when he permits himself into a Passion;
and Wrongs done us in this world, are rather the Occasions than the Causes of
our Misfortune: Which he was so fully persuaded of, that, if at any time
Passion peeped, it did but give opportunity for the exercise of Reason in the
quelling so strong an Enemy.

He wisely considered the Tongue to be that whose intemperate speeches do give
Rise, Growth and Continuance to Passion: It being the Rudder, which, when
dexterously managed, holds us in an even and steady Course: but if let loose
makes us fluctuate and move at random. His thrift of discourse was great, but
his sparingnesse in Censuring, Rebuking, Reproaching, and Detracting was such,
as perhaps in all his life, he was never accused by any; yea, I believe, scarce
by himself (the most severe Critic upon his own Actions) of this fault. So
studious was he to evite every occasion of affronting his Reason. So that
justly we may say there is a Prince and a Great Man fallen this day in Israel.

Well! we have considered Reasons, first Triumph over Passion: Its next
Conquest is the Trading on the cares and concernments of this Life. Our Bodies
are the Case which contains the Jewel. The Shrine for that Stem of Divinity. So
the Cares and Concernments of the Body must never come in consideration but as
Vassals to our Souls. But now this order is inverted. Are not men's Bodies
become the Prisons, if not, the Tombs of their Souls. The Caring for the One is
accounted a Debt, but Thinking on the other, is thought an act of Charity and
Benevolence. How many impoverished Souls are lodged in Bodies, whose cabinets
are well stored with Riches? Many a Plump body is the Receptacle of an
Hunger-starved Mind. Me thinks they resemble Egypts Temples, whose Outside had
a tearing show: but when admitted to the interior recesses of that Idol-house,
with the wan light of an half extinguished Torch, they could discern an Ape. So
what a sight should it be, if we could unfold the Plicatures of the Garments
wherein many souls are invelopt? Within these Cloutes would we see pitiful
Brates: on whom if one look, he will be at a loss, whither he shall have,
Pity, Contemn or account them Unworthy of all his thoughts. Is it possible that
so Sublime a being as the soul of Man, made and shaped for high things, can be
drencht in the dirt of sensuality and luxury, or grovel on this Earth? Far
different from this are the Apprehensions of a transformed Spirit, which
labors to forget its being detained in a Body, when it finds it self hailed
to and depressed in Earthly Employments, does with Sorrrow and Pity regrate the
distance it is at, from the Object of its Joy and Desire: the smart of which
the Body will feel in severe Mortifications; being denied the wanton Jolleties
and unnecessary Flatterings which are craved by a luxurient temper. Yea the
formerly bewitching pleasures, become more bitter than Gall and Wormwood. And
even Life it self, the Preservation whereof carries away the Supremacy of our
Affections and Desire, does prove a Burden, since it detaineth from that which
the purified Soul so vehemently longs for. And while the Pilgrimage
continues, what time they bestow on humane Affairs, is rather Complying with
the Providence of God (who orders every one to their Post and several
Employments in this world) than out of any Pleasure they have in it, or any
Desire of self-satisfaction. And when their Occasions and Hours of Divine
employment do avocate them, they quickly disingage Themselves, and their
Craving Appetites (unsatisfied with every thing beneath God) will with an
unexpressible satisfaction, suck in those comforts that are sweeter to them
than the Honey or the Honey comb.

With how little Flattery, what I have been saying, may be ascribed to Him, who
now enjoys what he much desired, His freedom from Covetousness, did
discover it self in the pain he was at when Crouding Affairs did invade many
Portions of his Time: Careful was he to rid himself of that Load. And though he
was dexterous enough, so to order his affairs, as to throw away nothing
Unnecessarily, which may be occasioned mistakes in some, Yet these to whom His
Soul was known could well discern it flowed from no sordid ground. And his
frank and large Charity did fully discover of what Metal he was. Yea a
Resolution of his (which his modesty kept unknown to all, save those who
shared in the secreter motions of his Soul) never to have increased his Estate,
but to offer what improvements he could make of it to God, by relieving the
Necessities and Wants of the Poor and Needy: Such a design, I say, to those who
knew what a Plentiful Fortune he enjoyed, and what Children he had, will make
them believe, that he counted the things of this world but Dung.

Little did they know of him, who know not how regardlesse he was of his Body.
He was notar for his Temperance, sparing in the enjoyments of his lawful
pleasures. Neither could the weakness of his Body, extort from him Care and
Tenderness, but rather draw from him Pity and Contempt. The Society of
Drunkards he hated and shunned, as much as a Toad. Yea so little force had all
the Enjoyments of this life (although even of these God had bestowed on him a
large Share) on his Spirit, that he was ever desiring to be rid of them all,
and to be where no Affair could avocate him from that he so much desired: That
being uncloathed of his vile Body, he should be fred from Gross and Material
Conceptions of Spiritual things; from the Tribute he owed his Body, and from
the trouble he was at with business: but most of all, from the dregs of
corrupted nature which pinch the Soul and make it long to be with Christ.

Some days ere he died, being desired not to wrong himself with the
Apprehensions of Death, his Answer was: That having exercised himself so long
with the thoughts of it, He did not apprehend it with fear as an enemy: and
therefore with Joy did he receive the approaches of it.

It was the last morning of his life that He said (even in the midst of high
and furious raving, occasioned by a Fever of which he died) O my most adorable
and glorious Lord God, to thee I come, and with thee shall I be for ever. Who
can then blame me when I say, There is a Prince and a great Man fallen this day
in Israel?

Reason, having made a foul fray among the Passions, and trampled the Body
underfoot, it carries on its Conquests, and at length Combats it self, and
Beats down any good opinion it is tempted to have of its Self. It fares with
many, as with those Vapors, which, being by the Suns active beams agitated
into a subtle thinness, mount up; but because they had not laid down their
earthinesse, reach no further than the Regions of the Air: where, after being
tossed too and again, they fall down in big drops, more gross than when caught
up. So the Souls of some, by the forcible impressions of some heats are caught
up from worldly, carnal, yea and passionate courses: But there being no true
Renovation of heart, they mount no higher than the Aerie Regions of Vanity.
Self-love being the Root of their Actions, though they may appear Specious,
being set of with Canting and Dissimulation; yet, their depth being sounded,
prove in effect nothing but profound Venerations, paid to the shrines of their
adored selves. This is the Last Battery of the Enemy of our Salvation. Other
engines failing, he insinuats himself into the more retired Corners of the
Soul, and by this deadly venom, he poisons and leavens the whole Soul, making
it forget that dependence upon God by which it lives; and cease to praise that
unbounded Goodness, to whom it owes more, than Seraphims can express. As also
the active vigor of the Soul in every duty of Religion, grows remiss, when it
conceits it self Victorious over all its Enemies. This is the Tympany of the
Mind which often, if not ever, proves deadly and irrecoverable.

But true Greatness, will quickly evacuate the Mind of all those Tumors, by
representing as well the Frailties of its Nature, as, the Miseries of its
depraved State. The One, by remembering it is a Creature started out of nothing
by the Omnipotent Power of its Adored Maker: The other, by discovering how Weak
and Effeminate our Souls are become: How Short sighted and Dim our
Understandings: how lame and unactive our Wills. How furious and undaunted, our
Passions. As also by reflecting on the great and frequent errors of our Life,
and our ever recurring imperfections.

It is by the Like Considerations, that Man comes to be undeceived, and does
persuade himself that He is an Empty Nothing, and so delights in Self-degrading
Thoughts, and, with S. Paul, does Glory in his infirmities, that the power of
Christ may rest upon him.

It is now time to Apply what has been said to Him who has finished his
Course and has obtained the Crown. But I suppose all, to whom He was not
wholly unknown, could spare me the labor. It were indeed a puzling Question,
Whither his Worth or his Humility was greatest. He took more pains to conceal
what he really had, than, may be the Proudest do to set of what they have not
at all. His shunning all occasions of any Public Appearance, and his great
Silence and Sparingnesse of Discourse (which were too well known to insist on,
yea it were a difficult work to instance, unless there were produced a
Catalogue of all the actions of his Life) were pregnant proofs of what has
been said. Neither did this nonpareiled Modesty, flow from either natural
Retiredness of Temper, or the Contempt of Others, which makes some retreat
from the Societies of Men; accounting it below them to converse with Persons,
beyond whom Self-conceit has far advanced them. No, on no such ground He
withdrew himself from the too much beaten road of Conversation: But he did so
distrust himself, as to be ever regrating those Imperfections (Judged to be in
him by none but himself) he found depressing his Spirit. He talked much of his
want of Memory: Yet was he well known both in Greek and Hebrew, in the Latter
especially. Neither was he a stranger to the other Oriental Tongues; not to
mention his perfection in the Latin and several Europaean Languages. Language
being a Heap of words, connected by no string of Method, (People being taught
to speak, by Custom and not by Philosophy) there is nothing that more racks
and overcharges the memory. A memory then so well twisted, as to be able to
retain Singled words, cannot be thought so treacherous, as to let slip
Connected things, when commanded to such an employment by Inclination. Truth
was, he was ready enough to forget any Pedling affair: but the impression such
stuff could make on a Mind so much alienated from the World, was so overly;
that no wonder it was not lasting.

Should we also take his Own testimony of himself, we should believe his Mind
was Shallow and Purblind. But a whiles conversation would have forced any to
change their opinion.

He was deeply skilled in the Mathematics, though he was well advanced in years
before he began that Study: and his distracting affairs, did never allow him
that Time, which an exactness in those Sciences does require. Notwithstanding
he was well seen in most of them. It was the Science, and not the Art in them,
most pleased him. His dexterity in unridling the most Knotty Theorems and
Problems was singular. His Patience was unwearied. So that I stick not to say,
that had his Convenience permitted him that Study, as much as His Genius and
Inclination would have led him to it, he had been inferior to few of his Age.
Which, many of his Papers would make no hard labor to prove.

He gave himself also much to Philosophical Studies, but could never satisfy
himself with that empty Scelet of Aristotle's Philosophy. Which being by the
Trifling way of Logic, digested into some Order, has imposed so long upon the
World, and has abused them into an Opinion of their own Great Knowledge, when
notwithstanding, they could never extricate one Difficulty in all Nature: and
yet they would bear the World in hand, that Wisdom shall die with them, But
was well pleased, with the late Ingenious Attempts to unmask Nature. And as the
Rational Subtility of these Designs delighted him, So he was much pleased with
the Ingenious Candor of these Mechanical Philosophers, and expected Great
Things, from the Honorable and Truly Royal Society of the Virtuosi in
England. For he believed That Design, to be the strongest Attempt the World had
seen, to rescue it from Ignorance and Uncertainty.

He was also a great Friend of Chimistry, and being no stranger to it, was
purposed to have applied himself seriously thereto: Hoping by Vulcans Key to
have disclosed Nature.

He had also studied Mechanism, and all such things as might improve a Society.
But the more he knew, the more he was persuaded of the Defects of Humane
Knowledge. Neither was he like these Globes, wherein the Author, rather than
acknowledge his Ignorance, will fill up these wast and unknown spaces, with
Lands designed and marked only in his Conceit: But he choosed rather, to Mantle
over that which he knew, by a Shadow; than, to pretend to that which he had not.

In fine rare was it to see so much Worth veiled under so much Humility. Which
kept him so from the Knowledge of Others, but most of all from himself. Yet
as the Sun beams when stopped in their even course, and refracted in a Cloud,
do appear in that rare Contexture of Light and Shadow the Rainbow: so the Vail
of Humility, though, it a little interrupted, yet, it had not the force to keep
up the Glancing light of that shining Soul, but rather, as a Shadowed Picture,
appeared he with advantage. And as the rare endewments of his Mind, did not
intoxicate him; so the Virtues of his Soul, however valued by others, were ever
counted few and mean by himself. For he had Perfection in his eye. His Aims
and Designs stooping no lower. Whence the recurring defects of the daily
imperfections which annoyed him in his Pilgrimage, represented always himself,
in the blackest shape disdain could set him in. And there was nothing more
grating to his Ears, than his own praises. Is there not then a Prince and a
great Man fallen this day in Israel?

The Soul of Man being by the Power of the Divine Spirit rescued from the
bondage of Corruption, is brought into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.
For these staining Tinctures of Passion, Lust and Pride are not done of, that
He should continue as a whited Wall or a Fleece of Wool. Nor are these Devils
only cast out, that the house be empty Sweeped and Garnished: No, we need not
fear so great preparations shall end in Nothing. We are uncloathed of our
Filthy Garments, in lieu whereof we receive Change of Raiment: And the Treats
of the Image of God are drawn on the Soul. Thus the Mind is Transformed, by
that Participation of the Divine Nature, whereby it is united and knit unto
God, with that bond of Perfection, Love: which having consumed, all that fuel
of Lust and Vanity which had so long smothered the Divine Life, but becoming
Victorious, it inflameth the whole Pile, and offers it up in one
Burnt-offering to God: And the Soul being agitated by the Love of God, shed
abroad in it, as by an Active Principle of Life, is ever in its Desires and
Meditations mounting thither, where it hopes to be for ever. Our Savior
compared this establishment of the Mind on God to Hungering and Thirsting:
Which is not caused by Reason but by Life.

Thus the Supreme Exaltation of the Soul, is in being so fixed on God, that we
need not be jogged up to it by Arguments: but, by a natural and unforced
emanation of Spirit, to be ever Breathing after, and Panting for Communion with
God. This is to have our Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son. To place
our whole Affiance and Confidence on God, who through the Mediation of his Son,
is become Our Merciful and Gracious Father. To bestow on him the Supremacy of
our Love and Affections; and by uncessant Motions to be springing toward Him.
Thus the Soul, maugre the Load of its Body, that separateth it so far from
Heaven, will not be delayed of its Glory, until Unbodied; but will be
snatching the Summer-fruits even before Harvest come. Which, though they be not
ripened, to the delectableness of Angels-food; yet, that Antepast of Glory will
yield the Mind, such sweet Solaces and Pleasures, so Sublime and Highly Divine,
as will beget a Loathing of the most unmixed Delights Earth can afford. For
that Original sin, that they be of the Earth, will sufficiently discredit them.

The Soul having now found an Object, that will both deserve and attract its
more Fixed Thoughts, With what silent Admiration will it be considering these
Divine Adorable Excellencies, wherewith the Glorious Lord God is clothed, as
with a garment? which will sometimes choke them, to a stillnesse next to
Ecstasie; and at other times will burst forth in Halelujahs and Thanksgivings.
Could we trace the steps and Sacred Soliloquies of a Devout Spirit, in those
blessed retreats it makes, from the Loud disturbances of the World into the
Presence of Him, who is its Hiding place, and strong Habitation whereunto it
will continually resort: We should see it with delight sum up, all the passages
of the Power, Providence and Goodness of God: whereby it rouseth it self and
all that is in it, To bless his Holy Name, and to forget none of his Benefits.
And, if the World offer it self to its View, It will quickly say with S. Paul,
These things that before were gain to me, are now become loss through Christ.
Yea, doubtless, I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. Yea, I will account them but dung that I may
win Christ. Thus are the Meditations of God, sweet unto it: Neither is this
only the Holy Days Employment of the Soul. For God does not come to a Soul, as
a wayfaring Man to tarry for a night; But he dwells and abides in it. The
Soul is Acted, Moved and Directed by Him, in all its goings. And when its
Station, to which God has commanded it in the world, calls it from these
immediate Adorations, it resolves quickly to return again, and leaves the Heart
with God in Pawn. So that however it may be busied, yet all passionate fervor
is blunted and quenched. And it is so exactly regulated, by the Divine Will,
into which its own is changed, that it Cares, Desires, Joys and Sorrows for
Nothing Earthly: But all the Methods and Steps of the Divine Providence, are by
it judged to be, both Wise, Good and Just: as flowing from an unerring Skill,
an unchanged Goodness, and a spotless Justice. Therefore in Patience does it
possess it self, and, with an Unreserved Submission, equally welcomes as well
the Ebbings, as the Flowings of Earthly Satisfactions. As being none of them of
a nature, capable of promoting or retarding, that Happiness it expects and
desires from God alone. Thus with open face as in a Glass, beholding the Glory
of the Lord, we are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

The Order of this Discourse does call for the Applying, what has been spoken
to the Glorified Saint that has now left us. In doing whereof, several
Instances must be disclosed, which in his life were unknown to all, save to,
his other self, his Friends. His Soul was even fraughted, with adoring and
Magnifying thoughts of his Maker. His Frequent and Fervent entertaining himself
with Divine Meditations, did let us all know wherein he placed his Happiness.
Every day, many Hours of his Time, were spent in the Outer Court of Heaven, in
those approaches to God. No Company was so bewitching, as to make him forget
him, who had inhanced all his desires and delights. But when the entertainment
of Friends, did seem to hinder him from that Employment: yet still He either
found or made a shift to excuse himself for a while, that he might converse
with his God: Which an ingenious Modesty did so contrive, that it was not so
much as suspected, to be done upon design. Yea when he was so pressed, that he
could get no time in the Day stolen, He made it up in the Night. Often he used
to be Eight hours a day in the immediate Service of God: beside His diligent
observance of the Lords Day, which was indeed Singular.

He used a constant Method in reading Scripture, wherein he was much
conversant. Neither did the Translation satisfy him, but He searched the
Original carefully: For he could quot, the New Testament and Psalter, as
easily, in the first Language, as most can do in their Mothers Tongue.

In his daily Reading, he did still choose some place, which he fixed in his
Mind. To the Consideration whereof, he recollected his Thoughts, all that day
when ever he found himself at leisure. Which he used to say, was his Sanctuary
whither he retreated, from the Persecution of Idle Thoughts.

Many such Methods used he to wing up His soul to the work of Cherubims, ever
to behold the Face of his Heavenly Father. Yea a Radiant Splendour which
possessed his Looks, when he returned from his Closet, could make us, easily
discern, what joyful and pleasant work he had been about.

He used often, to separate whole days, for the Worship of God, wherein He
denied himself any other Refreshment, save what was ministered to his Soul.

He performed himself, the duties of his Family constantly at two returns each
day: where you might have heard both Reading, Singing and Prayer, and that with
such a true and unaffected Devotion, as discovered how little Formality may be
in the Observance of Forms.

The first arrest of that Fatal sickness, had exhausted the Active Vigor of
his Spirit so far, that the Keenness and Fervor of his Soul was somewhat
blunted, which drew him into Sadness, judged Melancholy by Beholders; For he
complained, that then when these Attaques of God, did alarm him up to a
greater diligence, He was become more languid and tepid: This Trouble was but
of short continuance, for he found the union of his soul to his God, as close
as ever, though a Mistuned Body, could not bear up in a Concord with it.

The last Lords Day of his Life, was he diligent in the search of his Heart,
and earnest in wrestling with God: the Issue whereof was, a Quiet and Composed
Mind. Which was, apparent, in the Cheerfulness of his Spirit, which was
greater that Night, than it had been all the while of his sickness. Two days
after, he was seized with a spotted Fever, or rather, His Sickness did
evidently discover it self to be such. Which having in a sudden disturbed his
Fancy, what, after that, came from him like himself, was rather Curt (though
raised and Divine) Contemplation, than any fixed and well ordered conceptions.

Often did He pray, often did He speak of the Glory of His God, and of His
Redeemer: Yea never mentioned he either, but his Soul seemed to go out with
Fervor.

The Last Night of his Life, Five times, did he direct his desires to God, in
the words of the Lords Prayer. About the Morning, His Raving seemed to have
taken leave of Him: for about a Quarter of an Hour, did he, with great
seriousness, and in well fitted words, call upon the Lord and invocate his
aid. Neither did he forget His Sovereign, the Church, His Nation or His Family.
He had no sooner ended, when the Fury of his distemper, as if it had given him
Truce, only for that blessed work, did again invade him. It was a few hours
after that (for he scarce spoke any more) that the Cords of his Tabernacle,
begun to be slackened: and before we were awar, He gave up the Ghost and fell
asleep, passing into Glory. Is there not then, a great Man fallen this day in
Israel?

Having thus viewed the Greatness of that Soul, wherein I do protest, no
Hyperbole has been used; neither has ought been said but what I certainly
knew to be true, Those who are little acquainted with True worth, and who
Imagine there is no such thing in the World (but that it is a Chimaera,
contrived to amuse and overaw the sons of Adam) will, may be, look on what has
been said, as a Flaunting Story. But it will gain credit with such, as are,
neither strangers to Virtue, nor to Him. What was seen of him was so fair and
alluring, that every one will not stick to believe, the Unseen and Hidden parts
of him must be the most Glorious: All will believe the Closet of a Palace to
exceed the Glory of the Walls.

But it is a Sad Conclusion, to say, There is a great Man FALLEN, I shall
rather invert the words, There is a Great Man RAISED up. The Soul and Body are
wreathed into unity by such a Congruity of Life, that forgetting the Difference
of their Natures, they come to be so linked, in the embraces one of another, as
to move jointly in all their Operations. Whence follows such an Echo of the
One, to all the Affections of the Other, that they both gain or loss,
according as their Yoak-fellow is Pleased or Prejudged. Which being a Riddle
too hard for the crazed Understanding of Man, whose sight has not yet reached
the inside of Beings, their Natures; some take a Compendious way to extricate
themselves, by saying, It is but agitated and subtle Matter that keeps us in
Life.

How well this may be applied to such Agents as are devoid of Ratiocination,
and to the Plantall and Animal Actions of a Man, I am not now to examine. But
that Cogitation can be an effect of Matter, even when it acts on Immaterial
Objects and in Self-reflexions, will be found a greater difficulty, than that
they intended to shun.

And sure in the Conception of a Cogitating Being there is no greater
Absurdity, than in that of an Extended One.

After the Soul has lodged in the Body, that space of Pilgrimage and
Probation, appointed it by God; Then the time of its Dissolution draws nigh.
When it is to be unfettered, then, through the dark shades of Death must we
pass to Immortality. And though there be nothing more dreadful, to them whose
Lewd and Atheistical life, does fill them with just apprehensions of
approaching Miseries; Yet the Lord God, who can out of the Eater bring forth
Meat, and out of the Strong give Honey, has ordered that to be the Forerunner
of a Bliss, so far elevate beyond the mean and lo apprehensions, we Frail
Mortals can conceive, that the most Fluent Eloquence, can do it no Right. May
we but Imagine, what an Amazement a Holy Soul will be struck in, when it finds
it self, of a sudden freed from, the Depressions of a Gross and Terrestrial
Body, the Allurements of a Debauched Mind, the Entisements of a Foolish World,
the Contagion of Evil Company, the Stings of Sickness and Pain, and from an
Unactive Tepidity of Mind in the Service and Converse with God. And in stead of
all This, it Enters Heaven, Where it is received and welcomed by Innumerable
Companies of Angels and Spirits of Just men made perfect; and is by them led
into the Presence of that King of Saints, Who is Glorious in Holiness, whose
Majestic Greatness, being then clearly discovered by the Purified Soul, will
occasion the greatest Transports of Joy, the Rational Nature is capable of.
For, We shall then see, with the Evidence of Sense, the Brightness of the
Fathers Glory, the only begotten Son of God, whom, while on Earth, we behold in
the Obscurity of Faith. Believe me, This Glory were too dazzling a sight to us
while we are in the Body.

Moses, when he saw but the Outside of the Divine Glory, yet such a
Brightness, from that Passing View, was imprinted in his Looks, that he must
needs vail himself: What Eye could then behold an Unvailed God? And if a
Passing Sight of that Exalted Prince, did so swallow up the Spirit of the
Apostle of the Gentiles, What could resist the Ecstasies and Ruptures, a Fixed
Looking on the Sun of Righteousness would occasion? If the One made S. Paul
forget his Body, The Other would have made him abandon it. But in Glory, those
Ravishing Objects shall not consternate the Beholders into a languishing
faintness, but, being Transformed, it will Rouse them into a Vigorous Activity
and Sprightfulnesse of Blessing, Adoring, Loving and Rejoicing in their Maker,
that Fountain of Life. And this by no Short or Passing Returns, but by a
Constant Efflux of Soul. So the Creature is wholly swallowed up of, and
overwhelmed by the Vision of its Creator.

Now into the Number of that Celestial Quire is received the Soul of Him, who,
while on Earth, having seen the Glory of that Land which is a far of and
tasting some of the Grapes of Canaan, did Run his race with joy and Pressed
forward toward the mark, even the Prize of the high Calling of God in Jesus
Christ. And having now finished his Course, he has entered into His Masters
joy, and and has received, that Crown of Righteousness, which is
Incorruptible and fades not away. Now, being uncloathed of all Dullness and
Frailty, does his Soul as an unsullied Mirror, yield a bright Reflection of
that Uncreated Light, with whose beams he is irradiated: And, in that Purest
Light of Divine Illumination, does he see light, seeing Him that is Invisible.

If an Unknown Savior did by a Secret Influence, warm the hearts of the two
Disciples, while He talked with them; Sure then the Hearts of this Disciple, is
now inflamed with Love and Zeal, while He closely embraces and Immediately
converseth with an Unmasked Redeemer* O how much does He rejoice and bless
himself in the Possession of that Glory: the meanest degree whereof he
prefers to the Empire of the World. What Hallelujahs is he now singing? With
what delight does He keep his Part in those Heavenly Anthems? With what
Pleasure feels he himself beyond the Assaults of Corruption? How does it
Rejoice him, that He needs no further Incentive of the Love of God, and that no
Cloud does disturb or darken the Excellent and Magnificent Glory; no
Drowsinesse of Mind does steal him into sleep? For there is no Night above: But
day and night do they see the Face of God. Know ye not then there is a Great
Man raised up this day in the New Jerusalem?

It follows to be Considered, Where has this Great man fallen. Even in
Scotland our Israel: A Nation of which it may well be doubted, Whither its
Mercies or Ingratitude be greatest. And though at some time it might have
compared with any round about, being barren in nothing but the Soil; But now
indeed the case is altered. To instance it in one thing. It not the Power of
Godliness, whose Effects should be, a Reformation of our Spirits into a
Likeness and Conformity with our Glorious Master and Redeemer, turned into
Forms and Words? With what violence and eagerness, may we daily see
Inconsiderable and Controverted Opinions, pressed and advanced? What severe
Censurings, bitter Reproaches and scurrilous Invectives, are we daily forced to
hear? And we are become so keen on such stuff, that the Great and Indispensable
Precepts of the Law of Jesus, Holiness, Charity and Obedience are counted but
mean and sorry Doctrines. What Triumphs are made upon the Failings and Errors
of those that differ in Opinion, though such had no truth in them, and are but
the Forgeries of Gall and Despite? And how well pleased are we, when we get the
Inglorious Advantage of Crushing and Ruining These, whom Blind Zeal, tinctured
with Malice, and Revenge makes us account our Enemies? Thus for all our
Canting, if one should give a judgment of us by our Lives and Conversations, He
should not miss of calling us Christened Heathens. We are called Christians, and
profess our selves to be such, and do wisely in so doing; for there is Nothing
that would make any suspect us guilty of Religion, save our Outside. Are we not
Covetous, Proud, Passionate and Self-conceited? Thus have we flatly
contradicted the Great Design of the Gospel. Which Doctrine was proclaimed to
the World by the Wisdom of God, not to disturb our heads, with Harsh and
unprofitable Questions; But to Prick our hearts with a sorrow and hatred of
Sin. Not to make us Talk big, But to Live Sublimely and to become like unto his
Glorious Self. Yea, How degenerate by such work are we become, and what
Loathing this has begot of the great Truths of Religion in the Hearts of our
Supernumerary Gentry, I should rather mask with a silent Sorrow, than with a
Brisk Forwardness, discover the Nakedness of my Parent, my Country. But their
detestable and impious Lives, their Irreligious and Blasphemous scoffing at
Piety and Holiness, and their daily falling off to the Superstitions and
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, do give too evident a testimony what kind of
Cattle they are.

Neither has this contagion only corrupted the Morals of this People, but
their very Spirits are become mean and sordid. And how receptive their Vitiated
Minds are, of the worst impressions may appear from the Great footing that
French Contagion of Atheism (more to be abominated even then the sickness
which goes under that name) has among us. The furious wits of some rampant
Hectors, who having immersed themselves into all brutalism, and apostatized
from that Godlike nature, conceive the deepest hatred against the adored Deity;
and with a monstrous arrogance proclaim an open feud against God and Religion.
And if they can with Blustering and Sophistry elude those arguments, where with
some, less experienced with their cursed Arts, do assail them, and with a
wide-mouthed impudence run down the Modester: Thence do they conceit
themselves, the only sons of Wisdom; of whom, I dare boldly pronounce, that in
themselves we have the greatest Instance of their so eagerly contended for
principle, that a man has no real Pre-eminence over, or Difference from
brutes. Which if now they so much desire, what will their wishes be when, with
their Master Leviathan, they shall be shut up in that Lake of Fire and
Brimstone.

Their Triumph is, that no argument can reach them; for, they deny the
Certainty of all those Principles whence any Argument can be drawn: And yet in
the maintaining their own Hypotheses, how many Absurdities are they driven to
suppose? which could never have captivated any man's Reason, but his who has
consented to that slavery, and resolves, to believe any thing but Religion.

Further, if all things be uncertain; Then, that there is no God, must be so
likewise; and as their Principles yield to this, so they could never pretend to
any positive argument for this Monstrous tenet. If it follows then, that for
ought they know, there may be a God, it will be easy for every one to collect
hence, whether Atheism or Religion be the safer Course.

How much these hellish Doctrines begin to be received among us, is too notar,
the daring boldness of those blaspheming Rascals, tells us, they fear Man no
more than they do God.

This Great Person that is now fallen, although, He needed no such foil to set
off his Glory; Yet it cannot choose, but make Him the more Considerable, and
his Fall the more Lamentable.

How much the degeneracy of This Nation grieved him has been touched already.
Great was his Indignation against that divellish crew of Atheists: that one
should thought so Calm a mind, could not be stirred to so much spite. Much was
he incensed against some Pretenders to the Mathematics, who ranked themselves
under Leviathans Banner: for He believed that from these Sciences, more then
One or Two arguments could be brought for the Principles of Religion.

In fine, He judged the greatest Right could be done to Reason, was the belief
of Christianity, which is in all things so proportioned to our Faculties, that
the very proposing of them will gain credit, from any unstained mind, which is
freed from the polluting tinctures of Lust and Passion, and, converseth much
with its own Faculties, in still and serious Reflections upon it self.

His Spirit was too large to shrink into the narrow Orb of a Party or Interest.
No, His Charity taught him to despise none of his Brethren. For though he
believed his Conscience to be his own Rule, which he carefully and diligently
observed and followed, yet he judged it an Impudent piece of Antichristian
Arrogance, to assume Authority over the Consciences of Others, and to dictate
to them.

In Fine, he judged none of our Debates, to be about matters essential to
Religion: but found himself obliged to all Love and Kindness for those, that
lived Holily and whose Souls had taken on that Light and Easy yoke of Jesus,
and had stouped to his Government, however they might disagree about the
Outside and model of Church-Polity. And howbeit He was of Opinion, that,
Episcopal Government moderating over but regulated by Presbyters, might have as
strong a Plea for the Chair as any other Form; yet He judged Forms, to be but
Forms, which, of their own nature, are neither so Good as to make Men Good; nor
so Evil, as to make men Evil: But would prove Succesfull according to their
skilful management: or Vuneffectual by the furious overdryving of These, to
whose care that work was trusted.

By this Description, the Truth whereof was so fully known to all persuasions
(yea the last morning of His Life, did He cordially pray that the Lord would
heal our Breaches, and pour out the Spirit of Love and Meekness on this
divided and furious People, and fell out in a noble Panegyric on the Power and
Exaltedness of the Great Truths of our Religion; and concluded, that God who
had not denied us the Knowledge of his Son, would never have envied us a clear
Discovery of these Opinions, had they been Necessary for His Church.) Hence we
must conclude, that Now his Advantage, is our great and unspeakable Loss: For
He was one of a Thousand, a Burning and a Shining Light, blameless and
harmless as a Son of God, in midst of a Crooked and Perverse Generation.

O Scotland! Does None of you lay it to heart, that this Righteous and
Merciful Man is taken away: And who knows, but it is from the Evil to come.
Has not the Loud Cry of the Judgments of God awakened you? And does not the
Music of his Mercies Charm you? Has not the Preaching of His Word Converted
you, nor the Life of His Servants, wrought upon you? Yet let the Death of his
Saints Allarum you. Know! that the Lord God is angry: And that the Cry of your
abominations is going up to Heaven: and a Cousumption from the Lord, is come
out upon you. The Power and Vitals of Religion are daily decaying, and the True
Seekers of God are melting away as Snow before the Sun. They are the Pillars of
the Earth, and it is for their sakes, that the End of Time is not already come.
Justly may we then Fear, that the Lord shall be gathering in those Excellent
Ones to himself, and so His Fury shall run out upon us without a stop.

Therefore let me excite you to notice this great loss. And so I say to you,
Know you not that there is a great Man fallen this day in Israel.

Here is offered to our Consideration, what kind of Notice the Death of such a
Great Person does call for. Which that we may the better Understand, I shall
remove that Great Error of many, who think the Violent Touches of a Passionate
Sorrow to be a Debt they owe the Memory of their deceased Friends: wherein they
so obstinately harden themselves, That their Wit and Spirit is put to task to
Defend and Justify these daily Affronts they receive. And if the Force of
Reason or Length of Time be rescuing them from that Vassalage, then their
Vitiated Minds become incensed against themselves: and they will challenge their
hearts of Insensibility and Forgetfulness. Shall we then see how Just their
Sorrow is. Will we step into a Gallery of Heathens, there shall the Stoics
teach us Wisdom. From them may we Learn to look upon Nothing without us, as our
own; but count them of a lower nature, and to have nothing in them, that can
render Us truly Happy, but to be so Fluctuating that when we think our selves
most secured in the Possession of them, we are to remember, they may be removed
from Us: And so we are to preserve Our Minds from the Bondage of Passion and
Fondness on ought that is Earthly. For an Opinion of Excellency in any thing,
and the Apprehension of that to be Ours, does make the loss of it
unsupportable.

They will also teach us never to be troubled, For that we cannot Help; For
they Believed All Things to be Governed by a Fate, which was Inevitable: They
therefore judged it Irrational, to be busied in a Fruitless Labor, since that
nor Tears nor Sorrow can recall the Life that is gone. Thus Vnchristned Reason
taught these Philosophers to argue. And sure if they Lived as they Talked, they
shall rise in Judgment against many called Christians, who see a Clearer
Light, and yet walk in Greater Darkness and Disorder.

It is no Disgrace neither to Our Religion, nor to the Grace of God, to
magnify the Morality and Worth of the Heathens. Methinks it says and that
strongly for the Honor of it, to find, among the Rubbish of Ruined Nature,
still remaining, some Impressions of Virtue. But if we attempt a Comparison
betwixt that Sacred Doctrine delivered in the Bible and the Writings of the
more Moralized Heathens, you may as justly compare a Fish eye to a Pearl, or a
Diamond to a piece of Crystal: Natures Light being as the First Dawning* of
the Morning, pleasing to One wearied with the Blackness of Night, which may
well delight the Eye with its Beauty, but will hardly guide the Traveller on
his way. But the Divine Light, like the Noon Beams, which clearly discovers all
things here below, and makes us easily discern every Object save it self, not
for any dimness in its Self, but an Excessive Brightness. So after one has
been vexed, with looking on the Darkness of Heathenish Idolatry, and finds in
Greece something of a higher strain, He cannot choose but be somewhat
satisfied: But will find himself little furthered. Their Doctrine being able
excellently to inform, how he is to be unhinged, but Prescribing no foundation
to fix on, nor furnishing any helps toward such an Atchievment. This is
Peculiar to the glory of the Latter House, whose radiant splendor does
discover to us, all the Instances of our Duty, and fills our Hearts with true
Understanding, for the perfect knowledge of every thing in our course. Only He
whose Glory it is to be incomprehensible, cannot be found out to Perfection.
The truth whereof shall be now applied, to the Affair in hand.

Religion then teaches us, That in this life, we are but Pilgrims, and aiming
at* but not attaining, Happiness: and that the very Essence of all Earthly
Enjoyments, is to be Transitory. For we have no lease of Life, nor of the
Comforts thereof. There is a wilderness betwixt and Canaan, in which we must
Sojourn. We must not then fret, although we have no water at every Station: But
with all cheerfulness, ought we to follow every Remove of Divine Guidance; For
Here we live in Hope, and expect that after we have walked through the Valley
of Baca, we shall appear before the Lord in Sion, in that Rest that remains
for the People of God.

Being thus in the Gospel assured of that approaching Glory, How Irrational is
it, to Reckon upon our Present Troubles, which last but for a moment. No
Traveller will deeply resent the loss of Company he encountered on the way,
much less if he be assured to find them at home before him: Why should the
Death of an Excellent Person be accounted a loss, when we know the Separation
shall last but a few hours, compared with the Boundless length of that Eternal
fellowship wherein we shall enjoy one another.

Further the Gospel tells us, that, all things here below are managed by the
exactest Skill, and a well balanced Providence. The most despicable of
Creatures, are no forgot by Him, much less, the Masterpeece of his work, Man,
in the greatest* concernment thereof, Life. The hairs of our head are numbered,
much more the years of our Life, the End whereof never approaches but in the
fittest and best chosen time. For we are not exposed, to the uncertain Chances
of Accidents, nor folded under the Fatality of Stoics, or the influence and
aspects of Stars; but led by an unerring Wisdom that does all things in
Number, Weight and Measure. It is then but a well set off Blasphemy against the
Wisdom of God, to be offended with his Government of the World.

Again Christianity informs us well what Death is: That it is no Extinction of
the Soul, nor does it carry us to still and dark Caverns, where, in an unactive
Drowsinesse, we shall sleep over our Time; much less to any Violent, though
Temporal pains, as some dream: But the Instant of a Christians Dissolution is
the time He shall be invested with all Glory and Dignity and possessed of all
Bless and Happiness. How strong a curb must this be to any Believers sorrow,
when, without being Criminal in a Secret Envying their deceased Friends Glory,
they dare not regrate his Death. For all their Complaints do carry in their
bosom, so many wishes that the Ground of their trouble had not been: and
Self-interest and Satisfaction; is preferred to the unspeakable Advantage of
him that is Dead.

Even true Friendship would command one to say, Since my Happiness cannot come
at any other rate than my friends being detained from His, which is a good
degree of Misery, with all contentedness of mind shall my loss redeem my
friends Gain.

Further there be Comforts and Delights of the Mind of a Higher nature than
those of the Sense and Fortune, which can never be shaken, by any thing without
us: These true Delights, which a well grounded assurance of the Love of God
does bring into the Mind, are so far beyond all the World can promise, much
more give, that, when weighed in a true Balance, they prove lighter than
vanity.

The Lord God out of his Love to Man, does use all means, leaving none
unessayed, that He may obtain the Mastery of the Soul: when Earthly
Satisfactions do carry on this Design, they are allowed us: But if they prove
Retardments, the same reason does call for their Removal. An absolute Belief of
the Fullness of the Love of God, who makes all things work together for good
to them that Love Him, will secure the Peace of the Soul so entirely, that none
of all the Batterings of Passion will brangle it. And it is by these scorchings
of Affliction that God draws in many to dwell under the shadow of his Wings,
where they are in safety; whereby they come more actively to attempt, and carry
on a Triumph over all the Entanglments of Sense and Passion. Thus the
Foundation of our Joys and Hopes (the Love of God in Christ) remains unmoved,
however the Outside of our Condition, which is but our Exterior happiness,
may be subject to Change.

It is by these Considerations (of the Truth whereof, by the interior
operation of the Spirit of God, we are persuaded) That the Faith and Fear of
God, does guard our Minds and preserve them in Perfect Peace: So that we are
not afraid of evil Tidings, every one whereof, carries that Strength and
Evidence with it, that to it quickly the Assent of the Mind is gained. And
although the Fetters of Nature and Passion, not being wholly, while in the
Body, broke off, they will as a Hurrican, master for a while the whole powers
of the Soul. Yet that fury being over, in cold blood do they begin to condemn
themselves, and to amass those comforts of the Gospel, by the Force whereof and
the Assistance of Heaven, they at length become Proof to all the Assaults of
their Enemies.

Hither to have we seen, that a Raging Sorrow, is not the Debt we owe to the
Memory of the Dead. Neither did David (whose Practice upon the removal of His
beloved Child, does clearly discover his Temper, upon the like occasions)
intend any such thing when he says, Know ye not that there is a great Man
fallen this day in Israel. Neither is a sullen negligence of the Providence of
God, the Stillness Virtue requires. Betwixt these two does the Writer to the
Hebrews direct, our course. For he wrote, My Son, despise not thou the
Chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art corrected of Him. When therefore
the Fall of a Great Person does allarum us, we should diligently heed and
Observe the Voice of it. We should hear our selves thereby called to an
Elevation of Soul beyond all Earthly Enjoyments, and to consider how little our
Hearts should be fixed on such things. May be that Love has made us forget our
Work, and the Lord by snatching it from us does court our Kindness; Yea,
forces us to it, by the retiring us, from the bewitching enchantments of
Sublunary Contentments; that so being beaten of the other Objects of Desire, He
may be unrivaled in the Possession of our Heart. The least slip of Adulterous
Love, will be accounted unpardonable and quench all the others kindness, or
rather inflame it into a Fury and Revenge. Thus the Jealous Eye of God, if it
find us gadd a whoring after strange Loves, and give the Highest of our Love to
the Creature, then an Incensed Creator removing His Rival, does loudly call us
back to the duties of our wedlock.

And Further, then must we also have a just value of the Worth and Virtue of
Him who is fallen, by numbering up his several Excellencies which will never
shine so bright as Then. While the Person is alive, His present Worth does so
choke us with Joy and Complacency that scarce have we leisure to run over the
foregoing instances of his Life: which when He is Gone; being summed together
in Our Remembrance, and endeared to us, by the Privation of our equally Beloved
and Admired friend, cannot but Highly increase our esteem of Him, That so when
Dead He may live in our Memories: as that Queen, who, thinking no Tomb worthy
of her deceased King and Husband, did drink over over his ashes, and so buried
him in her own Bowels.

And sure those Impressions of Love and Affection, which are outlived by the
Person or worn off by Separation or distance, either, were never real, or, at
most, Skindeep. For the Character of true Friendship is indelible. A Bacchick
Fury, or Floods of Tears, or Languishing Fits do well prove the Strength of
Passion; but only a Lasting Esteem demonstrateth the Reality of Love. Neither
ought such resentments to be expressed only with Sad Face and Doleful Voice,
But chiefly by proposing such a rare Person, as an Example both for our own and
others Imitation.

The Sun is in the Firmament, not to be gazed at, but to Guide: and Beacons are
Lighted not for show but service. Many run his Fate, who looking to the Stars
did not mind his way, but fell into a Ditch. So their diligent attention to the
Virtues of Another, is so far from provoking them to endeavor a resemblance of
them, that it proves but a Scandal, while that remembrance galls them, either
fretting them into agonies of Grief and Sorrow, or benumming them into Idle
Heaviness. Thus as the Brazen Serpent, proposed for a Cure, became an Occasion
of Idolatry; So an Exalted Soul lifted up to Glory, being set forth to draw us
after it, does indeed prevail over many to draw them away, not to, but from
their Duty. So Corrupt man can suck poison from the sweetest flowr.

It is now time to bring what is set down in General to our Occasion. Let not
then the Death of this Great Person, choke our Hearts with that Pusillanimous
and sordid Passion of Sorrow. He is not Dead, but is Asleep: Neither has Death
triumphed over him, but He has obtained the Victory. What, though in the Heat
of the Combat He has thrown his clothes from Him, and striped himself of such
burdensome apparel, which yet will be rescued from the Jaws of Death, in the
last scene of His Triumph, The Morning of the Resurrection. Then shall He shine
as the Brightness of the Firmament. Let Us not therefore Envy his Glory, but
rather Congratulate his Happiness.

Neither should the Apprehension of Our Misery in his being Torn from us
Possess our souls with an uncomforted Melancholy. The Fellowship of our
Savior, the Supreamest of all Earthly Comforts, was, when removed, made up to
their advantage that were blessed with that* Mission of the Holy Ghost. Upon
which Consideration, did our Savior say, It is expedient for you that I go
away. So ought we believe that no Satisfaction on Earth is so great, but can be
exceeded by these inward Joys, which the Gracious Lord God will bestow on us,
in that measure that is most fit and expedient for us. Labor we therefore
seriously a subjection of Mind, to the Good, Acceptable and Perfect will of God.

Let his Memory also be dear and precious to us, and we stirred up to Active
Attempts after those Virtues He possessed. Was He Meek, Humble, Temperate,
Charitable, Patient, Pious and Devout: Let Us not only flauntingly Talk of
those Excellent Graces, but silently Study the Practice of them. Let the
Impious and impudently Wicked be ashamed, and be You remembered by the death of
this Great Man, that you must all once die, and after that come to Judgment.
Me thinks this Thought should start you and stop your carreer, lest you drive
into these unquenchable Flames ere you be aware. Learn you that are satisfied
with the Praise of being no ill men, from the Example of this Great One, not to
Halt betwixt two Gods. You must either love God or Mammon.

It was said by Him, that spoke never amiss, He that is not with me is against
me. Be therefore Holy, as your God is Holy: and be ye Followers of this blessed
Disciple, as he was a Follower of Christ.

You also that are entered into the School of Christ, Be not as Babes, ever
Learning, and never coming to the Knowledge of the Truth: But go on to
Perfection. Be not Cripled with, or detained under, the Pedagogy of Forms; but
Imitate this Great Man, by Tasting and Feeling the Power of the Divine Life,
transforming and uniting your Souls unto God. And Love one another, and let
nothing be done through Strife or Vainglory. Learn that Wisdom that is from
above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy.

And for these whose Souls have not overly tasted of the Waters of Life, but
are vigurously wrought upon by the Mighty Power thereof, seeing this Great Soul
with that Cloud of Witnesses that are passed into Glory, they will be animated
to run with Patience, that race, that is set before them. Forasmuch then as
Your Labor is not in vain in the Lord, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord.

It is now time to Conclude, for I doubt not but upon such a Speaking Occurrent
as this, Every one will be ready to supply themselves, with such fit and
suitable Considerations, as may most conduce toward that End we all ought to
aim at. So that I shall need to say no more, but know ye not, That there is a
Great Man fallen this day in Israel.

FINIS.

