An ENQUIRY into the Reasons for Abrogating the TEST imposed on all Members of
Parliament.
Offered by Sa. Oxon.
WHEN the Cardinals in Rome go abroad without Fiocco's on their Horses heads,
it is unstood that they will be then incognito, and they expect nothing of that
Respect which is paid them on other Occasions. So since there is no Fiocco at
the Head of this Discourse, no Name nor Designation, it seems the Writer offers
himself to be examined without those nice regards, that may be due to the
Dignity he bears: and indeed when a Man forgets what he is himself, it is very
natural for others to do it likewise.

It is no wonder to see those of the Roman Communion be stir themselves, so
much as they do, to be delivered from the Test, and every thing else that is
uneasy to them: and tho othres may find it very reasonable to oppose
themselves, in all the just and legal ways that agree with our Constitution, to
this Design, yet it is so natural to all that are under any Pressure, to desire
to get free from it, that at the same time that we cannot forbear to withstand
them, we cannot much condemn them: but it raises nature a little, to see a Man
that has been so long fatned with the Spoils of our Church, and who has now got
up to a degree so disproportioned to his Merit, to turn so treacherously upon
it. If he is already weary of his comfortable importance, and will here give
her into the bargain, and declare himself, no body will be surprised at the
change of his masque, since he has taken much pains to convince the World, that
his Religion goes no deeper than his Habit: yet tho his confidence is of a
piece with all his other Virtues, few thought it could have carried him so far;
I confess I am not surprised, but rather wonder to see that others should be
so; for he has given sufficient Warning of what he is capable of; he has told
the World what is the worst thing that Dr. Burnet can do. p. 50. but I am sure
the Dr. cannot be quit with him, to tell what is the worst thing that he can
do; it must needs be a very fruitful Fancy that can find out all the degrees of
Wickedness to which he can go: And though this Pamphlet is a good Essay of his
Talent that way, yet that Terra Incognita is boundless. In the Title Page it is
said that this was first writ for the Author's own Satisfaction, and now
published for the benefit of all others whom it may concern. But the words are
certainly wrong placed; for the truth of the matter is, That it was written for
the Author's own benefit, and that it is now published for the satisfaction of
all others whom it may concern: In some sense perhaps it was written for the
Author's own Satisfaction; for so petulant and so depraved a mind as His, is
capable of being delighted with His Treachery and a poor Bishopric with the
addition of: Presidentship, being too low a Prize for His Ambition and Avarice.
He resolved to assure Himseif of the first great Bishopric that falls; the
Liege Letter let us see how far the Jesuits were assured of him, and how much
courted by him: and that he said, that none but Athiests supported the
Protestant Religion now in England; yet how many soever of these may be among
us, He is upon the point of lessening their number, by one at least: and he
takes care to justify the Hopes which these Fathers conceived of Him. They are
severe Masters, and will not be put off with Secret Civilities, Lewd Jests,
Entertainments, and Healths drank to their good Success; so now the Price of
the ^residen^ship is to be paid, so good a Morsel as this deserved that Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Burnet, and some other Divines should be ill
used, and He to preserve the Character of Drawcansir, which is as due to Him as
that of Bays, falls upon the Articles of the Church, and upon both Houses of
Parliament. It is Reproach enough to the House of Lords, that He is of it; but
it is somewhat new, and a Character becoming Sa. Oxon, to arraign that House,
with all the Insolence to which He can raise his wanton Pen. Laws that are in
being are treated with respect, even by those who move for their Repeal; but
our Draw^ansir scorns that modest strain, He is not contented to arraign the
Law, but calls it Barbarous, and says, that nothing can be more Barbarous and
Profane than to make the renouncing of a Mystery, so unanimously received, a
State Test; page 133. page 64. But he ought to have avoided the word Profane,
since it leads men to remember, that He had taxed the praying for the King, as
under God and Christ, as Crude, not to say Profane: when in the prospect He
had then [36] of a Bishopric he raised the King above Christ, but now another
prospect, will make Him sink Him beneath the Pope, who is but at best Christ's
Vicar. But this is not all, there comes another Flower that is worthy of Him,
He tells us, That the TEST was the Firstborn of Oats 's Plot, and brought
forth on purpose to give Credit and Reputation to the Perjury, page 5. and
because this went in common between the Two Houses, He bestows a more
particular mark of His Favor on the House of Lords: and tells them That this
was a Monument erected by themselves in honor of so gross an Imposture.
(ibid.) But after all, the Royal Assent was added; and here no doubt it itched
somewhere, for if it had not been for the manner of the Late King's Death, and
the Papers published since His Death, He would have wreaked His Malice upon His
Memory, for He will never forgive His not Advancing him: And the Late King
being so true a Judg^ of Wit, could not but be much taken with the best Satyr
of our Time; and saw that Bays's Wit, when measured with another, was of a
piece with hi^ Virtues, and therefore judged in favor of the Rehearsal
Transprosed: this went deep, and though it gave occasion to the single piece of
Modesty, with which he can be charged, of withdrawing from the Town, and not
importuning the Press more for some years, since even a Face of Brass must grow
red, when it is so Burnt as his was then; yet his Malice against the Elder
Brother was never extinguished but with his Life: But now a strange conjuncture
has brought him again on the Stage, and Bays will be Bays still.

He begins his Prologue with the only soft word in the whole piece, I humbly
conceive, but he quickly repents him of that Debonarity, and so makes Thunder
and Lightning speak the rest, as if his Designs were to Insult over the two
Houses, and not to convince them. He who is one of the Punies of his Order* and
is certainly one of its justest Reproaches, tells us page 8. That to the shame
of the Bishops, this Law was consented to by them in the House of Lords: But
what shame is due to him, who has treated that Venerable Bench, and in
particular his Metropolitan, in so scurrilous a manner. The Order has much more
cause to be ashamed of such a Member: tho if there are two or three such as he
is among the Twenty six, they may Comfort themselves with this, That a dozen of
much berter Men, had one among them, that I confess was not much worse, if it
was not for this, That he let the price of his Treachery fall much lower than
Sa. Oxon does, who is still true to his Old Maxim, that he delivered in Answer
to one who asked him What was the best Body of Divinity? which was, That that
which could help a man to keep a Coach and six Horses, was certainly the best,
But now I come to Examine his Reasons for abrogating the TEST.

The first is, That it is contrary to the Natural Rights of Peerage, and turns
the Birthright of the English Nobility, into a Precarious Title: which is at
the mercy of every Faction and Passion in Parliament, and that therefore, how
useful soever the TEST might have been in its season, it sometime must prove a
very ill President against the Right of Peerage: and upon this he tells a story
of a Protestation made in the House of Lords, against the TEST, that was
brought in, in 1675, together with the Resolution of the House against that
Penalty upon the Peers, of loosing their Votes in case of a Refusal: he
represents this, as a Test or Oath of Loyalty, against the Lawfulness of taking
Arms upon any pretense whatsoever against the King.

But in Answer to all this, one would gladly know what are the Natural Rights
of Peerage, and in what Chapter of the Law of Nature they are to be found, for
if those Rights have no other Warrant, but the Constitution of this Government,
then they are still subject to the Legislative Authority, and may be regulated
by it. The Right of Peerage is still in the Family, only as the exercise of it
is limited by the Law to such an Age, so it may be suspended as often as the
Public Safety comes to require it: even the indelible Character it self, may
be brought under a total Suspension, of which our Author may, perhaps, afford
an instance at some time or other.

2. Votes in either House of Parliament, are never to be put in Balance with
Established Laws: these are but the Opinions of One House, and are changeable.

3. But if the TEST might have been useful in its Season, one would gladly see
how it should be so soon out of Season: for its chief Use being to Secure the
Protestant Religion in 1678. it does not appear, That now in 1688. the Dangers
are so quite dissipated, that there is no more need of Securing it. In one
Sense we are in a Safer Condition than we were then: for some False Brethren
have showed themselves, and have lost that little Credit which some unhappy
Accidents had procured them.

4. It was not the Loyalty in the TEST of the Year 1675. that raised the
greatest Opposition to it: but another part of it, That they should never
Endeavor any Alteration in the Government, either in the Church or State. Now
it seemed to be an unreasonable Limitation on the Legislative Body, to have the
Members engaged to make no Alteration: And it is that which would not have much
pleased those, For whose Satisfaction this Book is published.

The second Reason was already hinted at, of its dishonorable Birth and
Original; page 10. which according to the decency of his style he calls the
first Sacrament of the Otesian Villainy, page 9. This he aggravates as such a
Monstrous and Inhuman piece of Barbarity as could never have entered into the
thoughts of any man but the infamous Author of it; this piece of Elegance, tho
it belongs to this Reason, comes in again in his Fourth Reason, Page 6. and to
let the House of Lords see their Fate, if they will not yield to his Reasons,
he tells them that this will be not only an Eternal National Reproach, but such
a blot upon the Peers, that no length of time could wear away, nothing but the
Universal Conoagration could destroy, which are the aptest Expressions that I
know to mark how deeply, the many blots with which he is stigmatized are rooted
in his Nature. The wanton man in his Drawcansir humor thinks that Parliaments
and a House of Peers are to be treated by him with as much Scorn as is justly
due to himself. But to set this matter in its true Light, it is to be remembered
that in 1678. there were besides the Evidences of the Witnesses, a great many
other Discoveries made of Letters and Negotiations in Foreign Parts, chiefly
in the Courts of France and Rome, for Extirpating the Protestant Religion; upon
which the Parts that was most united to the Court, set on this Law, for the
Test, as that which was both in it self a just and necessary Security for the
Established Religion, and that would probably lay the fermentation which was
then in the Nation: and the Act was so little acceptable to Him, whom he calls
its Author, that he spoke of it then with Contempt, as a Trick of the Court to
lay the Nation too soon asleep. The Negotiations beyond Sea were too evidently
proved to be denied; and (which is not yet generally known) Mr. Coleman when
Examined by the Committee of the House of Commons, said plain enough to them,
that the Late King was concerned in them; but the Committee would not look into
that matter, and so Mr. Sacheverill, that was their Chairman, did not report
it; yet the thing was not so secret but that one to whom it was trusted, gave
the Late King an Account of it; who said, That he had not heard of it any other
way, and was so fully convinced that the Nation had cause given them to be
jealous, that he himself set forward the Act, and the rather because he saw
that the E. of S. did not much like it. The Parliament as long as it was known
that the Religion was safe in the Kings Negative, had not taken any great Care
of its own Constitution, but it seemed the best Expedient that could be found,
for laying the Jealousies of His Late Majesty, and the apprehensions of the
Successor, to take so much Care of the Two Houses, that so the Dangers with
which men were than alarmed, might seem the less formidable, upon so effectual
a Security: and thus all the stir that He keeps with Perjury and Imposture,
ought to make no other impression, but to show the wantonness of His own
Temper, that meddles so boldly with things of which He knew so little the true
Secret: For here was a Law passed of which all made great use that opposed the
Bill of Exclusion, to demonstrate to the Nation that there could be no Danger
of Popery, even under a Prince of that Religion; but as he would turn the
matter, it amounts to this, That that Law might be of good use in that season,
to lay the Jealousies of the Nation, till there were a Prince on the Throne of
that Communion, and then when the turn is served, it must be thrown away, to
open the only door that is now shut upon the Re-Establishment of that Religion.
This is but one Hint among a great many more of the state of Affairs at the
time that this Act of the TEST was made, show that the Evidence given by the
Witnesses, had no other share in that matter, but that it gave a rise to the
other Discoveries; and a fair Opportunity to those who knew the Secret of the
Late King's Religion, and the Negotiation at Dover, to provide such an
effectual Security, as might both save the Crown, and secure the Religion: and
this I am sure some of the Bishops knew, who (to their Honor) were faithful to
both.

The Third Reason he gives for Repealing the Act, is the incompetent Authority
of those who Enacted it; for i^ was of an Ecclesiastical nature: and here He
stretches out His Wings to a Top flig^t, and charges it with nothing less than
the Deposing of Christ from His Throne, the disowning, neglecting and
a^fronting his Commission to his Catholic Church, and entrenching upon this
Sacred Prerogative of his Holy Catholic Church: and then that He might have
occasion to feed his Spleen with railing at the whole Order, he makes a
ridiculous Objection of the Bishops being present in the House of Lords, that
He might show His respect to them, by telling in a Parenthesis that (to their
Shame) they had consented to it. But has this Scaramuchio no Shame left him?
Did the Parliament pretend by this Act to make any Decision in those two Points
of Transubstantiation and Idolatry? Had not the Convocation defined them both
for above an Age before? In the 28 th Article of our Church these words are to
be found: Transubstantiatien (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine)
in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ; but it is repugnant
to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions; and for the Idolatry of the Church of
Rome that was also declared very expressly in the same Body of Articles: since
in the Article 35 the Homiliys are declared to contain a godly and wholesome
Doctrine necessary for those times: and upon that it is judged that they should
be read in the Churches by the Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they
may be understood of the People. And the Second of these, which is against the
Peril of Idolatry, aggravates the Idolatry of that Church in so many
particulars, and with such severe Expressions, that those who at first made
those Articles, and all those who do now sign them, or oblige others to sign
'em, must either believe the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, or that
the Church of England is the Impudentest Society that ever assumed the Name of
a Church, if she proposes such Homilies to the People, in which this Charge is
given so home, and yet does not believe it Her Self. A man must be of Bays's
pitch to rise up to this degree of Impudence. Upon the whole matter then, these
points had been already determined, and were a part of our Doctrine enacted by
Law: all that the Parliament did, was only to take these out of a great many
more that by this Test it might appear whether they who came into either House
were of that Religion or not, and now let our Reasoner try what he ^an make out
of this: or how he can justify the Scandal that he so boldly throws upon his
Order, as if they had as much as in them lay destroyed the very being of a
Christian Church, and had profanely pawned the Bishop to the Lord: and betrayed
the Rights of the Church of England as by Law established in particular, as
well as of the Church Catholic in general. p. 8.9. All this shows to whom he
was pawned both the Bishop and the Lord, and something else too, which is both
Conscience and Honor, if he has any left. When one reflects on two of the
Bishops, that were of that Venerable Body, while this Act passed, whose Memory
will be blessed in the present and following Ages, those two great and good Men
that filled the Sees of Chester and Oxford, he must conclude, that as the World
was not worthy of them, so certainly their Sees were not worthy of them, since
they have been plagued with such Successors; that because Bays delights in
Figures taken from the Roman Empire, I must tell him, that since Commodus
suceeded to Marcus Aurelius, I do not find a more incongrous Succession in
History. With what sensible regret must those who were so often edified with
the Gravity, the Piety, the Generosity, and Charity, of the late Bishop of
Oxford, look look on, when they see such a Harleguin in his room.

His fourth Reason is taken from the uncertainty and falsehood of the matters
contained in the Declaration it self, page 9. for our Comedian maintains his
Character still, and scorns to speak of Established Laws with any Decency; here
he puts in a paragraph, as was formerly marked, which belonged to his Second
Reason, but it seems some of those to whom he has pawned himself, thought he
had not said enough on that head, and therefore to save blottings, he put it in
here. After that, he tells the Genty, that Transubstantiation was a Notion
belonging to the Schoolmen and Metaphysitians, and that he may bespeak their
Favor, he tells them in very soft words, That their Learning was more polite
and practicable in the Civil Affairs of Human Life, to understand the Rules of
Honor, and the Laws of their Country, the practice of Martial Discipline, and
the Examples of Great Men in former Ages, and by them to square their Actions
in their re^^^^tive Station^, and the life. But ^ine the Bishop is here without
his Fiocco, yet at least for Decencys sake he should have named Religion and
Virtue among the p^oper Studies of the Gentry: and if he dares not trust them
with the reading the Scriptures, yet at least they might read the Articles of
our Church, and hearken to the Homilies, for tho it has been long one of the
first Maxims that he has infused into all the Clergy that come near him, that
the People ought to be brought into an (...)ance in matters of Religion, that
Prea^^ing ought to be laid aside, for a Preaching Church could not stand, that
in Sermons no points of Doctrine ought to be explained, and that only the Rules
of Human Life ought to be told the People, yet after all, they may read the
short Articles: and tho they were as blindly Implicit as he would wish them to
be, yet they would without more Enquiry, find Transubstantiation to be
condemned in them. Next he Triumphs over the renouncing of it, page 11. as too
bold and too profane an Affront to Almighty God: when men Abjure a thing which
it is morally impossible for them to understand. And he appeals to the Members
of both Houses (whom in a fit of Respect he calls Honorable, after he had
Reproached them all he could) if they have any distinct Idea or Notion in their
minds, of the thing they here so Solemnly Renounce. I do verily believe none of
them have any distinct Notion of Transubstantiation, and that it is not only
Morally, but Phisically impossible for them to understand it: But one would
think thet this is enough for declaring that they do not Believe it, since the
TEST contains no declaration concerning Transubstantiation it self, whether it
is a True or a False Doctrine: but only concerning the Belief of him that takes
it. And if one can have no distinct Notion of it, so that it is morally
impossible for him to understand it, he may very well declare That he does not
believe it. After a Far^e of a ^light Story, he concludes, that there seems to
be nothing but a profane Levity in the whole mat^er: and a shameless abuse put
upon God and Religion, to carry on the Wicked Designs of a Rebel-Faction. For
he cannot for his heart, abate an ace of his Insolence, even when he makes the
King, Lords, and Commons, the subject of his sco^^. Certainly whatever his
Character is, it ought not to be expected that a man who attacks all that is
sacred under God and Christ, should not be treated as he deserves: it were a
feeble weakness, to have so great a regard to a Character that is so
prostituted by him. He tells us* page 47. That all Parties agree in the thing
and that they differ only in the word and m^nner* and here he makes a long
excursion to show his Learning, in tacking a great many things together, which
passes with Ignorant Readers as a mark of his great Reading: whereas in this,
as well as in all his other Books, in which any shows of Learning appear, those
who have searched into the Fountains, see that he doe^ nothing but gather from
the Collection of others: onl^ he spoils them with the Levities of his
Bu^^o^n-Stile, and which is worse, with his Dis-ingenuity. I leave all these
matters to be exa^ined, by those who have leisure for it, and that think him
worth their pains* But asfor Tra^substantiation, the words that I have cited
from out of our Articles, show plainly that it is rejected in our Church, so
that he is bound either to renounce it, or to renounce our Church: therefore
all that show he makes with our History, comes to nothing, since whatever he
may say with relation to Edwar^ the Sixth's Reign, it cannot be denied, but
they were Enacted by the Convocation in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and they have been ever since, the Doctrine of our Church: so that
without going further, this is now our Doctrine, and since Sa. Oxon carries the
Authority of the Convocation so high, he will find the Original Record of these
Arti^les in Corpus-Christi College in Cambridge, subscribed by the Members of
both Houses, in which there is a much more Positive Decision then is in the
Prints, not only against Transub^tantiation, but against any Corporal or Real
Pre^^^ce of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacra^^^^: And if he will give
himself scope* to rail at those who suppressed this, I leave him to his
Liberty. But here is the formal decision of this Church, and the pretending
that there was no Evidence of Cranmer's Opinion, but in an unknown Manuscript,
or a famous Invisible Manuscript, p. 49, 47. when there are two Books writ on
this matter by Cranme^ himself, and when all the Disputes in Queen Mary's Time,
besides those that were both in Oxford, and Cambridge, in King Edward's Time,
show so clearly, That this was his Doctrine, is a strain becoming his
Since^ity, that gives this among many other Essays of the Trust that is due to
him.

But it seems he thought that Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Burnet,
besides some others w^om he does not Name, had not Reputation enough in the
World, and therefore he intended to raise it, by using them ill: which is all
the effect that his Malice can have. He had set on one of his poor
under-workmen, some years ago, to decry the Manuscript which Dr. Stillingfleet
had in his keeping for above Twenty Yea^s, and which D^. Burnet had in his
Hands, for many months, and which ^hey showed to as many as desired to see it,
but that had turned so much to his Shame that first vented the Calumny, that it
seems he summoned Sa. Oxon to appear his Second in the Slander: and he whose
Brow is of so peculiar a Composition* will needs bring it here, tho ever so
impertinently. But I forgive the Hatred that he bears both to that Manuscript,
and to those Doctors, since nothing could be less to the Satisf^ction of those
for whom he published his Book, then to see the Mature and Regular Methods in
which the Reformation was advanced, For the Bishops and Divines were appointed,
to Examine all Points with much Care, and to bring every man His Opinion in
Writing, all which were compared very faithfully, and upon these the Decisions
were made.

There are many other Papers yet extant, which by comparing the Hands show
these to be Originals: and they were in the Salisbury Family probably ever
since they were at first brought together. Their Ancestor the Lord Burghly who
was Secretary of State in Edward the Sixth's time, gathered them up; and as
appears in a Letter under his own Hand yet extant, he had 6 or 7 Vol^mes of
them, of which Dr. Stilling fleet had only two, but Dr. Burnet saw two more of
these Volumes.

The History of the Reformation sells still so well, that I do not believe Mr.
Chiswell the Printer of it has made any present to this Reasoner, to raise its
price: for to attack it with so much malice, and yet not to offer one Reason to
lessen its Credit, is as effectual a Recommendation, as this Author can give it.

He pretends that Dr. Burnets Design was, to make Cranmer appear a mere
Sacrame^tarian as to Doctrine, as he had made him appear an Erastian, as to
Discipline: and he thinks the vain Man was flattered into all the pains he
took, that he might give Reputation to the Errors of his Patrons, and that
those two grand Forgeries are the grand Singularities of his History: and the
main things that gave it Popular Vogue and Reputation with his Party. So that
were these two blind Stories, and the Reasons depending upon them retrenched,
it would be like the shaving off Samsons hair, and destroy all the strength
peculiar to the History. But to all this stuff I shall only say, 1. That the
Charge of Forgery falls back on the Reasoner, since as to Cranmers opinion of
the Sacrament, his own Books, and his Dispute at Oxford are such plain
evidences, that none but Bays could have questioned it: and for his being an
Erastian, Dr. Burnet had clearly proved that he had changed his Opinion in that
point, so that tho he showed that he had been indeed once engaged in those
Opinions, yet he proved that he had forsaken them: Let the Reader judge to whom
the charge of Forgery belongs. 2. Dr. Burnet has indeed some temptations to
Vanity now, since he is ill used b^ Bays; and put in such Company* But I dare
say if he goes to give him his Character he will never mention so slight a one
as Vanity, in which how excessive so ever he may be, yet it is the smallest of
all his Faults. 3. These two particulars here mentioned, bear so inconsiderable
a share in that History, and have been so little minded, that I dare say of an
hundred that are pleased with that Work, there is not one that will assign
these as their Motives.

He censures Dr. Burnet for saying he had often heard it said that the Articles
of our Church were framed by Cranmer and Ridley; as if it were the meanest
Trade of an Historian to stoop to hear says. p. 55. But the best of all the
Roman Historians (Salust. in ^ello Catil.) does it, and in this Dr. Burnet
maintains the Character of a sincere Historian to say not^ing that was not well
grounded: and since it has been often said by many Wr^ters that these two
Bishops prepared our Articles, he finding no particular Evidence of that,
delivers it with its own doubtfulness. It is very like Sa. Oxon would have been
more positive upon half the Grounds, that Dr. Bu^net had, but the other chose
to write exactly: yet h^ adds, Tha^ it is probable that they penned them: a^^
if either the Dignity of their Sees, or of their Persons be considered, the
thing will appear reasonable enough. But I do not wonder to see any thing that
looks like a modesty of Style offend our Author. He is next so kind to Dr.
B^r^et as to offer him some Counsel, (p. 50.) that he would be well advised to
employ his Pen in writing Lampoons upon the present Princes of Christendom
(especially his own) which he delights in most; because i^ is the worst thing
that himself can do, then collecting the Records of former times: for the first
will require time and Postage, to pursue his Malice: but the second is easily
traced in the Chimney corner.

One would think that this period was Writ by Mr. Louth, it is so obscure and
ill expres^ed, that nothing is plain, but the malice of it: but He of all men
should be the furthest from reproaching any for Writing Lampoons, who has now
given so rude a one, on the late King and the Lords and Commons; if bold
railing without either Wit or Decency, deserves that Name. I will only say this
further, that if one had the ill nature to write a Lampoon on the Government,
one of the severest Articles in it, would be. That it seems Writers are hard to
be found, when such a Baboon is made use of. It is Lampoon enough upon the Age,
that he is ^ Bishop: but it is downright Reproach that he is made the Champion
of a Cause, which if ^t is bad of it self, must suffer extremely by being in
such Hands.

And thus I think enough is said in Answer to His impertinent digression upon
Transubstantiation, let Him renounce the Article of our Church, and all that he
possesses in Consequence to His having signed it, and then we will argue all
the rest with Him upon the square: but as long as He owns that, He is bound
likewise to own the first Branch of the TEST, which is the Renouncing of
Transubstantiation. In this Discourse He makes His old Hatred to Calvin and the
Calvinists return so often, that it appears very Conspicuously. I believe it is
stronger now than ever, and that for a particular reason: When the Prince and
Prircess of Orange were Married, he was perhaps the only Man in England that
expressed his uneasiness at that Happy Conjunction, in so Clownish a manner,
that when their Highnesses past through Canterbury he would not go with the rest
of that Body, to which he was so long a Blemish, to pay his Duty to them, and
when He was Asked the Reason, he said, He could have no regard to a Calvinist
Prince. Now this Calvinist Prince has declared his mind so openly and fully
against the Repeal of the Test, that no doubt this has increased Bays's
distemper, and heightened his Choler against the Whole Party.

The second Branch of the TEST is the Declaration made of the Idolatry
committed in the Roman Church: upon which he tells us, page 71.72. That
Idolatry is a Stabbing and Cutthroat Word, and that it is an Inviting and
Warranting the Rabble whenever Opportunity favors to destroy the Roman
Catholics; and here Bays will outdo himself, since this was a Masterpiece of
Service, therefore he makes the taxing the Church of Rome with Idolatry, a
piece of inh^manity that outdoes the Savages of the Canibals themselves; and
damns at once both Body and Soul. He Charges Dr. Stillingfleet as the great
Founder of this, and all other Anti-catholick and Antichristian and
uncharitable Principles among us, and that the Test is the Swearing to the
Truth of his unlearned and Fanatic Nation of Idolatry. page 130.135. and the
result of all is, That Idolatry made the Plot, and then the Plot made Idolatry,
and that the ^ame persons made both. He has also troubled the Reader with a
second impertinence to show his second hand Reading again upon the Notion of
Idolatry. But all this falls off with a very short Answer, if he is of the
Church of England, and believes that the Homilies contain a Godly and Wholesome
Doctrine, all this clamor against Idolatry, turns against himself, for he will
find the Church of Rome charged with this, almost an Age before Dr.
Sti^lingfleet was Born; and tho perhaps none has ever defended the charge, with
so much Learning as he has done, yet no malice less Impudent than his is, eould
make him the Author of the Accu^ation. It will be another strain of our Authors
modesty, if he will pretend that our Church is not bound to own the Doctrine
that is contained in her Homilies, he must by this maxe our Church as
Treacherous to her Members, as Sa. Oxon is to her, or to deliver this Doctrine
to the people, if we believe it not our selves, is to be as Impudent as he
himself can pretend to be. A Church may believe a Doctrine which she does not
think necessary to propose to all her Members; but she were indeed a Society
fit for such Pastors as he is, if she could propose to the people a Doctrine,
chiefly one of so great consequence as this is, without she believed it her
Self. So then he must either Renounce our Church and her Articles, or he must
Answer all his own Plea for clearing that Church of this Imputation: which is
so slight, that it will be no hard matter even for such a trifling Writer as
himself is, to do it: As for what he says of Stabbing and Cutthroat Words, he
may charge us with such words, if he will, but we know who we may charge with
the Deeds. I would gladly see the List of all that have been murdered by these
Words, to try if they can be put in the Balance, either with the Massacre of
Ireland, or that of Paris; upon which I must take notice of his slight way of
mentioning Coligny, and Faction, and telling us in plain words, page 45. "That
they were Rebels, this is perhaps another instance of his kindness to the
Calvinist Prince, that is descended from that Great Man.

If Idolatry made our Plot, it was not the first that is made; but his
malignity is still like himself, his charging Dr. Stillingfleet, who he says is
the Author of the Imputation of Idolatry, as if he had suborned the Evidence in
our Plot. I should congratulate to the Dr. the Honor that is done him by the
Malice of one who must needs be the object of the Hatred of all good Men, if I
did not look upon Him as so contemptible a person, that his love and his hatred
are equally insignificant. If he thinks our Church worse than Canibals, I wish
he would be at the pains to go and make a trial, and see whether these Salvages
will use him as we have done. I dare say they would not Eat him, for they would
find so much Gall and Choler in him, that the first bit would quite disgust
them.

FINIS

