A TREATISE OF THE Covenant of GRACE: WHEREIN The graduall breakings out of
Gospel grace from Adam to Christ are clearly discovered the differences betwixt
the old and new Testament a^^ laid open, diverse errors of Arminians and others
are confuted; the nature of Uprightness, and the way of Christ in bringing the
soul into Communion with himself: Together with many other Points, both
doctrinally an^ practically profitable, are solidly handled.

By that faithful servant of Jesus Christ, and Ministe^ of the Gospel, JOHN
BALL.

Published by SIMEON ASH.

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and
w^ keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the
Gentiles. Isai 42. 6. But ye are come unto mount Sion and unto the city of the
living God, the heaven^ Jerusalem, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and to the blood sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of
Abel. Heb. 12 22, ^4. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show the^ (...) Covenant: Psalm. 25. 14. LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for
Edwa^d Brewster on Ludgate hill nea^ Fleet-bridge at the Sign of the Bible.
16^^*

To the Christian Reader.
Good READER,
WE do not conceive it necessary, to give credit unto the ensuing Treatise by
our Testimony, seeing the learned, and holy works of the Reverend Author do
abundantly praise him in the gate. His Catechism, with the exposition thereof;
his Treatise of the life of Faith, together with other Books more lately
published, tending to reconcile the differences of these times, do
sufficiently witness to the world, both his great abilities and Piety. And if
God had been pleased to lengthen his life, we believe, he might have been very
serviceable, in seeking to reconcile our present sad differences about
Church Government, because (as we understand) he had thoroughly studied all those
Controversies. But seeing the Lord has deprived us of his help in that kind,
we are right glad, that the Church shall have the benefit of any labors, which
he has left for public use, and in special of this subject (the Covenant of
Grace) so needful and profitable. And that acquaintance which we had with this
faithful servant of Jesus Christ, does incline us with all willingness, to
give our approbation of this piece, although our manifold employments have not
suffered us to peruse it, so exactly, as otherwise we should have done.

We shall desire, that by thy faithful improvement hereof, thy knowledge of
the foederall transactions betwixt God and his people, through Jesus Christ,
may be much augmented, unto his honor, and thine everlasting happiness, in
him, in whom we are,

Thy faithful Friends, EDWARD REYNOLDS. DANIEL CAWDREY. EDMOND CALAMY. THOMAS
HILL. ANTHONY BURGESS*


To the Reader.
Good READER,
THe worthy Author of this Treatise (who was my very dear and much honored
friend) bequeathed unto me, as a legacy of his love, this, with the rest of
his Manuscripts. This piece he prepared for the Press, purposing the
enlargement of it, if the Lord had continued his life and health: and I am
confident, it would have come abroad better polished; if he having completed
it, had then survayed the whole fabric, when set together. Although at the
first I was unsatisfied in mine own thoughts, whether I should adventure the
printing of it, because imperfect, yet upon the importunity of Friends, being
encouraged by the judgment of some Reverend Divines, who had perused it, I
have now made it public, without any addition, diminution, or alteration. The
subject of the book is excellent, profitable and necessary; even, the mystery
which has been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to
Col. 1. 26.
the Saints. That blessed Apostle, who experimentally understood the utmost
worth of humane learning, did yet contemn it, in comparison of that knowledge
which is taught in this Treatise. I determined not (says he) to know 1 Cor. 2.
2.
any thing among you (among you, knowing Corinthians,) save Jesus Christ. Yea,
doubtless, I count all things but loss, Phil. 3. 8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Oh how
incomparably sweet and satisfying is it unto a self-studying Christian soul, to
be acquainted with the faithful engagements of the Almighty Majesty, unto the
poor penitent si^ner, through that Son of his loves, in a Covenant of free,
rich, everlasting grace! This Covenant being transacted betwixt Christ and God,
here, here lies the first and most firm foundation of a Christians comfort. I
will give thee for a C^venant of the people, and will Isai. 49. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 10.
establish the earth, etc. All the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him
Amen, to the glory of God. Therefore the Servants of the most High
(notwithstanding their own changeableness and unworthiness) may hold up their
hearts and hopes to enjoy all Gospell-Prerogatives through him, because God
has said, I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David. Isai. 55. 1, 3.
The right understanding and the fruitful improvement hereof, will be
seasonably supporting and solacing to Gods people in these doleful distracted
times. We have, through Gods mercy, a glorious work, the work of
Church-Reformation under hand, now, though difficulties, delays, and
oppositions, do cast discouragements upon our hearts, yet from hence, we have
heartning. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but Isai. 54.
10. 11. 12.
my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my
peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. Oh thou afflicted,
and tossed with tempests, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with
fair colors, and lay the foundations with Saphires, etc. And when bloody
oppressors prevail and prosper, we may thus plead with our God, Have respect
unto the Covenant: for the dark places Psa^. 74. 10.
of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. For the tenor of the
Covenant which God makes with Christ and his spiritual seed, runs thus, If
they break my statutes, and Psalm 89. 31, 32.
keep not my commandments: Then will I visit their transgressions with the
rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will
I not utterly take from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, etc. And, As
for Zech. 9. 1^.
thee also, by the blood of the Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out
of the pit, wherein is no water. How precious beyond all expressions are the
treasures of Gods love in the Covenant of Promise! These mines are dug up
and discovered in this discourse, many obscure Scriptures, full of rich
Gospell-Grace are here interpreted from the original languages, and by a
judicious comparing of one place with another. The book (I believe) will
commend it self unto the considerate Reader: and because so many godly,
learned, well-approved brethren, have been pleased to honor it with their
attestation, therefore my further testimony would be altogether needless and
unseasonable. If the phrase of speech seem sometimes knotty and unusual, I
desire that serious attention may take off that discouragement. A little
diligence does often conquer greatappearing difficulties, and love of truth
will make laborious in searching after the knowledge of it. The Lord direct and
prosper thy perusal of this Treatise, that thereby thy soul may be edified in
grace and comfort, through the accomplishment of his glorious Promises in the
Lord our Savior, in whom, and for whom, I will endeavor to approve my self,

June 12. 1645. Thy faithful Friend and Servant, SIMEON ASH.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
Of the first part.
1. OF the significations of the word Covenant. page 1. 2. Of the Cov. God made
with man in the state of Innocence. p. 6. 3. Of the Covenant of grace in
general. p. 14. 4. Of the Covenant of promise. p. 27. 5. Of the Covenant of
promise made with Adam immediately upon his fall. p. 36. 6. Of the Covenant of
grace, as it was made and manifested to Abraham. p. 47. 7. Of the Covenant of
grace under Moses till the return of Israel from the Babylonish captivity. p.
92. 8. A particular explication of the Covenant, that God made with Israel, and
what Moses brought to the further expressure of the Covenant of grace. p. 122.
9. Of the Covenant that God made with David. p. 143. 10. Of the Covenant that
God made with Israel after the Babylonish captivity. p. 156. 11. Of Truth and
uprightness. p. 166.
The second part.
1. Of the New Testament, or Covenant, and how God has revealed himself
herein. p. 194. 2. Christ the Mediator of the New Testament, for whom he dyed
and rose again. p. 203. 3. How Christ has fulfilled the office of Mediator,
or how he is the Mediator of the New Testament. p. 264. 4. How Christ does
bring his people into Covenant, or fellowship with himself. p. 323. 5. How
Christians answer to the call of Christ, and so come to have Fellowship with
him. p. 345.
Errata.
Page 1. l. 1. marg. (...) p. 12. l. 23 r. how that faith which the exact
justice in the Covenant of nature presupposes p. 16. l penult. r. with Christ.
p. 37. marg. (...). and post. (...). p. 41. l. ult. dele is. p. 54. mar. (...),
p. 56. marg. parvo nesciat. p. 70. l. 26. r. challenge that. p. 13 lin penult.
(...) p. 143. lin. ult (...). p. 204. l. 30. positions. p. 258. lin. ult. and
then p 262. l. 1. believe not. p. 268. l. 5. dele as. p. 278 l. 11.
surrogation. p. 279. l. 23. (...) p. 280. l. 35. dele which is penal only, not
sinful. p. 287. l ^. (...). p. 290 l. 30. pays. p. 301. l. 13. never. p.
309. mar. (...). etc. p. 317. l. 20. the former by real union, that is. p. 320
l 2. or which are. l. 3. are the works. p. 330. l. 19. deferred, l. 21.
deferred no longer. p. 149. l. 1. 2 Samuel 21. 5.

A TREATISE OF THE Covenant of GRACE.
CHAP. I. Of the significations of the word Covenant.
THE word translated Covenant, some derive (...) a (...) Genesis 26. 28, 30. and
31 46, 54.
of another that signifies to choose, or to eat; because usually they had a
feast at making of Covenants: or it is a thing which two choose, and of which
they mutually agree and promise betwixt themselves: although the word be used,
when one alone does promise with a simple promise, and so it may be referred to
the Testamentary disposition. Others derive it of a root that imports to
cut, divide or smite: (...)
which being joined to the word Covenant, signifies to make or strike covenant
or agreement. Genesis 15. 18. Sept. (...), 1 Reg 8. 21. Jer. 31. 31. Genesis 31. 44.
LXX. (...): Edit. Conp* disponamus testamentum. LXX. (...). The holy Ghost in
Greek expresses this word (...) sundry ways, as by (...), Heb. 8. 9. Jer. 34.
18. Jer. 34. 8. (...), Heb. 8. 8. (...), Heb. 8. 10. and (...), Heb. 9. 20.
Exodus 24. 5, 6, 7. Numb. 18. 19. 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. Septuagint (...). Pactum,
salis, firmum stabile, quod rescindi nequit, ut nec salita car^ corrumpi, Genesis
15. 9, 10. Jer. 34. 18. Pactum perpetuum hebraice diceretur, pactum seculi
simul utrumque obvium. Sal pecuniae benignitas: ut sal carnem conservat, sic
benignitas opes and pecuniam, Et caesa jungebant foedera porca. Virg. In humane
affairs also, they use the same word, 1 Samuel 11. 1. 1 King. 5. 12. Vid. Jun.
Par. lib. 3. cap. 9. ad Heb. v. 15. etc. Job 31. 1. It is to be understood of a
solemn condition to take heed to his eyes. Budae: Comment. ex Aristop (...),
page 705. Maldon. in Mat. 26. Genebrard. on Psalm. 24. Act. 3. 25.
In the same day the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham. Jer. 34. 18. They have
not performed the words of the Covenant, which they had made before me. Psalm.
83. 5. They are confederate against thee, Psalm. 89. 3. I have made a Covenant
with my chosen. But else where to promise, appoint or ordain, 2 Chronicles. 7. 18.
As I have promised (or ordained, or covenanted) with David thy Father. And so
in the new Testament, the word used by the Septuagint does signify ( Luke 22.
29) And I appoint unto you a Kingdom. Erasm. Ego dispono vobis regnum. Beza,
Ego paciscor. Sir. Ego polliceor. And amongst all Nations, Covenants were
established by the oblation of Sacrifice: Example beyond all exceptions, we
have in that Sacrifice, wherein God made a Covenant with the people of Israel,
and bound them to the obedience of his Law: whence it is also called a Covenant
of Salt, that is, perpetual; either, because salt expels corruption, or
rather, because salt was used in Sacrifices; as if it had been said, a Covenant
being stricken, and such ceremonies used, as are ordinary in making Covenants.
Amongst the Greeks also, that it was most usual, appears not only by infinite
examples, but by common phrases, as (...), which is as much as to swear the
Sacrifice being slain, or to establish a Covenant. And in Homer, Iliad. 3.
(...), that is, bringing or bearing those things, which were necessary in
performing an Oath, or making a Covenant. The word Covenant or testamentall
bond or league, which has in Hebrew the signification of brotherly or friendly
parting, and of explaining the conditions of agreement; The Greek Interpreters
do frequently and almost perpetually render by (...), a testament or
disposition, Psalm. 25. 10, 14. Psalm. 44. 17. and 50. 16. and 55. 20. seldom
(...), Covenant, Isa. 28. 15. which is used elsewhere, Sap. 1. 16. 1 Mac. 10.
26. 2 Mac. 13. 25. and 24. 26. But in the old Testament, the word Berith is
never read for a testamentary disposition, which of the Rabbis, as Drusius
witnesses, is called (...) from the word that signifies to command, and so to
set his house in order, or to make his will, Isa. 38. 1. Which word is yet
general, and must be restrained according to the circumstances of the place,
Where the LXX. and Theodotio translate it (...), Symmaechus and Aquila turn it
(...). Psalm. 25. 14. Nor is it a thing unusual with classical Authors of the
Greek tongue to use the word (...) in the general signification; For
Camerarius cites out of Aristophan. de Avibus, (...), used for to make a
Covenant. The Papists carpe at our Interpreters, because they render the word
Covenant, rather then Testament: for they would have it to signify a
testamentary disposition. But they are deceived, for the signification of the
word is more general: and the Apostle Heb. 9. 16. argues not from the simple
signification of the word, but the circumstances of the Covenant. In a Covenant
and Testament both, there is an ordination and disposition of things according
to pleasure: and the Greek phrase in the New Testament does follow the
received Interpretation of the Septuagint; although in this the Covenant of
Grace is like to a Testament, that it is not established but by the death of
the Mediator as of a Testator.

The Covenant in Scripture does sometimes signify an absolute Promise of God,
without any stipulation at all, such as was the Covenant which God made with
Noah presently after the Flood, promising freely, that he would never destroy
man and beasts with an universal deluge of water any more. Genesis 9. 11. And
that Covenant of Peace, and everlasting Covenant which Sept. (...).
God made with Phinehas, that he and his seed after him should have the
Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. Numb. 25. 12, 13. Of this kind is the
Covenant wherein God promises that he will give his elect faith and
perseverance, to which promise no condition Jer. 33. 20.
annexed can be conceived in mind, which is not comprehended in the Promise it
self. Heb. 8. 10.

But oftentimes in holy Writ the name Covenant is so used, that in it is
plainly signified a free Promise of God, but with stipulation of duty from the
reasonable creature, which otherwise was due, no promise coming betwixt, and
might have been Psalm. 50. 16. Sir. Quid tibi and libris praeceptorum meorum
quod assumpseris pactum meum.
exacted of God, and ought to have been performed of the creature, if God had
so pleased, Psalm. 50. 16. and 25. 10. Psalm. 44. 17. For a Covenant is quiddam
complexum, implying two things, distinguished either re or ratione, the one
covenanting, the other restipulating or accepting. As also two parts
covenanted. First, the giving of some future good. Secondly, the retribution of
some performance. The first without the second, is no more then a Promise: the
second without the first is no less then a Law, though the Apostle, Gal. 3.
22. makes another opposition of Law and Promise, nature and faith, works and
Christ, for that is from a diverse acceptance of the Promise. But when two
persons upon these two parts concur, it is that we call a Covenant properly:
though tropically sometimes the Promise, and sometimes the stipulation only is
noted by the Covenant. Psalm. 50. 5. Nehem. 1. 5. Genesis 17. 7, 9. and sometimes
the seal of the Covenant is called the Covenant. Genesis 17. 10, 11.

This distinction of the Covenant depends upon a distinction of Gods love; for
there is a love of God toward the creature, whence all the good that is in the
creature does flow, and there is a love of God vouchsafed to the creature, and
that for those things which it has received, not of it self, but of God, as
it was beloved with that first love. That we may call primary or antecedent
(for distinction sake) this secondary or consequent love. From that flows both
the making and fulfilling of the Absolute Covenant: on this depends the
fulfilling of the Covenant, whereunto a restipulation is annexed, but not the
making thereof. For in the Absolute Covenant there is nothing in the creature
that might move God, either to promise, or to perform what he has promised:
but in the Covenant to which a stipulation is annexed, God fulfils what he
promised, because the creature exhibits what was exacted, although this that
God has entered into such a Covenant, and promised so great things unto him
that performed such and such obedience, that wholly proceeds from the
antecedent love, and free pleasure of Almighty God. The essance of the Covenant
properly consists in the Promise and stipulation: But the words of the
Covenant contain obedience required of God, and promised of them in Covenant,
and so by a Metonymie are called the Covenant. Exodus 34. 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 29. 1.
Jer. 11. 2, 3, 4. and 34. 13, 14. The Tables of the Law were the Tables of the
Covenant. The Covenant and Law differ, as friendship and tables obligatory to
friendship: he that violates these, is convinced to break this: Heb. 8. 1, 2.
and the tables of the Covenant of Law are called the Covenant or Testament, and
the Book of the Covenant. Exodus 24. 4, 7. 2 King. 23. 2. A Covenant is made
betwixt men of those things, which either were not due before, or were not
thought to be due, which are made firm, stable and due by the very Covenant,
so that by the Covenant new right is acquired or caused, either to one or both,
who Covenant betwixt themselves of any matter. Therefore the Covenant of God
does contain new things, great, and in no wise due, which of his mere pleasure
God offers unto us. Now where there is huge and infinite disparity, there can
be no assurance of this so great a gift, but the certain Word of God, and the
assured Promise of him who does never lie, nor change. That therefore Man
should enter into Covenant with God, it was necessary that men should first
give credit to the Word of God, and then that they should hope for those things
which exceed their capacity, and so at last trusting in God and obeying, they
should obtain the good things promised: and Exodus 24. 6, 7, 8.
therefore the words of the Covenant may well be put for the Covenant.
Nevertheless in making Covenant with the creature God is not tied to verbal
expressions, but often he contracts the Covenant in real impressions in the
heart and frame of the Creature, which is apparent in the Covenant so often
mentioned with the unreasonable creature, and this was the manner of
covenanting with our first parents in the state of Innocence: but is most
observable in the restored reasonable creature, when God shall put his Laws
into their hearts, and write them in their inward parts, Jer. 31. 33. and the
more perfect the creature grows, the more real shall the impression be: But
yet in all ages of the Church past, and so to the end of the world, God has
ever, and ever will make expressions outward of this his Covenant with
mankind. The Covenant is one thing, the name of the Covenant another. For the
Covenant includes the whole reason of the Covenant with the circumstances: but
the name sometimes is attributed to some circumstances. So the Covenant may be
said to be the same and not the same, that which is the same in substance,
varieth in manner and circumstances. Deuteronomy. 5. 2, 3. and 29. 1. and 4 31. Nor is
it a thing unusual in Scripture, that this should be affirmed of one, and
denied of another, which is more illustrious in one then in another, though it
be common to both, as Matthew. 15. 24. Interpreters of Scripture give this rule,
when it seems to deny the very essence of the thing, it does deny only some
circumstance or respect, Mark 9. 37. He that receives me, does not receive me:
which negation properly respects the degrees. Joh. 5. 45. There is one that
accuses you, even Moses, that is, Moses primarily and especially, Genesis 45. 8.
God sent me hither: when God and his See Jer. 23. 7. Isai. 43. 18.
brethren had done it, but in a diverse manner.

CHAP. II. Of the Covenant God made with man in the state of Innocence.
IT has pleased God to deal with the reasonable creature, by way of Promise
and restipulation, that is, by way of Covenant: In which God himself is one
party covenanting and promising, and the whole reasonable creature, the other
restipulating and obeying. The thing holden out by God is eternal life with
all immediate blessings, the condition on the part of the reasonable creature
is free, ready and willing obedience, whether from nature or grace. The causes
why God made choice to deal with the reasonable creature in this manner are
principally three. First, that the creature might know what to expect from the
Creator, into what state soever cast. Secondly, that the same creature might
always recognize, and acknowledge what to retribute. Thirdly, Such manner of
dealing suites best with the nature of the reasonable creature, and his
subordination to the Almighty. But passing by what might be spoken of the
Covenant with reasonable creatures, both men and Angels: we will only consider
what Covenant God has made with mankind, because the knowledge thereof does in
special manner concern us, and in the unfolding thereof the Scripture is most
plentiful. We read not the word Covenant betwixt God and man, ever since the
Creation, both in Innocence, and under the fall: but we have in Scripture what
may amount to as much. As in Innocence God provided and proposed to Adam,
eternal happiness in the present enjoyments, and calls for perfect obedience:
which appears from Gods threatening, Genesis 2. 17. For if man must die if he
disobeyed, it implies strongly that Gods Covenant was with him for life, if he
obeyed. And after the fall, it is most evident, God was pleased to hold this
course with man, in all ages and conditions, but with some alterations, as
seemed best in his infinite wisdom, and best fitted the present condition of
the creature. In this manner has God afforded both the prime and secondary
good unto man under Covenants and seals, that he might have the greater
assurance, so long as he walked in obedience: and herein God was pleased to
condescend to man's weakness, and for the confirmation of his faith to add
Seals to his Covenants, in all times to bind the bargain. The Covenant in
general may be described, a mutual compact or agreement betwixt God and man,
whereby God promises all good things, specially eternal happiness unto man,
upon just, equal and favorable conditions, and man does promise to walk
before God in all acceptable, free and willing obedience, expecting all good
from God, and happiness in God, according to his Promise, for the praise and
glory of his great Name.

The Author of the Covenant is God, not God and man, for God does enter into
Covenant with man, not as his equal, but as his Sovereign, and man is bound
to accept of the conditions offered by the Lord. There can be no such equality
of power and authority betwixt God and the creature, as that he should indent
with the most High, but he must accept what the Lord is wellpleased to offer
and command. The Covenant is of God, and that of his free grace and love: for
although in some Covenant the good covenanted be promised in justice, and given
in justice for our works: yet it was of grace that God was pleased to bind
himself to his creature, and above the desert of the creature: and though the
reward be of justice, it is also of favor. For after perfect obedience
performed according to the will of God, it had been no injustice in God, as he
made the creature of nothing, so to have brought him unto nothing: it was then
of grace that he was pleased to make that promise, and of the same grace his
happiness should have been continued. The partees covenanting are God and man:
for God promises unto man upon condition, and man promises unto God what he
requires. In respect of Gods promise the Covenant is called his: but in
respect of the conditions, it may be called man's. God promises freely to
recompense Zech. 9. 11. In the blood of thy Covenant. Sept. (...) 68.
the good of obedience, which is already due, and might be exacted without
promise of reward; man promises to pay that debt of duty, which he owes unto
the Lord, in respect of the manifold relations, wherein he stands obliged unto
him. The form of the Covenant stands in a Promise and restipulation, wherein
the Lord, though he might have required the whole To will and to nill the same
things is the sure bond of all amity and friendship. Now because the communion
betwixt God and us is of infinite disparitie, therefore his will is a Law to
us, and our obedience is true love to him.
debt of obedience, without promise of reward, in respect of the good things
already bestowed upon the creature, yet to the end that man might yield
cheerful and free obedience, he first bound himself to reward the obedience
of man, before he bound man unto him in obedience.

The Subject of this Covenant in general is man not differenced by special
respects: for as the Law was given, so the Gospel is revealed to man. Man in
this or that special consideration is the subject of the Covenant, as it is
divided for kinds, or altered for circumstances, and degrees: but man is the
subject of the Covenant without such particular considerations. The Lord having
respect to the mutability and weakness of man's nature, was pleased, as to try
his obedience by Symbolicall precepts, so to evidence the assurance of his
faithful promise by outward seals: but when the creature shall grow to
absolute perfection and unchangeablenesse, such symbolicall precepts and
outward seals shall cease as needless. The good promised is eternal
blessedness with all good things that do accompany it, or belong thereunto:
the good required is obedience to the just and righteous Commandment of God,
which he as our Sovereign Lord does claim and call for, according as he shall
prescribe and appoint. The end thereof is the glory of God, viz. the praise of
his wisdom, justice and bounty. And in all these things the Covenants
howsoever divided in kinds, or varied in degrees and circumstances, do sweetly
consent and agree. But seeing the Covenant is not one, but manifold, both in
kinds and degrees, we must distinguish it, and weigh more diligently what does
agree to every kind, and whe^ein they agree, and wherein they differ one from
another. Some distinguish thus, the Covenant is either of Nature, or of Grace,
or subservient to both, which is called the Old Testament. Others thus, the
Covenant is Legal or Evangelicall, of works, or of grace. The Covenant of
works, wherein God covenanteth with man to give him eternal life upon
condition of perfect obedience in his own person. The Covenant of Grace, which
God makes with man promising eternal life upon condition of believing. And
this distinction is one for substance with the former: and with that which may
be taken from the special consideration of the subject with whom it was made,
scil. the Covenant made with Adam in the state of Innocence, or with man after
the Fall. We read not in Scripture, the Covenant of works, or of grace totidem
syllabis: the nearest we come to it is Romans 3. 27. the Law of works opposed to
the Law of faith; which holds out as much as the Covenant of works, and the
Covenant of Grace. For there the Apostle is disputing about justification, and
by consequent eternal Salvation, which is Gods part to give under a Covenant.
But of this hereafter. The Covenant which God made with our first parents, is
that mutual contract or agreement, wherein God promised eternal happiness to
man upon condition of entire and perfect obedience to be performed in his own
person.

The Author of this Covenant was God his Creator and Sovereign, who had
bestowed many and great blessings upon man, furnished him with excellent
abilities, and enriched him with singular privileges. This Covenant God made
in Justice; yet so as it was of Grace likewise to make such a free promise, and
to bestow so great things upon man for his obedience. God did in strict justice
require obedience, promise a reward, and threaten punishment: but yet as
bountiful and gracious unto his creature, entire and perfect, if he should so
continue. God did in justice proportion the reward and the work, the weight of
the blessing promised, and the work of obedience required: but yet I cannot
think it had been injustice in God to have given less, or not to have
continued so great things to man, so long as he continued his obedience: No,
God was pleased to manifest his goodness to man continuing in obedience, no
less then his justice, as formerly in creation he had showed himself
exceeding gracious to man, above other visible and corporal creatures.

This Covenant God made with man without a Mediator: for there needed no
middle person to bring man into favor and friendship with God, because man did
bear the image of God, and had not offended: nor to procure acceptance to man's
service, because it was pure and spotless. God did love man being made after
his Image: and promised to accept of his obedience performed freely, willingly,
entirely, according to his Commandment. The form of this Covenant stood in
the special Promise of good to be received from justice as a reward for his
work, Do this and live: and the exact and rigid exaction of perfect obedience
in his own person, without the least spot or failing for matter or manner. The
good that God promised was in it kind a perfect systeme of good, which was to
be continued so long as he continued obedient, which because it might be
continued in the eye of creating power for ever, we call it happiness, life,
and everlasting happiness. But upon a supposition of Adams persisting in a
state of obedience, to say that God would have translated him to the state of
glory in Heaven, is more then any just ground will warrant; because in
Scripture there is no such promise. And if we must not presume above what is
written, we may say, Adam should have continued in that blessed estate in which
he was created, but as for his translation after some number of years spent on
earth, we read it not. In this state and condition Adams obedience should have
been rewarded in justice, but he could not have merited that reward. Happiness
should have been conferred upon him, or continued unto him for his works, but
they had not deserved the continuance thereof: for it is impossible the
creature should merit of the Creator, because when he has done all that he
can, he is an unprofitable servant, he has Luke 17. 10.
done but his duty. The obedience that God required at his hands was partly
natural, to be regulated according to the Law engraven in his heart by the
finger of God himself, consisting in the true, unfeigned and perfect love of
God, and of his Neighbor for the Lords sake: and partly Symbolicall, which
stood in obedience to the Law given for his probation and trial, whether he
would submit to the good pleasure of God in an act of it self merely
indifferent, because he was so commanded. Though God had put many abilities and
honorable privileges upon man, yet he remained his Sovereign, which by an
act of restraint, he was pleased to make man thus exalted to know, which he did
by requiring and commanding his creature to abstain from one fruit in it self
pleasant to the eye, and good for meat. This was man's Homage-penny, a thing
before the command indifferent, unto which he had a natural inclination, from
which he was now to abstain, because God (who had before given to man as part
of his patrimony, and not as reward of his obedience to this particular
restraint, liberty to eat of every tree of the Garden) here interposed himself
and reserved this as an Homage unto himself. God in his Sovereignty set a
punishment upon the breach of this Genesis 2. 16.
his Commandment, that man might know his inferiority, and that things betwixt
him and God were not as between equals. The subject of this Covenant is man
entire and perfect, made after the Image of God in Righteousness and true
holiness, furnished not only with a reasonable soul and faculties beseeming,
but with divine qualities breathed from the whole Trinity, infused into the
whole man, lifting up every faculty and power above his first frame, and
inabling and fitting him to obey the will of God entirely, willingly, exactly,
for matter and measure. Whether this was natural or supernatural unto the
first man, is a question needless to be disputed in this place, and
peradventure if the terms be rightly understood, will be no great
controversy. Only this must be acknowledged, that this was Adams excellency
above all the creatures, and that in the fallen creature this quality is
supernatural. Unto this mutual Covenant God added a seal to assure the
protoplast of his performance and persisting in Covenant with him, and further
to strengthen his obedience, with the obedience of his posterity, which upon
his breach with God was made void. This Covenant of works made with Adam should
have been the same unto his whole posterity, if he had continued as in all
after Covenants of God, they are made with Head and Root, reaching unto all the
branches and members issuing from them, Romans 5. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 22, 47. The
proportion holding in Abraham to Christ, till the Covenant be rejected in after
comers. But this Covenant was so made with Adam the root of all mankind, that
if transgressed, his whole posterity should be liable to the curse temporal
and eternal, which entered upon his fall. This Covenant was a Covenant of
friendship not of reconciliation; being once broken it could not be repaired;
it promised no mercy or pardon, admitted no repentance, accepted no obedience,
but what was perfect and complete. If Adam had a thought after his breach, that
he might have healed the matter, it was but vain presumption, and least he
should rely upon a vain confidence in eating of the tree of life, God drove
him out of the Garden. But this Covenant was not peremptory, not the last nor
unchangeable. Woe to all the posterity of Adam, if God should deal with them
according to the sentence here denounced. When man had plunged himself into
misery, it pleased the Lord to reveal his abundant Grace in the Covenant of
Grace, of which hereafter.

The end of this Covenant is the demonstration of Gods wisdom, bounty,
goodness and justice, both rewarding and punishing: and it made way for the
manifestation of his rich grace and abundant free mercy brought to light in the
second Covenant.

Three questions may be moved here not unprofitable, nor impertinent. 1. Why in
the Covenant of nature (as it is called)

Again, in this Covenant is considered, what in exact justice man does owe
unto God: (but he owes justice and Sanctity:) but in the Covenant of Grace
what God reconciled to man in his Son, would offer, and that is bountifully
offered.

2. How that Faith, which presupposes exact justice in the

Answ. Faith, which the exact righteousness of man in the Covenant of Nature,
does presuppose, agrees with faith which is required in the Covenant of Grace
in this, that both are of God, both is a persuasion concerning the love of God,
both begette^h in man mutual love of God, because if faith abounds, love
abounds; languishing, it languisheth; and being extinct, it is extinguished.
But they differ first in the Foundation. For Faith which the Righteousness of
nature presupposes, leans on the title of entire nature, and therefore after
the fall of Adam it has no place; for although God love the creatures in
themselves, yet he hates them corrupted with sin. No man therefore can
persuade himself, that he is beloved of God in the title of a creature; (for
all have sinned) nor love God as he ought. But the Faith, of which there is
mention in the Covenant of Grace, does lean upon the Promise made in Christ.
Secondly, when both are of God, yes that faith which exact righteousness
presupposes is of God (as they speak in Schools) per modum naturae: But the
Faith required in the Covenant of Grace, is of God, but per modum gratiae
supernaturalis. Thirdly, the righteousness, which the faith of nature
begets was changeable; because the faith whence it did flow, did depend upon
a changeable Principle of nature: But the Sanctity, which the Faith of the
Covenant of Grace begets, is eternal and unchangeable, because it comes
from an eternal and unchangeable beginning, the Spirit of Grace.

But if the Faith and Holiness of Adam was changeable, how Adam, which was
wholly fixed, and set in the admiration and sense of Gods goodness, could not
admit of such thoughts; such cogitations could not creep into it.

3. Whether the Covenant of works stand on foot in the posterity Adam, though
not in respect of life and happiness, yet in respect of the things of this
life? To this some answer affirmatively, because many of them, from some
remainders of the forementioned abilities, did many good things for the good of
bodies politic wherein they lived. Romans 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. which God
retributes with good things in this life, to some more, to some less, but to
all some. And it cannot be denied; but some remainders of Gods Image or notions
of good and evil, are to be found amongst the Heathen: and that these things,
in them who lived without the pale of the Church, have been increased by
culture of nature under Discipline, by Arts and Exercises, and might receive
improvement by vicinity to the Church; from which they might learn some things
to enrich them in this trade: And that God has bestowed many and great
blessings upon them pertaining to this life: But it may be questioned, whether
these things come from the compact of works, or be gifts of bounty and Gods
righteous administration, for a time respiting the sentence denounced against
man for breach of Covenant, and vouchsafing unto him some temporal good things
for the use and benefit of humane Society. Yea, it may be worthy consideration,
Whether these things be not granted unto them in Jesus Christ, according to the
Covenant of Grace, which was made upon the very fall* by whom not only the
Elect, but the whole frame of nature received benefit. In the Creation God
raised up a great Family, wherein he made Adam the head, and all his posterity
inhabitors, the frame of Heaven and Earth his domicile, the creatures his
servants, this Family upon the fall was broken up, the present Master turned
out of his employments, the children beggered, the servants returning to God
their Sovereign, and the whole frame of the creature under attainder. God thus
defeated, (if I may so speak) sets up a second Family, called the Family of
Heaven and Earth, wherein Jesus Christ, the woman's seed, Genesis 3. 19. is the
Head, Matthew. 28. 18. Ephesians. 1. 22. Col. 1. 19, 20. styled the second Adam, Lord
of all things in Heaven and Earth, and that with more sovereignty and amplitude
of enjoyment then ever the first Adam had; the whole creature being put under
his feet. The children of this Family are the faithful, who be the adopted
Brethren, Romans 8. 15. sometimes called the seed. The servants be the wicked,
and those of two sorts, either such as attend in the Church, nearer about
Christ's person, or further off, as in farme-houses for baser offices. The
creatures, by a second ordinance from their former Master free, are stated upon
Christ, though they bear some brands of evil from the sin of their former
Master: the domicile, though not so beautiful, returns to Christ. So the
Covenant of Grace, entering upon the breaking up of the former Family, investeth
Christ with all as purchaser of the lost creature from revenging justice, and
as Lord of all things in Heaven and Earth, who freely conferreth the heavenly
inheritance upon the adopted sons and brethren, and vouchsafes earthly
blessings, and some spiritual common gifts to the wicked, which may be called
servants, both those that more nearly attend his person, and those that be
further off. But of this more hereafter.

CHAP. III. Of the Covenant of Grace in general.
THe Covenant of Grace is that free and gracious Covenant which God of his
mere mercy in Jesus Christ made with man a miserable and wretched sinner,
promising unto him pardon of sin and eternal happiness, if he will return
from his iniquity, embrace mercy reached forth, by faith unfeigned, and walk
before God in sincere, faithful and willing obedience, as becomes such a
creature lifted up unto such enjoyment, and partaker of such precious promises.
This Covenant is opposite to the former in kind, so that at one and the same
time, man cannot be under the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace. For
he cannot hope to be justified by his perfect and exact obedience, that
acknowledging himself to be a miserable and lost sinner, does expect pardon of
the free mercy of God in Jesus Christ embraced by faith. The condition of the
Law as it was given to Adam, excludes the necessity of mercy reaching to the
pardon of sin: and the necessity of making a new Covenant, argues the former
could not give life, Heb. 8. 7. He that is under grace, cannot at the same time
be under the law: and he that waits for Salvation of mere and rich grace to
be vouchsafed, cannot expect it as the deserved wages of his good work from
justice, and not of mercy.

What then may some say, is the Law abolished, or is it lawful for Christians
to live as they list, because they be not under the Law?

Not so: but the Law has a double respect: one as the unchangeable rule of
life and manners, according to which persons in Covenant ought to walk before
and with the Lord, and in this sense it belongs to the Covenant of grace. The
other, as it is propounded in form of a Covenant, as if he must necessarily
perish, who does neglect or break it in the least jot or tittle, and in this
sense the Covenant of grace and works are opposite. The matter of Evangelicall
precepts and of the Moral Law is the same, but the form of promulgation is
not the same: the rule is one, but the Covenants differ. Materialy the Law,
that is, the matter and argument of the Law, as a rule, stands in force: but if
formally it did continue as a Covenant, there could be no place for repentance,
nor for the promise of forgiveness, or mercy reaching to the pardon of sin,
or the quickening of them that be dead in trespasses. The Covenant of works is
of justice, the Covenant of grace is of grace and mercy, which cannot agree and
take place in one and the same subject: for he that try^th justice, perceives
not the force of mercy, and e contra. This might be common to both Covenants,
that God does freely give reward, because he was not bound unto it by any Law,
and that is done of grace, which we are not tied unto by Law: but in the
Covenant of Grace, he gives the reward of mere and rich grace, and that to the
creature which has deserved Hell.

This Covenant entered immediately upon the fall, and so may be called a
Covenant of Reconciliation, not of friendship. At the very instant, when God
holy and true, was pronouncing judgments upon the several delinquents in the
fall, setting down his sentence against the Tempter, both in his instrument
the Serpent, and the maine Author Satan, he brings in the party who should
execute the same, in which execution is unfolded the Covenant of grace for the
Salvation of the creature, that the Serpent had destroyed, that God might be
known in wrath to remember mercy. At the very fall, and before judgment was
pronounced upon the delinquents that were tempted, the Covenant of mercy was
proclaimed, that by virtue of this Covenant God might prevent further waste of
his creature, which Satan might have wrought upon his new advantage in
following his good success, and that the tempted might have some comfort
before their judgment, least they might have been swallowed up of wrath.

The Author of this Covenant is God, considered as a merciful and loving
Father in Jesus Christ: as a Creator he struck Covenant with Adam in his
integrity; as a Savior he looked upon the poor creature plunged into sin,
and misery by reason of sin.

The cause that moved the Lord to make this Covenant, was not any worth,
dignity or merit in man: for man never had ought, which he had not received;
and now by his disobedience, had deserved to be cast off for ever: neither was
the present misery into which he had cast himself the cause that moved the
Lord to receive man into favor: for the Angels more excellent by creation, as
miserable by their fall, he has reserved in chains of darkness: The sole
moving cause, why God made this Covenant, Bonitatis Dei donumest, quod liberare
nos voluit: quod vero aliter quam tali modo liberare nos noluit, p^ccatorum
nostrorum est meritum.
was the love, favor and mercy of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. Only the Lord had a
delight in thy fathers to love them, (says Moses) and he chose their seed
after them. Deuteronomy. 10. 15. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine
own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live. Ezekiel. 16. 6.
See Ezekiel. 36. 32. Luke 1. 54, 55, 72, 78.

This Covenant was made in Christ, in and through whom we are reconciled unto
God: for since God and man were separated by sin, no Covenant can pass
betwixt them, no reconciliation can be expected, no pardon obtained, but in and
through a mediator. Sins were never remitted unto any man, no man was ever
adopted into the place and condition of a son, by grace and adoption, but in
him alone, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Jesus Christ, true
God and true man. Act. 4 12. Heb. 13. 8.

The fall of our first parents was occasion of this Covenant: for Actus nostrae
liberationis divinam bonitatem causam habet. Sed aliter actus, exactio, nimirum
paenae per modum satisfactionis ca^sam eam habet, quae ad paenam exegendam
irritat, id autemest peccatum.
God suffered him to slip, that he might manifest the riches of his mercy in
man's recovery. Mercy freeing man from misery possible might have taken place
before transgression, and have discovered it self in the preventing of sin,
and so of misery: but it seemed good unto Almighty God to suffer misery to
enter upon man through sin, that he might make known the infinite riches of
his mercy, in succouring and lifting him up, being fallen and plunged into a
state remediless and desperate for ought he knew. Besides, we may conceive,
that Almighty God, upon just grounds disdaining, that such a base creature
fallen by pride, should thus upon advantage of the mutability of his reasonable
creature, ruinate the whole frame of the Creation, and trample the glory of his
name under foot: and withal looking upon the Chaos which sin had brought,
and would further make, if some speedy remedy was not provided; did out of his
infinite and boundless love to man (though in the transgression,) and just and
dreadful indignation against Satan, give forth this gracious and free
Covenant.

The form of this Covenant stands in gracious and free promises of all good to
be repaired, restored, augmented, and a restipulation of such duties as will
stand with free grace and mercy. For the Covenant of Grace does not exclude all
conditions, but such as will not stand with grace. The Covenant which was made
of free love, when we lay wallowing in our blood, and which calls for nothing
at our hands but what comes from, and shall be rewarded of mere grace, is a
Covenant of grace, though it be conditional. So the pardon of sin is given
of grace, and not for works, though pardon be granted only to the penitent,
and faith on our part, a lively, unfeigned and working faith be required to
receive the promise.

The parties covenanting are two, and so are the parts of the Covenant, the one
in respect of God, the other in respect of man. A Covenant there is betwixt God
and man, but no mutual obligation of debt: for such mutual obligation is
founded in some equality; but there is no equality between the Creator and the
creature, much less betwixt the Lord most high, and man a sinner. If man had
never offended, God almighty, who gave him his being and perfection, could not
have been indepted unto him, but as he was pleased to recompense the good of
obedience, in the creature that never deserved punishment: much less can God
be indepted to the creature that has offended, who can neither endure his
presence nor bear the weight of his wrath, nor satisfy Justice, nor deliver
his soul from the thraldom of sin. The obligation of man to God is of
double right and debt: but it is of rich grace and abundant love, that God does
bind himself unto man. God does promise in this Covenant to be God and Father
by right of redemption, and Christ to be Savior of them that believe in God by
him, and in faith do yield sincere, uniforme, willing, upright and constant
obedience unto his Commandments. Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33 Deuteronomy. 31. 6. Ezekiel. 36.
25, 26. Genesis 15. 1, 4, 5. Jer. 32. 40. and 33. 9. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 54.
7. Hos. 2. 19.

The stipulation required is, that we take God to be our God, that is, that we
repent of our iniquities, believe the promises of mercy and embrace them with
the whole heart, and yield love, fear, reverence, worship, and obedience unto
him, according to the prescript rule of his word. Repentance is called for in
this Covenant, as it sets forth the subject capable of Salvation by faith,
but is it self only an acknowledgement of sin, no healing of our wound, or
cause of our acquittance. The feeling of Luke 13. 5. Act. 11. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 10.
Ezekiel. 18. 27^,
pain and sickness, causes a man to desire and seek remedy, but it is no
remedy it self. Hunger and thirst make a man to desire and seek for food, but
a man is not fed by being hungry. By repentance we know our selves, we feel
our sickness, we hunger and thirst after grace, but the hand which we stretch
forth to receive it, is faith alone, without which repentance is nothing but
darkness and despair. Repentance is the condition of faith and the
qualification of a person capable of Salvation: but faith alone is the cause of
Justification and Salvation, on our part required. It is a penitent and
petitioning faith, whereby we receive the promises of mercy, but we are not
justified partly by prayer, partly by repentance, and partly by faith, but by
that faith, which stirs up godly sorrow for sin, and enforces us to pray
for pardon and Salvation. Faith is a necessary and lively instrument of
Justification, which is amongst the number of true causes, not being a cause
without which the thing is not done, but a cause whereby it is done. The cause
without which a thing is not done, is only present in the action, and does
nothing therein: But as the eye is an active instrument for seeing, and the
care for hearing, so is faith also for justifying. If it be demanded whose
instrument it is? It is the instrument of the Soul, wrought therein by the Holy
Ghost, and is the free gift of God. In the Covenant of works, works were
required as the cause of life and happiness: but in the Covenant of grace,
though repentance be necessary and must accompany faith, yet not repentance,
but faith only is the cause of life. The cause not efficient, as works should
have been, if man had stood in the former Covenant, but isntrumental only: for
it is impossible that Christ, the death and blood of Christ, and our faith
should be together the efficient or procuring causes of Justification or
Salvation. When the Apostle Romans 3. ^^, 22 28, 30. Gal. 2. 16. 17. Romans 4. 2, 3.
writes, that man is not justified by works, or through works, by the Law or
through the Law (opposing faith and works in the matter of Justification, but
not in respect of their presence: faith, I say, and works, not faith and merits
which could never be) without doubt he excludes the efficiency and force of the
Law and works in justifying: But the particles By and of do not in the same
sense take Justification from the Law and works, in which they give it to
faith. For faith only does behold and receive the promises of life and mercy,
but the Law and works respect the Commandments, not the promises of mere
grace. When therefore Justification and life is said to be by faith, it is
manifestly signified, that faith receiving the promise, does receive
righteousness and life freely promised. Obedience to all Deuteronomy. 7. 1^. and 10.
12. Ier. 7. 23. Lev. 19. 17, 18. Luke 10. 27 Mar. 12, 30.
Gods Commandments is covenanted, not as the cause of life, but as the
qualification and effect of faith, and as the way to life. Faith that embraces
life is obedientiall, and fruitful in all good works: but in one sort faith
is the cause of obedience and good works, and in another of Justification and
life eternal. These it seeks in the promises of the Covenant: those it
works and produces, as the cause does the effect. Faith was the efficient
cause of that precious oblation in Abell, of reverence and preparing Heb. 11,
4, 7, etc.
the Arc in Noah, of obedience in Abraham: but it was the instrument only of
their justification. For it does not justify as it produces good works, but
as it receives Christ, though it cannot receive Christ, unless it brings
forth good works. A disposition to good works is necessary to justification,
being the qualification of an active and lively faith. Good works of all sorts
are necessary to our continuance in the state of justification, and so to our
final absolution, if God give opportunity: but they are not the cause of, but
only a precedent qualification or condition to final forgiveness and eternal
bliss. If then, when we speak of the conditions of the Covenant of grace, by
Condition we understand whatsoever is required on our part, as precedent,
concomitant or subsequent to justification, repentance, faith and obedience are
all conditions: but if by Condition we understand what is required on our part,
as the cause of the good promised though only isntrumental, faith or belief
in the promises of free mercy is the only Condition. Faith and works are
opposed in the matter of Justification and Salvation in the Covenant, not that
they cannot stand together in the same subject, for they be inseperably united,
but because they cannot concur or meet together in one and the same Court,
to the Justification or Absolution of Man. For in the Court of Justice
according to the first Covenant either being just he is acquitted, or unjust he
is condemned: But in the Court of Mercy, if thou receive the promise of pardon,
which is done by a lively faith, thou art acquitted and set free, and accepted
as just and righteous: but if thou believe not, thou art sent over to the Court
of Justice.

Obedience is twofold, perfect in measure and degree, this is so far
required, that if it be not performed, we must acknowledge our sin in coming
short: And this God is pleased to exact at our hands, that we might walk in
humility before him, strive after perfection, and freely acknowledge his rich
grace and mercy in accepting and rewarding the best service we can tender unto
his Highness, when in the Court of Justice it deserves to be rejected. 2.
Sincere, uniforme and constant, though imperfect in measure and degree, and
this is so necessary, that without it there is no Salvation to be expected. The
Covenant of Grace calls for perfection, accepts sincerity, God in mercy
pardoning the imperfections of our best performances. If perfection was rigidly
exacted, no flesh could be saved: if not at all commanded, imperfection should
not be sin, nor perfection to be labored after. The faith that is lively to
embrace mercy is ever conjoined with an unfeigned purpose to walk in all well
pleasing, and the sincere performance of all holy obedience, as opportunity is
offered, does ever attend that faith, whereby we continually lay hold upon the
promises once embraced. Actual good works of all sorts (though not perfect in
degree) are necessary to the continuance of actual justification, because
faith can no longer lay faithful claim to the promises of life, then it does
vertually or actually lead us forward in the way to Heaven. For if we say, we
have fellowship with God and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth:
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, 1 John 1. 6, 7. This walking in the light, as he is in the light,
is that qualification, whereby we become immediately capable of Christ's
righteousness, or actual participants of his propitiation, which is the sole
immediate cause of our justification, taken for remission of sins, or actual
approbation with God. The truth of which Doctrine St John likewise ratifies in
terms equivalent, in the words presently following: And the blood of 1 Ioh.
1. 7.
Christ cleanses us, (walking in the light as God is in the light) from all
sin. But of these things more largely in the several degrees how this
Covenant has been revealed.

In this Covenant man does promise to repent of his sins, and repenting to
cleave unto the promise of mercy made in Jesus Christ, and in says to yield
willing, cheerful and continual obedience. In contracts amongst men, one may
ask more, and the other bid less, and yet they may strike agreement: But it
is altogether bootlesse, for men to think of entering into Covenant with God,
if they be no^ resolved to obey in all things. The practice of all Gods people,
who ever made Covenant with his Highness, does expressly speak thus much,
when they solemnly entered into, or renewed their Covenant: for thus they
promise, Whatsoever the Lord says, that will we do, Exodus 24. 3, 7. The people
said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey,
Josh. 24. 23. And they entered into Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers, with all their he art, and with all th^e^r sou^e? That whosoever would
not se^ke the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or
great, whether man or woman, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. And the King stood by the
pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to
keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his statutes, with all their
heart, and all their soul, to perform the words of this Covenant that were
written in this book: and all the people stood to the Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 34.
31. 2 Kings 23. 3. They entered into a Curse, and into an Oath to walk in Gods
Law, which was given by Moses the Servant of God, and to observe and do all
the Commandments of the Lord our God, and his Judgments, and his Statutes,
Neh. 10. 29. And thus runs the exhortation of Joshua to the two tribes and
half when he sent them home; Take diligent heed to do the Commandments of
the Law, which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your
God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his Commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul,
Josh. 22. 5. Which must not so be understood, as if he that did of frailty and
infirmity offend in any one jot or tittle, should be held a Covenant breaker:
for then no man should be innocent, but the promise must be interpreted
according as the Law or rule of obedience is given, which calls for
perfection but accepts sincerity. In the Covenant of mercy we bind our selves
to believe and rest upon God with the whole heart, so as doubting or distrust
of weakness and infirmity, must be acknowledged a sin, but every such
frailty does not argue the person to be a transgressour of the Covenant. And
the same holds true of obedience. But of this more largely in the particular
manner how God has been pleased to administer this Covenant. Man then does
promise to serve the Lord, and to cleave unto him alone, which is both a debt
of duty, and special prerogative, and he does restipulate or humbly entreat,
that God would be mindful of his holy Covenant or testimony, that he would be
his God, his Portion, his Protector, and rich reward. These things be so
linked together in the Covenant, as that we must conceive the Promise of God in
order of nature to go before the Promise and obedience of man: and to be the
ground of faith, whereby mercy promised is received. The offer of mercy is made
to man an unbeleever, that he might come home, and the promise must be
conceived before we can believe, else we should believe we know not what, and
faith should hang in the air without any foundation: but mercy offered is
embraced by faith, and vouchsafed to him that believes. Also the duty which
God calls for, and man promises, is man's duty but given of God. By grace man
is enabled and effectually drawn to do what God commands. The Covenant
could not be of grace, nor the good things covenanted, if man by his own
strength did or could perform what God requires.

This Covenant was first published, and made known by lively voice: afterward
it was committed to writing, the tables thereof being the holy Scripture. It
was made both by word and Psalm. 85. 4, 35. Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 14. Isai. 54. 9. Heb.
6. 17, 18. Genesis 22. 16. Luke 1. 72.
Oath, to demonstrate the certainty and constancy thereof: and sealed by the
Sacraments, which on Gods part do confirm the Promise made by him: and on
man's part are bills obligatory or hand-writings, whereby they testify and bind
themselves to the performance of their duty.

For manner of administration this Covenant is diverse, as it pleased God in
sundry manners to dispense it: but for substance it is one, the last,
unchangeable and everlasting. One, For Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever. The last: for it Heb. 13. 8.
succeeded the Covenant of works, but none shall succeed it. In it God has
revealed his whole pleasure touching the Salvation of man, and has manifested
his principal properties, the riches of his grace, wherein he delights to be
magnified. He that is not saved by the Covenant of Grace, must and shall perish
everlastingly. Unchangeable and everlasting: for therein God has revealed
himself, in respect of the things he wills concerning man's Salvation to be
one and the same for ever. There is none other relation and respect, that might
give occasion to another Covenant. It was the pleasure of God to show mercy to
man miserable; but he will not extend compassion to him that obstinately and
wilfully shall contemn the riches of his grace. The Covenant made with Adam in
the state of Innocence, is altered for our great good and comfort: but this
Covenant is like the Covenant of the day Isai. 24. 5. Psalm. 111, 9.
and of the night, it stands fast for ever and ever. Though men be unfaithful,
God continues faithful: he waits for the conversion 1 Samuel 7. 3. Deuteronomy. 4.
31. Jer. 3. 1, 2. Romans ^. 6. and 11. 1, ^9.
of them that go astray, and if they return, he will receive them into
favor. The Lord will not utterly cast off that people, whom he has once
chosen, and received unto mercy. And in respect of the life to come, the
Covenant is eternal: for after this life the people effectually in Covenant
shall live with the Lord Hos. 13. 14. Matthew. 22. 32.
for ever.

Externally this Covenant is made with every member of the Church, even with
the Parents and their children, so many as hear and embrace the Promises of
Salvation, and give and dedicate their children unto God according unto his
direction: for the Sacraments what are they but seals of the Covenant? But
savingly, effectually, and in special manner it is made only with them, who
are partakers of the benefits promised. And as the Covenant is made outwardly
or effectually, so some are the people of God externally, others internally and
in truth. For they are the people of God, with whom God has contracted a
Covenant, and who in like manner have sworn to the words of the Covenant, God
stipulating, and the people receiving the condition: which is done two ways:
for either the Covenant is made extrinsecally, God by some sensible token
gathering the people, and the people embracing the condition in the same
manner, and so an external consociation of God and the people is made: or the
Covenant is en^red after an invisible manner, by the intervention of the
Spirit, and that with so great efficacy, that the condition of the Covenant is
received after an invisible manner, and so an internal consociation of God and
the people is made up.

Here it may suffice briefly to mention these things, because in the sundry
manners of dispensation, they will come to be discussed more at large.

From that which has been said two things may be gathered. 1. How the Covenant
made with Adam, called by some Divines the Covenant of Nature, agrees and
differs from the Covenant of Grace.

They agree in a general consideration of, 1. The Author, which is God only
wise, most holy, our supreme and absolute Sovereign. 2. The matter of the
Covenant, which is a Commandment and Promise of reward. 3. The persons
contracting or covenanting, which are God and man. 4. The Subject not
differenced by special respects, for the Law was given and Gospel revealed to
man. 5. The form of administration, because to both Covenants is annexed a
restipulation. 6. The end, viz. the blessedness of man, and the glory of God
manifested in his wisdom, bounty and goodness. 7. As Adam in the state of
Innocence was made able to fulfill the Covenant made with him: so is the
Covenant of Grace written in the hearts of them that be heirs of the Promise
in Christ.

They differ, 1. In the special consideration of the Author, cause and
foundation of the Covenants. God gave his Law to Adam as bountiful and
gracious to his creature entire and perfect, but in strict justice requiring
obedience, promising a reward and denouncing punishment. But the Covenant of
Grace he made as a loving Father in Jesus Christ, of his mere Grace promising
to receive them into favor, that sincerely and unfainedly turn unto him. The
Creation of man and integrity of humane nature, is the Foundation of the former
Covenant: but the Redemption of man by Christ is the Foundation of the Covenant
of Grace.

2. In the form of Sanction. In the Covenant of Nature there is no Mediator:
but the Covenant of Grace is made in Christ, in whom God has made us accepted.
The Covenant of Nature was not promised before it was promulgated: but the
Covenant of Grace was first promised, and long after promulgated and
established or ratified in the blood of his Son.

3. In the special matter of the Covenants, and that both in respect of the
Promise and stipulation. For the Covenant of Nature promised life, but not
righteousness: but in the Covenant of Grace God promises to tread Satan under
the feet, and to write his Law in the hearts of them that be heirs of
Salvation. That Covenant promises life to them that perfectly obey, but not
remission or forgiveness of any, even the least iniquity. But this promises
forgiveness of sins and life eternal to the penitent sinner believing in
Christ, and embracing the free promise of mercy. In that, life eternal is
promised as the reward of justice: in this, life and glory as the reward of
free and rich grace and mercy. To him that works, the wages is of debt; but
to him that believes the reward is of Grace. In that God as a Creator does
exact his right of man pure: but in this as a loving Father he does offer
himself to the sinner smitten with the conscience of his sin. In that, life
eternal and most blessed is promised, but only animal, to be enjoyed in
Paradise, or continuance in that good estate wherein he was set at first of the
rich bounty of God: but in the other, translation out of ignominy and death
into eternal happiness and glory in Heaven. In the Covenant of Nature perfect
obedience is exacted, so that if there be but the least failing in any jot or
title, and that but once, a man can never be justified thereby, nor can the
breach be made up by any repentance: But in the Covenant of Grace obedience is
required, repentance admitted, and sincerity accepted: If a man sin and go
astray, if he return unfainedly, he shall be received into favor. In the
Covenant of Nature obedience and works were commanded as the cause of life and
justification: in the Covenant of Grace, Faith is required as the isntrumental
cause of Remission and Salvation, obedience as the qualification of the party
justified, and the way leading to everlasting blessedness. The object of
obedience in the Covenant of Nature was God: in the Covenant of Grace God in
Christ.

4. They differ in the special consideration of the Subject. The first
Covenant was given to man pure, perfect, entire and sound, able to do what God
required: But the Covenant following was made with man a sinner, miserable and
by nature the child of wrath. And so that was a Covenant of friendship, this of
firm Reconciliation.

5. In the special and peculiar respect of the end. For the former Covenant
was made for the praise of Gods wisdom, goodness, bounty and justice. But the
Covenant of Grace was made to declare and set forth the riches of Gods grace
and mercy. In it the wisdom, goodness, power and justice of God is more
illustrious then in the former: and the mercy, long-suffering and rich grace of
God is greatly magnified, which did not appear or shine forth at all in the
former.

6. And in their Effects and Properties. For not the Covenant of Nature, but of
Grace does exclude boasting. By the Covenant of Nature Adam was not advanced
above the condition of an honorable Servant. In the Covenant of Grace, man by
nature the child of wrath, is made the child of God by grace and adoption. The
Covenant of nature was neither the last nor everlasting, but being first made
way for a better, and being broken was antiquated or disanulled to our singular
comfort: but the Covenant of Grace shall continue firm and immovable for
evermore.

The second thing to be gathered is, That the Fathers before Adam, and
Christians in the times of the Gospel, did live under the same Covenant for
substance, but not for manner of administration, which is most clear by
evident Heb. 13. 8. Rev. 13. 8. Act. 4. 12. and 15. 11. Gal. 3. 29. Romans 3. 30.
Ephesians. 2. 12. Genesis 15. 1* and 17. 1, 7. Lev. 26. 12. Exodus 3. 6. Matthew. 22. 32. 2
Cor. 4. 13. Heb. 11. 6, 7, 8. Romans 4. 12. Heb. 11. ^, 19, 23.
testimonies of holy Scripture, and by the very form of the Covenant, which
was one before and after the coming of Christ. The same God that calls us,
called them to the hope of eternal life: they were endued with the same
spirit, and lived by the same faith: Their Sacraments for substance in
signification agree with ours: and they expected an Inheritance everlasting and
undefiled. Religion for substance was ever one and unchangeable, and such as
were truly religious walked in the same way, and waited for the same heavenly
Inheritance and everlasting crown of glory. The Church before Christ may be
considered as an heir, or as an Infant, according to the substance of the
Covenant, or according to the manner of administration. In the first respect
the Church is under the Covenant or Promise, and her people are called a free
and willing people, an heir of heavenly and spiritual blessings. In the
latter respect she is under the Covenant, in respect of the different
administration, and her people are called a servile people in comparison, an
heir under Tutors and Governors, not differing from a servant.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Covenant of Promise.
THe Covenant of Grace is either promised or promulgated Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 12.
1. and 15. 1.
and established. Promised to the Fathers, first to Adam, and afterward to the
Patriarchs, and lastly to the people of Israel, and that before their coming
into the Land of Canaan, and after Gal. 4. 4* 1 Pet. 1. 20. Act. 3. 25. Gal. 3.
16. 1^. Ephesians. 2. 12.
their return from the Babylonish captivity. Promulgated, after the fullness
of time came. And hence the Covenant of Grace is distributed into the Covenant
of Promise, or the New Covenant, so called by way of excellency. For the
Foundation and Mediator of the Covenant of Grace is our Lord Jesus Christ, but
either to be incarnate, crucified, and raised from the dead, or as already Act.
4 12. Heb. 13. 8.
incarnate, crucified, and truly raised from the dead, and ascended into
Heaven. For there was never sin forgiven but in him alone, who is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Therefore although before the Incarnation,
Christ was only God, he was our Mediator, yet not simply as God, but as the
divine person, who should take our flesh, and in it should finish all the
Mystery of our Redemption, and therefore he is called the Lamb of God slain
from the beginning of the world, and the Fathers by his grace were saved, even
as we. In the acts of Mediation three things may be considered. Reconciliation,
by which we are accepted of God. Patronage, by which we have access unto the
Father. Doctrine, whereby God has made himself known unto men by a
Mediator. This third act might be done before he assumed our flesh, and indeed
was done: but the two first did require his coming in the flesh, although the
fruit of them was communicated to the Fathers under the Old Testament, by force
of the divine Promise, and certainty of the thing to come with God.

If it be objected, that the cause is before the effect, and therefore the
incarnation and death of Christ must go before the communication of the fruit
and benefit thereof unto the Fathers.

The answer is, That in natural causes the Proposition holds true, but in
moral causes the effect may be before the cause: and so the fruit and virtue
of Christ's death was communicated to the Fathers before his Incarnation. But
although the Son of God before he was manifested in the flesh, was our
Mediator with God (to whom future things are present) because he should be,
and therefore for his sake sins were remitted, men did teach and learn by his
Spirit, the Church was governed by him: yet the manner and reason of that
Mediation was proposed more obscurely, the force and efficacy of it was less,
and did redound to few^r. The Covenant of Promise then was that Covenant which
God made with Adam, the Fathers and all Israel in Jesus Christ to be incarnate,
crucified and raised from the dead: And it may be described the Covenant,
whereby God of his mere grace and mercy in Jesus Christ to be exhibited in the
fullness of time, did promise forgiveness of sins, spiritual adoption and
eternal life, unto man in himself considered a most wretched and miserable
sinner, if he should embrace and accept this mercy promised, and walk before
God in sincere obedience. God the Father of his mere and free grace and mercy
looking upon man in Jesus Deuteronomy. 9. 5. Gal. 3. 18. Luke 1. 54, 55.
Christ, in whom he is reconciled, is the Author and cause of this Covenant. He
has h^lpen his servant Israel in remembance of his mercy, as he spoke to our
Fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, your Fathers dwelt on Josh. 24 ^.
the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham, and
the Father of Nahor, and they served other gods. And I took your Father Abraham
from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the Land of
Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.

The condition required in this contract, is the obedience of faith. Remission
of sins, gracious adoption in Christ, and the Inheritance of eternal life is
promised to believers: and eternal condemnation peremptorily threatened against
unbeleevers.

Christ, whom God has exhibited in the Gospel, as he was promised to the
Fathers in the Scriptures of the Prophets, is the object of this Covenant.

The end thereof is the praise of the glorious grace and mercy of God in Christ
to come.

In this Covenant there is a mutual compact betwixt God and man: God in mercy
promising, and man in duty binding himself unto the Lord.

It was made with man a sinner, and reaches to the faithful and their seed,
as God has promised to accept the children of believing parents, upon due and
religious tender of them made unto his Highness according as he has
prescribed: but saving effectually it was made with them only, who believe in
him that justifies the ungodly, be the heirs of salvation, and walk in the
steps of our Father Abraham.

This Covenant does beget children to liberty, does administer the
righteousness of faith, and the inheritance by faith: hope, peace of
conscience, life in Christ, and spiritual joy is the effect thereof.

Internally the Spirit does seal up the truth of this Covenant in 2 Cor. 4 13.
Romans ^. 4, 5. Gal. 3. 18. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 3. 14. Gen 22. 16. Luke 1. 73.
the hearts of the faithful. For when the adoption and the inheritance
pertained to the Fathers under the Covenant of promise, the spirit of adoption
and earnest of the inheritance pertained unto them likewise. Externally it was
delivered and confirmed by word and oath, and sealed by the Sacraments.

For substance also this Covenant was everlasting and unchangeable: The New
Testament did not abolish the former, but the former was fulfilled by the
latter. And in all these things it does Psalm. 105. 10.
agree with the new Covenant: which here only are but briefly named, because
the confirmation of them must be sought in the Chapters following.

And if the Covenant of Promise, and the New Covenant do thus agree in
substance, then it must necessarily follow, That there Ephesians. 2. 18, 19, 20. and
4. 4, 5.
is but one Church of the Elect, the same Communion of Saints, one Faith, one
Salvation, and one way of obtaining the same, viz. by Faith in Christ.

Secondly, that the Word of God was no less incorruptible seed Romans 11. 17.
to the Fathers and the Israelites then to us: That the Fathers did eat the
true flesh of Christ by faith, as well as we in the times of 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. 2
Cor. 4. 13.
the Gospel: That they and we are partakers of the same Spirit: and that the
Sacraments of the Jews did signify and seal to them, the same promises of
eternal life, which our Sacraments do to us. The Sacraments of the Old
Testament were not types of our Sacraments, as sometimes they are called by
Divines: but they typified the same things that ours do. For as the Covenants
under which they and we lived, were one for substance: so are the Sacraments
one in their common nature and signification.

Thirdly, that the faithful before Christ were saved by the free mercy of God
in Christ, did know God and Christ, had the Heb. 11. 9. Psalm. 105. 15. Isai.
51. 6.
spiritual promise of life eternal, and were equal to us Christians in all
substantial graces of the Covenant.

Fourthly, and from the same grounds we may conclude, that the souls of the
faithful, who departed this life before the coming of Christ in the flesh,
were immediately received into Heaven. For they were taken to glory, and saved
as we: Now such as are taken to glory, are taken to Heaven. For the Scripture
knows Act. 15. 11.
no place in which God does ordinarily display his glory, but Heaven. And what
should hinder their translation into the heavenly Jerusalem, when they are
removed out of this earthly tabernacle? Not their sins, for they which could
not hinder them from Sanctification, fitting them for Heaven, could not hinder
them from Heaven: Not want of Faith, who now have that faith which Abraham, and
many of them had: No want of efficacy in Christ, he was the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world, he was yesterday, to day, and for ever; his death
was effectual to cause them to find pardon, and the Spirit of Sanctification.
Not any privilege of Christ: for not simply to ascend into Heaven was Christ's
privilege, but to ascend soul and body, as heir of all things, and the
Author of Salvation to all that obey him. David is said not to have ascended
into Heaven, but that is spoken Act. 2. 34.
in respect only that he was not raised in body, and gone into Heaven body and
soul, as the heir of all things, and person who was to sit at Gods right
hand. It is also said, The Fathers received Heb. 11. 39.
not the Promise, scil. of Christ's coming in the flesh to perform the work
of our Redemption: but as they received the promise of forgiveness, and of the
Spirit of Sanctification, so after their death they were taken into Heaven.
They whose Pilgrimage and sojourning ceased with this life, they could not but
be in their Country at home after this life. But Heaven is the Country of the
Saints; for where their Father is there is their Country. Those who walked as
strangers here on earth, because they looked Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16. Heb. 11.
5. 2 King. 2. 11. Luke 9. 31.
for an heavenly Jerusalem, a City whose Maker was God, they leaving this earth
were translated thither. The translating of Enoch, Moses, and Elias seem to
figure out no other thing. Christ was the forerunner of Enoch, not in act, in
respect of the assumption of his humanity into Heaven, but in virtue and merit.
From the beginning of the world, a place was prepared for all, whom God had
chosen in Jesus Christ, Matthew. 25. 31. and 20. 23. but a place was to be
prepared of Christ, for us, in respect of the promised payment, by the force
and efficacy whereof the effect was before obtained, but with respect to future
labors, which were both certain and present with God. For a moral cause,
though it be not present in act, if it be supposed as future, may have its
effect. The faithful before Christ, when they removed out of these earthly
tabernacles, were received into everlasting habitations. Luke 16. 9. Now if the
godly at the instant departed, were bestowed in any place but Heaven, they then
did go to mansions, which they were to leave in a short time, even then when
Christ did ascend. Our Savior promised to the penitent Thief upon the Cross,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: which if it was not Luke 23. 43.
into Heaven, but into Limbus, it was but for a short time; for that was to be
broken up within a few hours space.

But to return to the matter in hand, The Covenant of Promise and the new
Covenant are so one for substance, that what is in the first for weight and
essential, is in all the degrees following, and to be understood, though not
mentioned, and whatsoever in any after degree appears as substantial to the
Covenant, that was included in the first propounding of it but in sundry
accidents, which nothing hinder their substantial unity, they are
distinguished.

First on the part of the Object, Christ exhibited in the New 1 Ioh. 1. 1, 2.
and 4. 14. Mal. 3. 1. Isai. 59. 15.
Covenant, is promised as to come in the Covenant of promise. For it was meet
the promise should go before the Gospel, and be fulfilled in the Gospel,
that so great a good might earnestly be des^red before it was bestowed, and
that the expectation of them that waited for the consolation of Israel might
not be frustrated.

Secondly, In the manner of administration and measure of faith. For the
knowledge of Christ, and faith in him to come, was more obscure and dark, then
the knowledge of him already come, and faith which does behold him present. The
manner of Christ's Mediation was more sparingly and obscurely revealed: his
person, the manner of execution of the office of Mediator, and the benefits
that we receive in him, more darkly unfolded, sometimes propounded in general
words, sometimes shadowed in types and figures, seldom more specially
described. And the reason why these things at first were more darkely
delivered, may be: first, because things present or past are seen more
clearly then things to Heb. 11. 17.
come: prophesies be obscure before the accomplishment. 2. The Church was then
in her Infancy and rude, not come to her ripe age, the Lord in his infinite
wisdom so disposing the matter. 3. It was meet the clear and full revelation
of this mystery should be reserved to Christ the chief Prophet. The Author of
life was to lay open and make manifest the way to life: Till the way into
Heaven was really entered by the true high Priest, after the order of
Melchisedech, it was not fully manifested: Heb. 9. 8. Under the Old Testament
the way into the Holiest was not absolutely shut, but veiled, not altogether
untraced, but not fully laid open: because our true and real high Priest had
not made satisfaction by the offering up of himself a sacrifice once for all,
nor consecrated that new and living way through the veil, that is to say, his
flesh. 4. The minds of men were to be held in a longing desire and expectation
of Christ: and the obscure revelation of Christ and his benefits did serve to
raise their hearts to an earnest desire of his coming, in respect of the
clear revelation and great and glorious blessings they might then expect. But
in this obscurity we may observe some degrees: Before the Law given by Moses
the promise was more obscure: the Law being given, even to the times of the
Prophets less clear: in the times of the Prophets even to John the Baptist,
more clear. Even from the first giving forth of the promise until the coming
of Christ in the flesh, the revelation was more clear, distinct, ample, as the
coming of the Messiah did approach nearer and nearer. For the Church by how
much it was nearer to her beginnings, by so much it was the ruder, and therefore
to be instructed in a more rude form. As the time of the Sun approaches
nearer, or if further off, so is the light that goes before it, greater or
lesser: and as the time of the arising of the Son of righteousness is more
remote or nigh at hand, so was the revelation that went before more dim or
clear. It was meet and expedient that when the coming of the glorious King
of peace and righteousness did draw nigh, the hearts of men should be raised
up in desire and expectation of him: But the better they were acquainted with
his person and office, the more distinctly they understood the time of his
coming, the more lively taste they had of the benefits they should receive by
him, and the greater tokens they saw of his glory approaching, the more their
hearts would be enlarged to desire and expect him. Moreover it was the good
pleasure of God to manifest the riches of his grace, not all at once, but by
degrees, as he saw it most expedient for the glory of his great Name, and the
good of his people in several ages and states of the Church, of which we shall
have occasion to speak largely in the Chapters following. But here two things
must be noted to prevent some doubts that may arise. First that clearenesse of
Revelation is twofold. One on the part of the revealer, when the revealer
deals so, that unless he have a rude hearer, or altogether malicious, it may
be understood of the hearer what he means. The other clear, even on the part
of the hearer, when it is so great that the rudeness of the hearer cannot
hinder, that he should not perceive what is spoken, but his malice only. In the
first sense, the revelation of Christ in the Covenant of the promise was
clear: but the testimony concerning the Kingdom of Christ could not be
understood of a rude hearer before the accomplishment.

If it be objected, how then could they be saved?

In the second place i^ is to be observed, that Christ does not save as clearly
known, but as he is sincerely acknowledged. But when the Revelation was
sparing and dark, no man can deny that Christ was truly and unfainedly
acknowledged in the Church of the Jews. The word of God is the measure of
faith, and that is true and saving faith, which believes all things which are
revealed, and in that manner wherein they are revealed, and therefore the faith
of the Fathers was sound and effectual, because they believed what God was
pleased to reveal, and after that manner wherein it was revealed of God.

A Third difference arises from this; for Christ with all his benefits was
proposed to the Israelites under types and figures. As Exodus 24. 7. 8. Heb. 10.
1, Gal. 3. 16. Heb. 8. 1, 2 and 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 3, 25. 1 John 2. 2.
Heb. 3. 18. and 4. 1.
the Prtiests, Altars, Sacrifices, Propitiatory, were all types of Christ his
Priesthood and Sacrifice: and the Land of Canaan a type of Heaven: the Lord
leading the Jews by the help of earthly things to heavenly and spiritual,
because they were but young and tender: which was one cause why the Covenant
was more obscure, heavenly things being wrapped up under earthly. But in the new
Covenant Christ is offered to be seen with open face; the truth, substance and
body of the things themselves is exhibited; and all veil of figures removed,
our minds are straight directed to heavenly blessedness.

4. The variety of administration does offer a fourth difference: Gal. 4. 12.
and 3. 13, 25.
for the Apostle compares the Nation of the Jews to an heir as yet an Infant,
that is under Tutours and Governors. The Christian Church to an heir come to
ripe years.

And from this arises a fifth difference, That as an heir not Gal. 5. 1.
come to years, not differing from a servant, the Church was held under the
Ceremonial Law, from which they that believe in Christ are delivered after the
expiration of the time of nourture appointed of the Father.

Sixthly they differ in the number of them that are called to the participation
of the Covenant. The Covenant of promise was at Deuteronomy. 30. 8. Math. 10. 1, 6.
and 15. 24.
first concluded within the Families of the Patriarchs, the rest having
excommunicated themselves, and then within the confines or limits of Judea:
that in the Jews there might be a most illustrious type of Election, and of
rejection in the Gentiles, that is, of the Church of God and Satan. But the
partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile being broken down, the Covenant of
grace was made with all Nations.

Seventhly, the efficacy of Christ promised is lesser then of Christ Genesis 2^.
18. Deuteronomy. 19. 8, 9.
exhibited. In the Covenant of promise, certain promises concerning corporal
blessings, were made unto the Fathers: and external blessings were more
esteemed, as Symbols of spiritual and heavenly: But under the New Covenant,
blessings spiritual, and the gifts and graces of the Spirit are in more ample
and plentiful manner powered upon the Church. Remission of sins though it was
certain with God, was less felt under the Covenant of Promise, because the
cloud of the Law put betwixt the mercy of God and the eye of the sold; the
grace of God was more obscurely revealed, and the means of expiating sin by
the death of Christ; as also because remission of sins was not really
obtained by our surety, for as yet he had not made the satisfaction promised.
The Spirit was powered in less plenty upon the faithful: because Ioh 3. 34.
Ioh. 1. 16. and 7. 38, 39. Joel ^. 28.
that benefit was to be reserved to the times of Christ, who was first to
receive the Spirit above measure in his humane nature, and thence to derive
grace unto all us. The Jews as heirs were partakers of the Spirit of
Adoption, bu tempered with the sprit of Servitude, because they were Infants,
under the yoke of the Law, Rom 8. 15. Gal 46.
the way to heaven not as yet clearly manifested: But the heir come to ripe
years, is altogether led by the Spirit of Adoption. The sense of future glory
was also more obscure, because there is more obscure mention of it, and of the
way thereunto in the Old Testament. If we speak of some particular persons
under the first Covenant, they were endued with greater gifts of the Spirit
then many under the New: but more light of knowledge, and greater plenty and
abundance of Grace is bestowed upon the Church in the time of the Gospel, if
we respect the body of the Church and faithful in General.

Eighthly, the seals of the Covenant of promise were in number more, in
signification more obscure, in use painful and burdensome, peculiar to some
people as the Covenant was, and to continue only until the time of
reformation: But the seals of the New Testament are in number few, in
signification clear, in use easy, common to all nations, and to endure for
ever.

And from these grounds it may be concluded, That though the Fathers being
delivered from the Tabernacle of the body, were made Heb. 8. 6. and 10: 20.
partakers of life eternal in Heaven. yet they had not before Christ that
perfect state in Heaven, which now we and they are presently possessed of: for
they were not to be perfected without us, as neither shall we be perfected
before that blessed day of the second Heb. 11. 39, 40.
coming of Christ, wherein the body of Christ, that is, the Church, shall be
absolute and perfect every way. Not to insist upon this, that the former
Tabernacle standing, the way to the Holiest was not fully manifested, and that
there must be some proportion betwixt the manifestation of the way unto and
sense of the future life, in this life, in them that be of ripe age, and the
fruition of it in the life to come: This is certain, the Fathers who died
before Christ, did expect in Heaven their Redeemer, on whom they had believed
for forgiveness of sin and life everlasting: even as souls now expect the
Resurrection of the body, the second appearance of Christ to Judgment, in
regard of which things they are not perfected. Now hence followed a want of
much light and joy, which on the sight of Christ, God man, entering the Heavens,
did redound unto them: as we in earth now have not the fullness of joy which
then we shall have, when we shall see the accomplishment of what we expect.

CHAP. V. Of the Covenant of Promise made with Adam immediately upon his fall.
THe Covenant of Promise began immediately upon the fall, and reached unto the
coming of Christ in the flesh, which is obscure in comparison of the new
Covenant, but in it self receives distinction of degrees, according to the
several breakings out of it to the dark world, and the growth from several
manifestations of God, as was proportionable to the number and qualities of
those, who in succeeding ages should take benefit: so that at first being like
a young sapling, it grew to be firm, always a fruitful tree. In Scripture it
is delivered unto us under these degrees of growth, both in respect of fuller
and more clear manifestation, and as we may suppose of numbers that received
benefit by it. First, from Adam until Abraham. Secondly, from Abraham until
the Covenant made with Israel upon the Mount. Thirdly, from Moses to Christ:
which must be subdistinguished: for the Covenant which God did promise to make
with Israel and Judah upon the delivery from the North Country, was to exceed
the former Covenant, which he had made with their Fathers, when he brought them
out of Egypt. Jer. 23. 5, 6, 7, 8. The first breaking forth of this gracious
and free Promise and Covenant was immediately upon the fall, and is expressed
in these words, I will put Genesis 3. 15.
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed: He
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Herein God setting
down the irrevocable judgment and final overthrow and destruction of Satan,
the arch-enemy of his glory, and man's Salvation, Gods fearful doomes-man:
into whose power man was now fallen, he proclaims his rich grace and mercy
toward mankind in Jesus Christ, the woman's seed, who should break the
Serpents head. In the malediction of the Serpent is included the greatest
blessing of God most merciful toward miserable and wretched sinners. In
reference to this gracious ancient Proclamation of mercy the Gospel is called
everlasting. (...). Apoc. 14. 6. (...). Isai. 58. 12. and 61. 4. (...). Jer. 6.
16. and 18. 16. (...). Deuteronomy. 33. 15. Genesis 49. 26. Isai. 54. 4. (...). Jer. 5.
22. (...).
Revel. 14. 6. I saw another Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel, not in respect of the future, but of the time past,
scil. which was promised from the beginning of the world. For as the hills,
paths, and desolations are said to be everlasting or ancient, so the Gospel,
that is from the beginning.

This first Promise of grace and life was published by the Lord himself to
mankind now dead in sin, and enemies to God, that as they had heard from him
the curse against sin, and saw and felt the same in part executed upon them,
so they should hear from him the promise of absolution, lest they should be
swallowed up in despair. When they should hear peace proclaimed by the Author
of Peace and Judgment, both by him that was immediately provoked and offended
by sin, and came now to sentence the transgressors: when they should hear
peace proclaimed by him in his own person, by his own voice, it must needs
put more life and encouragement into them, then if the glad tidings had been
brought by some Messenger, or divulged by some Herald only.

The party upon whom the Promises of mercy are settled, is here propounded as
the seed of the woman, and under the next degree as the seed of Abraham: called
the Angel of the Covenant, The Mal. 3. 1. Ephesians. 1. 22. Joh. 3. 18. Gal. 4. 4.
head of all things to the Church: even Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
God, who being God over all blessed for ever. Romans 9. 5. should come of David
and Abraham, and so of Eve Romans 1. 3.
according to the flesh, for she was the mother of all living. Christ God and
man is made of God an Adam (often opposed to the first Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22,
23, 45.) Head, root, common receptacle and storehouse, in whom are treasured
all good things, which from him are communicated to the faithful. As in Adam
our being natural, our hopes of life and death, and in event our condemnation,
was received, before ever they came to be applied and received actually in us:
So in Christ as in a common storehouse every thing is first placed, which
afterward is to be imparted to any believer. The first Adam* created after the
Image of God, but a mere creature only, was entrusted with the Promise of life
for his posterity, and betrayed all the body: But now God of Matthew. 28. 19.
his infinite mercy ordains a second Adam, even the seed of the woman, that
is, Christ-man, but lifted up above the condition of a creature by union unto
the Divine Person, that so as man he might be fit to receive that trust for
men, as God he It is clear, that this battle pertain^d to the woman and her
seed on the one party, and to this Devil that spoke by the Serpent, and all
the wicked, on the other party. Dow. But then it cannot in special be applied
to the Virgin Mary. If the Virgin Mary may be said to bruise the Serpents head,
because Christ was borne of her, by the same reason we may say, she was
crucified and died for us, etc.
might undergo the burden and charge, which was now greater then God laid upon
the first Adams shoulders. To have put the prime right of the Covenant upon
every particular, had left occasion to infinite falls; and withal opened a g^p
to disunion, which the Lord abhors: To have chosen out a mere creature,
and under the fall, how could he have made satisfaction for sin formerly
committed, or free himself from the bondage of Satan? Therefore that the
Promise might be sure to the Heirs of Promise, God puts this honor and charge
upon Jesus Christ, who was the seed to come, to whom the Promises were made,
and in whom all the Promises for all his brethren are Yea and Gal. 3. 19. 2
Cor. 1. 20.
Amen.

The parties who are to partake of the benefits promised, are enclosed in the
woman as the Mother of the good, or rather under the former term, the woman's
seed. For the word seed Genesis 4. 25. and 21. 13.
is sometimes taken for one, but often collectively, which must be judged by
the circumstances of the place. Now in this Text by the woman is meant Eve, and
by the seed of the woman, the posterity of the woman, those, scil. which
degenerate not into the seed of the Serpent, which is proved The Papists read
it Ipsa, contrary to all Hebrew copies, and all circumstances of the Text. The
Septuagint translates it (...): Ch^ysast* Hom. 17. in Genesis ha^h (...), though
his Latin Interpreters has made him say Ipsa. Iren* l. 3. advers* haeres. c.
38. seem^s to have read it Ipsum. Andradius def. l. 4. Comas. l. 2. c. 15.
Cajetan. Steuch^^. Cosmop. in Genesis ^. 3. Pagnine, Ar. Montan^^, Sacraboscus,
Francis. Georg. tom. 1. Pathemat* probl. 15. Felisius e^ucidat. Genesis 17. 2.
Gal. 3. 16. Decal. praec. 1. c. 49. Riber. in Heb. 1. 15. and de Tempt. l. 2.
c. 2. Perer. in D^^. cap. Lindan. de opt. genere interpretandi. l. 3. page 126,
127. dislike the reading. S^e Cypr. sect. Adversus Iudaeos* l. 2. c. 9. Panel
Leo. Sermo 2. de Nativ. Dom. Rainold. praefat. de Idol. Rom.. 6*
by the opposition of seeds there made. For as the seed of the Serpent must be
taken collectively, so also the seed of the woman, that the opposition may be
fit. But by the Serpents seed are meant not only venomous beasts, but wicked
men. 1 John 3. 12. And the enmities fore-spoken of do pertain to all the godly
posterity of Eve, even from the beginning, so that the faithful who lived
before the manifestation of Christ in the flesh, cannot be excluded, but they
must be understood under the name of the seed. Christ peculiarly was the seed
of the woman, but the faithful are comprehended under that title also; the
seed of the woman is to be taken collectively, but so as it does comprehend
them only, who are not the Serpents seed, but opposite to them. Christ properly
is the seed by which the Promise is to be fulfilled: the faithful are the seed
to whom the Promise is made: The Promise is made to the faithful, and they are
and shall be partakers of the Promise^. but Christ only is the cause of the
blessing to be communicated. Christ and the faithful are comprehended under
one kind of seed spiritual, not carnal: but Christ the principal, who in
that seed does so excel, that in him he does bring all the seed of Abraham
according to the Spirit unto unity; the faithful are the seed also, as they
shall inherit the Promise in and through Jesus Christ.

The work of Christ the woman's seed is to bruise the Serpents head: which is a
phrase of speech fitted to the condition of the Serpent, which is obnoxious to
this hurt, when he is compelled to creep on the ground, that his head should be
crushed and bruised by the feet of men. And thereby is signified, that Christ
should destroy death, and him that had the power of death, that is, the devil,
Heb. 2. 14. that he should destroy the works of the devil. Joh. 12. 3^.
1 John 3. 8. And this is true of the faithful al^o by communication with
Christ. Christ has bruised the Serpents head by his own power: but the
faithful overcome by the power of Christ. The victory is common to all the
seed: but the author of victory in the seed, is he who is the Head and chief,
and to whom as to an Head, the unity of all the rest is reduced. Ye have
overcome the evil one, Rom 16. 20. Luke 11. 21.
1 John 2. 13. By bruising the Serpents head we must not only understand the
deadly wound given to the actors person and his instruments, but the desolation
of those works, which the Tempter had by the fall planted in the nature of the
fallen creature, as pride, vanity, ignorance, lust etc. 1 John 3. 8. Ephesians. 2.
15. Now the nature of the fallen creature is such, that if you continue his
being, and remove off him the works of the Serpent, you must necessarily bring
in the contrary habits of Grace and goodness, as of knowledge, faith, love,
fear and other Graces of the Spirit. So that under this one blessing is
comprehended whatsoever is necessary to spiritual blessedness. For if Satan be
vanquished, the curse of the Law is removed, sin is pardoned, the Image of
God repaired, spiritual freedom and adoption obtained, and everlasting
happiness shall in due time be possessed. All these blessings, which concur
to make up perfect happiness, are inseparably linked, and the possession of
any one is an undoubted pledge of the rest in due season to be enjoyed, So the
Apostle says, God that cannot lie, promised eternal life before the world
began, or rather, Tit. 1. 2. (...), Mead. in Ap. 14. 6.
ante tempora saecularia, that is, from the beginning of ages, scil. in that
famous promise of the blessed seed. It seems somewhat harsh to interpret the
word promised, by decreed to promise: and therefore it is better to refer it
to this promise made from the beginning of the world. And it is manifest, by
this phrase (...), he means nothing but what the same Apostle signifies by
(...), Romans 15. 25. and nothing is signified thereby, but what elsewhere the
same Apostle does intimate by this phrase, (...), Ephesians. 3. 9. and (...), Col.
1. 26. and that notes the same that (...), Act. 15. 18. as Ier. 28. 8.
(...), Heb. 7. 24. and (...), Heb. 13. 8. are the same. But this phrase (...),
in it own force and propriety does not signify from eternity, Luke 1. 70.
Act, 3. 21.

But how must the Serpents head be bruised? even by Christ's suffering death to
satisfy revenging Justice, which was offended by transgression under the
former Covenant. This is expounded under this term of bruising his heel by
the Serpent and his seed: which work and labor of love is typified in the
blood of the Sacrifices, executed in his cross and passion. The devil and all
his instruments (the Scribes and Pharisees and Romans whom Christ calls the
children of the devil) labored mightily to bring him to the cross, supposing
they had gotten full conquest when he was The very fight it self was triumph:
while the Devil ^an with all his might against Christ; he killed himself.
Angry Bees stinging once* make themselves drones forever: So Satan.
laid in the grave: but when they hoped to have vanquished him, the Kingdom of
darkness was utterly overthrown, Satan, sin and death were conquered and
taken captive, and whatsoever might be brought against us, was taken away, as
the least bill or scroale, Col. 2. 14, 15. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ
was wounded in the heel: but by the power of his divine nature, he soon
recovered of his wound: being put to death concerning the flesh, he was
quickened by the Spirit, and lives through the power of God. 2 Cor. 13. 4. 1
Pet. 3. 18. But by the wound he received, he wounded his enemies irrecoverably:
he bruised the head of the Serpent, which wound is deadly, He spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly. And it is not
improbable, that in reference to this promise, that Christ by his death should
conquer and subdue the enemies of our Salvation, he is said to be the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8. For what can we understand
by that phrase from the foundation of the world, but from the beginning, which
cannot note eternity which is without beginning: for then from the beginning
should be as much as before all beginning or without beginning. But seeing the
death of Christ to vanquish and subdue the enemies of our soul is published in
this ancient and famous promise, ever renowned in the Church of God, in
reference to it, it may be said, that he was slain from the foundation of the
world.

These words do contain a manifest distinction betwixt the seed of the woman
and the seed of the Serpent, and a promise of assured victory to the seed of
the woman over Satan, and all spiritual enemies to be administered according
to the decree of God. So we read, that the names of some are written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world, Rev. 17. 8. that God has saved
some, and called them with an holy calling, not according to their works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given them in Jesus Christ
before the times of the ages, 2 Timothy 1. 9. that God has from the beginning
chosen some to Salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of
the truth, 2 These. 2. 13. In all which passages that choosing, writing and
calling is to be understood, which is taught in this famous promise, whereunto
they seem to be referred. For the phrase is, from the beginning or the
beginning, does sometimes note the time of (...).
the constitution of the Jewish Church, and its policy, presently from the
going out of Egypt: as Psalm. 74. 2. Remember the Congregation which thou have
purchased of old. LXX. (...), It (...)
signifies also the beginning of the dispensation of the Gospel preached of
Christ himself: for then a new manner of revelation of the Doctrine of the
Gospel was brought in, Luke 1. 2. Also from the beginning is as much as from
the beginning of the world, from the foundation of the world, or at least,
little after the beginning of the world, Ioh. 8. 44. the devil is said to be a
murderer from the beginning, and to sin from the beginning. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. The
word beginning absolutely and precisely put, is taken one of these ways, but
with an addition or restraint from the circumstances of the Text, it imports
some other beginning, as of the preaching of the Gospel, to this or that place
or people, or the like; as Phil. 4. 15. 1 Ioh. 2. 7, 8, 23, 24. But this phrase
from the beginning never imports from eternity, in any passage of Scripture:
and it is somewhat strange to interpret the beginning of duration by eternity,
which is essentially and absolutely without beginning of duration. Now when the
Apostle says, God has chosen the Thessalonians from the beginning, what can
we understand thereby, but God has manifested some outward declaration of
their election, according to this famous promise made to Adam and Eve, that the
seed of the woman should break the Serpents head. Some would refer it to the
time that the Gospel was preached amongst them, or to the time of their
effectual calling: but the word beginning precisely and absolutely put is
never so taken: neither can it be said, that the Thessalonians were chosen as
soon as the Gospel was first preached unto them: for it may well be, that it
was often preached unto them before they believed: nor from the beginning of
their effectual calling, if (as they would have it) the faithful persevering,
not simply the faithful, be the object of Gods Election. Of the other Texts
alleged the same may be said, unto which the foresaid answer can in no sort
be fitted: so that we may conclude, in all the fore* cited passages there is an
apparent allusion to this grand, ancient promise of mercy prclaimed immediately
upon the fall, setting forth a manifest difference betwixt the seed of the
woman and the seed of the Serpent, according to the election of God. Besides,
in these words is employed a Covenant consisting of a promise and stipulation,
made not internally alone with the heirs of promise, but externally
administered, offered unto and accepted of all the members of the Church, viz.
of Adam and Eve, and all their posterity, that were dedicated to God by them,
or did accept or receive the promise of mercy. If no Covenant had been made,
there could have been no Church, nor pleasing service tendered unto God. If
this Covenant had not been externally administered, no unregenerate man could
have been in the Church, nor have communion in the ordinances of Religion. But
by virtue of this Covenant, Cain as well as Abell offered Sacrifice unto God,
as a member of the Church, and after his Sacrifice was rejected he hears from
God, If thou d^ Genesis 4. ^, 4.
well shall thou not be accepted? which is a promise of the Covenant that took
place after the fall; for the former Covenant made no mention of mercy to be
vouchsafed to the delinquent upon repentance, nor of acceptance after
transgression. Of this Covenant there be two parts; first a promise, 2. a
stipulation. The promise is, that God will pardon the sins of them that
repent unfainedly, and believe in his mercy: which he does truly promise to all
in Covenant, and effectually bestow upon them that be heirs of the promise. 2.
The stipulation is, that they believe in him that justifies the ungodly, and
walk before him in all wel-pleasing. This may be gathered, because the promise
of forgiveness cannot be received, but by faith, and by faith it is that we
overcome the world, and vanquish Satan, the enemy of our souls. Thus we
read, that by faith the Elders* obtained a good report: and that by faith Heb.
11. 2, 4, 6
Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then Caine: by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous: and that by faith Enoch was
translated, that he should not see death: and that Noah became heir of the
righteoussnesse which is by faith: which is an argument sufficient, that they
understood how faith was required in this Covenant or promise. And seeing it is
the property of faith to work by love, and to be fruitful in all good works,
of necessity if faith be commanded, obedience is required, though not as the
cause of life, yet as the way to life, and the fruit of faith. If we must
believe in God, we must also walk with God, and work righteousness. To whom
God gives to believe in him, to them he gives to obey, and do all his
Commandments; as he does to all that be effectually and internally in Covenant
with his Highness: and of whom he requires faith in his Promise, of them he
exacteth obedience to his Commandment, scil. of all them that be outwardly in
Covenant. Thus we find, that by faith Enoch walked with God* or walked before
God in all wellpleasing. Heb. 11. 5. 6. Genesis 5. 22, 24. And to what end is
remission from sin promised, that man set free from the curse of the Law and
stroke of revenging justice should wallow in profaneness? No, but that he
should serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of his life.

But how does God require these things at the hand of the reasonable creature
fallen, unless he give them sufficient grace to believe if they will?

The answer is, man in the state of Innocence, being made after the Image of
God, had power both to believe and obey, which being lost by sin, God is not
bound to repair. And though he had not justifying faith, because it argues
imperfection and sin, and could not loose what he had not: yet by
transgression he brought himself into such a state of bondage and wrath, which
could not be removed but by faith in Christ.

2. When God in justice does shut men up in ignorance and unbelief, and
withold from them both the graces of his Spirit, and the means thereof, his
judgments are just, though secret. And if for the sin of man, God may justly
cast off millions, and not vouchsafe so much as outward means of Salvation
unto them; he may also exact faith and obedience upon promise of pardon and
eternal happiness, when he does not deliver them from thraldom and bondage
spiritual whereunto they plunged themselves. Was it injustice in God t^
^^^mise acceptance to Cain if he did well, when as yet he was not set free from
the bondage of Satan.

3. God does deny nothing to them that be outwardly in Covenant with his
Highness, that he is bound to give either in justice or by promise, so that it
will be in vain for them to plead with God: for if they come short of mercy
promised, it is through their own wilful neglect or contempt.

4. No man is hindered from believing through the difficulty or
unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his own simple infirmity, as
being willing and desirous to believe, but not able, which inability deserves
pity: but his inability is of corruption and wilfulness: he does not believe,
because he will not, he is unable, because he does not covet or desire, which
is inexcusable.

5. His inability to believe is joined with the wilful refusal of mercy
promised and voluntary pursuit of some inferior good, as more to be desired
then Gods favor. But of this more in the next degrees of the Covenant.

Under this Covenant outwardly administered, were comprehended both Adam and his
posterity, even so many as he should dedicate unto God, or should accept of the
Covenant, until by wilful departure from the faith and worship of God they
discovenanted themselves, and their posterity. As the Covenant was after made
with Abraham and his seed, and is now made with believing Parents for
themselves and their children after them: so was it with Adam, and those that
should descend from his loins.

They that lived under this administration of the Covenant did offer sacrifice
unto God by divine institution and appointment, as is manifest in the example
of Abel and Noah. We read not Quemadmodum in terris, quum famulu^ aliquid
agit, quod non potest nisi juss^ Domini, and n^ est stultus, omnes intelligunt,
eum habere mandatum, etiamsi non dicat. Bell. de Sacr. Conf. l. 2. c. ^.
indeed, that God gave any Commandment touching burnt offerings or sacrifices:
but without question what they did, was done by divine prescription. What a
faithful servant does on earth, which he cannot do but by command and
appointment of his Master, for that, if he do it, we presume he has the
Commandment of his Master, although he do not say so. But Abel and Noah
faithful Servants of God, offered sacrifice, which they could not well do,
but by the Commandment of God: therefore they were so commanded, though so
much be not expressed. All Ceremonies which signify grace are ordained of God,
or they be unlawful. But the Sacrifices were Ceremonies which signified grace.
It is written of Abel, that by faith he offered a better sacrifice then Cain,
and that God had respect unto Abel and his sacrifice: Of the sacrifice of Noah
it is said, that God smelled a savor of rest: but in faith the sacrifice could
not have been offered, if it had not been prescribed: it should not have been
accepted, if it had not carried the stamp of God. For those Sacrifices were the
types of Christ, and seals of propitiation and remission of sins in and
through the blood of Jesus: which must be perscribed, or they cannot be
accepted. These Sacrifices then were instituted of God, and may well be called
seals of the Covenant, as they did signify remission of sins in and through
the blood of Christ, our true Priest and Sacrifice. Whether God was pleased to
confirm his Covenant by any other visible signs or seals, in that state of
the Church, is more then the Scripture has revealed.

One question remains to be discussed, scil. Whether this Covenant of Promise
was made in Adam with all and every Infant that should afterward be born into
the world?

There be some that hold the affirmative part, viz. That all Infants, whether
borne of believing, or infidel parents, are comprehended under the Covenant of
Grace, according to the internal efficacy, though not according to the
external administration, so as they be truly and effectually partakers of the
benefits promised therein. But the Authors of this opinion do neither consent
with themselves in this, nor with the truth. Not with themselves: for they say
Christ died for all men considered in the common lapse or mass, in respect of
impetration, not of application. But if all Infants be partakers of the
Benefits of Christ, he died for them, and so for all men in respect of
application: all men are effectually regenerated, justified, sanctified and
adopted, until by disobedience they fall from that estate. Again they
confess, that God with the Fathers may and has reprobated the children, which
is directly contrary to this assertion. Arm. in Perk. page 92. Probas
(Perkinse) gratiae rejectionem praevisam, non esse causam desertionis, quia
Infantes extra foedus evangelicum morientes, gratiam non repudiaverunt, qui
tamen reprobi sunt, and a Deo deserti: At, inquam ego in Parentibus, avis,
abavis, atavis, tritavis Evangelii gratiam repudiarunt, quo actu meruerunt, ut
a Deo deserentur. Velim enim mihi solidam adferri rationem, cur cum omnes in
Adamo contra legem peccaverint, posteri ejus, atque eo ipso poenam meriti sunt
and desertionem, etiam infantes in suis parentibus quibus gratia Evangelica
oblata est, ac repudiata, non peccaverint contra gratiam Evangelii: Perpetua
enim est foederis Dei ratio, quod filii in parentibus comprehendantur and
censeantur. And whereas they teach that Christ died for all men in respect of
impetration considered in the mass, but not as impenitent, unbeleevers, or
obstinate, let this opinion stand, and he died for impenitent and unbeleevers
only in respect of impetration, but for all men in the mass effectually, so as
they be actually set into the state of grace, and made partakers of the
benefits of Christ's death. It is contrary to the truth. For no such thing can
be found in the Scripture. In this first promise we find a manifest distinction
betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent: but that all
Infants be of the seed of the woman, that we read not: and therefore we cannot
receive it. And when we see by experience, that many thousands are excluded
from the external Covenant, and God has left them without all means, whereby
they should come to the knowledge of Christ if they live, we cannot think all
Infants effectually to be comprehended within the Covenant, and to be partakers
of the good things promised therein. We know God is not tied to the means, nor
do we absolutely exclude every particular man from the grace of the Covenant,
who is excluded from the Covenant outwardly administered: but we cannot think,
they should universally be partakers of the grace of the Covenant, who are
rejected and cast off in respect of the external pledges and administration.
And if all Infants be partakers of the benefits of the Covenant, it is a wonder
the fruits thereof do seldom or never show themselves in them that live; or
that God should leave them in such condition, as if they live, it is ten
thousand to one, being destitute of all means to bring them to the knowledge
of Christ, they shall fall from the grace received, and so plunge themselves
into eternal perdition. Whether this opinion will stand with the tenor of the
Covenant as it was renewed and further manifested to Abraham and the Israelites
after him, we shall have occasion to consider in the Chapters following.

CHAP. VI. Of the Covenant of Grace as it was made and manifested to Abraham.
THe Covenant made immediately upon the fall with Adam and Eve, God delivers it
by accident, when he denounced judgment upon Satan, and in that whole passage
does not mention the name of a Covenant: but in the further manifestation of
the Covenant of Grace to Abraham, God does not only of purpose fall into it,
and directly look at it, but openly declares the nature of the Covenant. Genesis
17. 7, 8. And what is more remarkable, God would have ^ Moses spend many
Chapters in opening the special passages of this grand contract betwixt God
and Abraham. At the first breaking forth of the Covenant, it was propounded in
dark and cloudie terms, not easy to be understood, and most things sparingly
expressed, and indeed rather employed then expressed: In this second rise and
further manifestation of the Covenant, we have it laid down in a plain and
conceiveable language to all whom it concerns. Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for
an everlasting Covenant: and it is fully expressed both in respect of the Head
and Purchaser or Undertaker, the confederates in this Covenant, and
subfederates, the good things promised, and conditions required therein. That
place of Genesis 3. is seldom alleged in holy writ, but now and then by way of
allusion: but those of the Promise made to Abraham and his seed often pressed
in the person of Christ, not only as Meritor of the Promise, and Satisfier of
revenging wrath, nor yet as Maker of the Promises, nor only as Ratifier of the
Promises by his death, nor as having the prime part in the Promises as man and
Head, but as Treasurer of them for the whole seed of Abraham. For all the
Promises of God in him are Yea and Amen, to the glory of God by us. 2 Cor. 1.
20. And Paul, when he had to do with the false Apostles, who would have
blemished this free Covenant made with Abraham, by the Covenant of the Law,
Gal. 3. 15, 16, 17. he so insisteth upon it, as that in a sort he prefers
this manifestation, and proves that it was confirmed of God in Christ, and
could not be di^anulled by the Law.

This Covenant was made in form of a Promise to be performed according to the
purpose of Election: In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed: and
in form of a Covenant consisting of a free Promise and restipulation, I am God
all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect: Genesis 17. 1. And therein
the inward force and virtue of the Covenant is to be distinguished from the
outward administration, as we are to show hereafter.

The Head upon whom this Covenant is settled, both as Undertaker and Confirmer,
Purchaser and Treasurer of all good things promised therein, is Jesus Christ:
which is more fully expressed and often repeated in this second breaking forth
of the Covenant. Genesis 17. 3, 4. and 18. 18. and 22. 18. In thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed: which cannot be understood of the seed
collectively but singularly, scil. of Christ, as the Apostle expressly
proves, saying, Now to Abraham and his seed was the promise Gal. 3. 16.
made, he says not to the seeds, as speaking of many, but of one who is
Christ. But we must not conceive the Apostles argument to be taken from the
Grammatical use of the word- Seed: for that is often put collectively in the
singular number: but from the quality of the blessings there promised, which
could not be accomplished in any other but in Christ alone. And this is
evidently holden out to be the literal sense in other places. Acts 3. 24, 25.
But where shall we find mention of the passion of Christ in this expressure of
the Covenant unto Abraham, which in the first manifestation was clouded in the
phrase of bruising his heel: and is essential to the Covenant of Grace in any
overture of it, as containing the price and ransom by which all hindrances
are removed, as the Apostle says, Christ was made a curse for us, that the
blessing of Gal. 3. 13, ^4.
Abraham might come on the Gentiles. Some answer, that this is thrice put on in
the passage of this Covenant with Abraham; first, in the federall confirmation
by the figments with the smoking furnace, and burning lamps, which passed
between those pieces, Genesis 15. 8, 9, 17. which howsoever it typified the
dividing of Abraham's seed in Egypt with their fiery labors and sorrows: yet
primarily the type expresses the torment and rending of Christ Abraham his
prime seed, and by the furnace and fiery lamp, the wrath of God that runs
betwixt, and yet did not consume the rent and torn nature. Secondly, they
conceive this perpession of Christ was expressed in the blood of the
Circumcision. Genesis 17. 10, 11. For they be of opinion, that where God commands
shedding of blood in any his ancient Ordinances, it does fully reach unto the
blood of Christ, and his everlasting Testament. The blood which was shed in the
signs ordained to seal the Covenant of Promise, what did it signify but the
blood of Christ, whereby the Covenant was to be sealed. Lastly, we may find a
full expression of his passion in the resolved sacrifice of Isaac, which was
typical the death of Christ, and the Ram in his stead: wherein is set forth
an Emblem of Gods love unto the world, in that he has truly sacrificed his
only Son Christ to take away sin. Joh. 3. 16. And if some of these be not
lively expressions, it may seem to (...) in typo vertit Tremelius ex Syri
interpretis (...) quae vox Hebra^^e (...) est, and apud Evang. Matthew. 13. 35.
Propheta Psalm. 78. ^. redditur (...). Theod. in Epist. ad Hebr. 11. Genesis 17. 4.
be employed in the very Promise: for how should the blessing promised come upon
the posterity of Abraham, if the promised seed had not borne the curse of the
Law, and by suffering removed it, that mercy might be glorious in conferring
righteousness and life eternal.

In the former Covenant a secret honor was put upon Eve, as she was made (if
we may so speak) the first pipe whereby God conveyed the grace of his Covenant
unto her posterity, who did not degenerate into the seed of the Serpent. But
here the Covenant is made with Abraham, who received it, not as an example
only, nor as a type, but as an Ordinance leading unto the conveyance of the
same Covenant to all the confederates. In which sense it is plainly spoken to
in the Epistles to the Romans and Gal. and he called the Father of the faithful.
Romans 4. 11, 12, 16. and they which are of the faith the children of Abraham.
Gal. 3. 7. the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. 29. Abraham is not the Father of the
faithful effectively, as if he should be the worker of faith in all, or that
men should be borne faithful of him: For so God only by the holy Ghost is the
Father of the faithful: But analogically for the grace of the Covenant given
unto him on that condition and privilege, that as Fathers transfer and pass
over their rights and inheritance to their children: so he as a Father should
propagate the righteousness of faith and free blessedness to all the
faithful by Doctrine, Example and Covenant. So that all who receive this
Covenant from God in Christ, do likewise by faith draw it through Abraham, to
whom the promise was made, Gal. 3. 16.

The Subfederates are described, and by that differenced from all the world, to
be Abraham's seed. I will establish my Covenant between Ge^. 17. 7.
me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Where these
specialties are holden out. That God will be as good a God to Abraham's seed, as
he is to Abraham himself, and that whatsoever right by the Covenant was
invested upon Abraham, should descend as from a Parent under this Covenant, to
all his seed by virtue of this Covenant made with him. But we must distinguish
Abraham's seed. For sometime by the seed of Abraham Genesis 18. 22. Gal. 3. ^6.
is meant Christ, who is the prime and principal seed, who first entered the
Co^venant as Purchaser, Maker, Confirmer, and upon whose person it was settled
for us all by Abraham. Again, by Abraham's seed are meant all that receive this
Covenant from him, whether by outward administration only, or internal force
and virtue also. In the eye of God and Scripture all believing Gentiles are the
seed of Abraham, which may be called the Christian seed. In thee shall all
Nations of the earth be blessed: which Genesis ^2. 3. and 18. 18. and ^^. 18. Rom
4. ^6, 17. ver. 11.
must needs be understood of the Gentiles which should believe, and is plainly
so interpreted by the Apostle: Therefore it is by faith, that it might be by
grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only
which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham* who is
the Father of us all; As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many
Nations. That he might be the Father of them that believe, though they be not
circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also. And if ye be
Christ's, then are Gal. 3. 14, 29.
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by Promise. All believing Jews and Proselytes
are comprehended under the seed of Abraham, and may be called the spiritual
seed, in opposition to the carnal or natural seed only. This distinction of
Abraham's seed spiritual and natural the Apostle plainly specifieth; Neither
because they are the Rom 9. 7, 8. and 2. 28, 29.
seed of Abraham are they all children: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called:
that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Besides, all
that descend from the loins of Abraham, and all that were borne in his house,
and bought with his money are counted Genesis 17. 11, 12, 13.
for the seed, though indeed many of them were wicked and profane. Therefore
Abraham is commanded to circumcise every man-child, both him that is borne in
his house, or bought with money of the stranger, which is not of his seed. Thus
Ishmael, Esau, and others were circumcised, counted Abraham's seed, and under
Covenant, until they fell away, and discovenanted themselves: but their
posterity are not counted for the seed, because they utterly fell away, and
departed from the faith. The whole Nation of the Jews descending from Jacob,
was accounted the seed of Abraham, until the time of Reformation, though many
amongst them were wicked, and oft-times fell away. I know (says our Savior to
the Pharisees) ye are Abraham's seed, but ye John 8. 37.
seek to kill me, so did not Abraham. In respect of the external
administration of the Covenant they* were counted the seed: but they walked not
in the steps of the faith of Abraham* and therefore indeed and truth they were
not the seed. And the Apostle speaking to the Jews, who had put Christ to
death, says, Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant, which
God made with Act. 3. 25.
our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the Kinreds of the
earth be blessed. Further it is to be observed, that in all the seed the
Covenant reaches to Infants borne of the seed under the Covenant, which was
the reason why they must receive the seal of the Covenant at eight days old.
Neither must we put off this, that Infants have only jus foederis, for they be
foederati. Your children are holy, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Holy by
Covenant, though by nature sinful. Indeed it is true they be not capable of
many actual enjoyments under the Covenant, nor of actual Faith: but through
the free grace and acceptance of God, the Promise of forgiveness, and the
Kingdom of Heaven belongs unto them. So that if any person come into
Covenant and procreate children, that man and his issue are foederati, and may
grow up into a further body from that beginning. From this we may see the true
ground of all Covenants as they receive difference Luke 18. 9.
from the parties enjoying, whether personal, family-Covenants, or national.
Personal is the cause of family-Covenants, as Abraham's Covenant, the ground of
his Families entrance: and so the Covenant made with the Family the ground of
national, as in the Families of Jacob cast together, made all Israel under
Covenant. And herein appears the truth of the former distinction, that the
Covenant is made according to internal force and efficacy, or outward
administration only.

The things on Gods part promised under this manifestation to Abraham and his
subfederates are held forth in these and the like expressions: I will make thee
a great Nation, and I will bless thee, Genesis 12. 2, 3.
and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them
that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee: and in thee shall all
Families of the earth be blessed. Unto thy seed will I give this land. ver. 7.
Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward and
Southward, and Eastward and Westward. For all the Land Genesis 18. 18. Genesis 13.
14, 15, 16.
which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. And I will
make thy seed as the dust of the earth; so that if a man can number the dust of
the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered. Fear not Genesis 15. 1. ver. 5.
Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Look now toward
Heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said unto
him, So shall thy seed be. I am the Almighty Genesis 17. 1. 2. 3. 6. 7. 8. ver. 19.
God: and I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee
exceedingly, and thou shall be a Father of many Nations. And I will make thee
exceeding fruitful, and I will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out
of thee. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession, and I will be their God. By my self have I sworn,
says the Genesis 22. 16, 17. and ^4. 7.
Lord, for because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son,
thy only Son, That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
seashore, and thy seed shall possess the gates of his enemies. And in thy
seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed; because thou have obeyed my
voice.

The grand Promises of this Covenant are, that God would be the God of Abraham
and of his seed, whereby is signified, that God would be to him, what he had
revealed himself to be, his King, Psalm 33. 1^. and 144 15. Psalm. 4^. 14.
Hieron. in Ez. 1. Shad^ai. Sy^. Theod. (...) transtu^erunt, quod nos fortem,
r^bustum possumus dicere Is^ ^ 13. 6.
and Father, his Portion and Protector; that he would pardon his sin, write
his Law in his heart, lead him into all truth, defend him from all evil, and
in due time receive him unto glory. Happy are the people that be in such a
case: yea, blessed are they that have God for their God. This God is our God
for ever and ever, he shall be our guide until death. And this is employed, in
that the Lord expressed himself unto Abraham to be Almighty, or
All-sufficient, the nurse of all living things, strong, and potent to do
whatsoever he will, who can bring all things to nothing, as he made all things
of nothing, can give and take away, give plentifully, abundantly, as (...)
Sept. (...). Gen 49. 25. Genesis 17. 1. and 28. 3. and 35. 11. (...). Sept. (...).
pleases himself, whose goodness does copiously reach unto all his
creatures. The Sept. Interpreters sometimes express this title by the common
name of God: sometimes they omit it altogether, and for I am God Almighty, they
translate I am thy God: sometimes they put for it, the God of heaven, Psalm. 91.
1. sometimes they render it by a word that signifies fit, sufficient, strong
and potent. Job 31. 2. but most commonly Almighty, Omnipotent, able to do all
things, Job 15. 25. and 22. 25. and 23. 16. and 26. 16. and 27. 11. and
paraphrastically, who has made all things, Job 8. 3. Sometimes they turn it
heavenly, Psalm. 68* 15. once they retain the Hebrew word (...), Ezekiel. 10. 5.
and once they use an expression, which comes nigh to self sufficiency and
contentation, Job 29. 5. qui materia copiosus est valde. But (...).
when God manifested himself to Abraham to be God Almighty, the meaning is not
so much to express what God is in himself, as what he would be to Abraham and
his posterity: as afterward when he says he would be known unto them by his
name Jehovah, Exodus 6. 3.
thereby is meant that he would give being to the promises formerly made unto
them. And in many passages, when the Scripture speaks of the eternity of God,
the absolute eternity which respects God himself, is not understood: but that
whereby he Psalm. 90 2. Psalm. 10^. 12, 13, 28, 29. Heb. 1. 12. Genesis 12. 2, 3.
Act. 3. 25. Genesis 12. 17. Heb. 6 1^. Gal. 3. 8.
will show himself eternal in his love and favor and rich grace toward his
people. Art not thou from everlasting, o Lordour God, we shall not die. And
when the promise was made to Abraham, that in him, or in his seed, all nations
of the earth should be blessed, therein was preached the Gospel unto Abraham,
that the Gentiles should be turned from their sins, justified by faith,
adopted to be the Sons of God, made partakers of the promised Spirit, and
receive the Inheritance purchased for the Saints.

Unto these spiritual blessings, it pleased God to add the promise Voss. resp.
Rav rsp. cap. 23.
of many and great temporal good things, which are fully branched out in the
words before cited, and may be reduced to these heads. 1. Protection, I am thy
shield. The Sept. has it, I Psalm. 3. 4. and 7. 11. Psalm. 18. 3.
will protect or stand betwixt the and all dangers, that may threaten, or seem
to come nigh thee. The like promise is often repeated in Scripture, wherein not
simple aid or vulgar manner of protection is signified, but present, certain,
effectual defense, nigh N^mb, 23. 10. Deuteronomy. 10. Genesis 3^. 13. Jer. 15. 8. Hos.
1. 10. Hab. 1. 9. Isa. 10. 22. and 4^. 19. Jer. 33. 22. Theocrit. Joyll 15.
Horat. 1 Car. Od. 2^. Sen. in Med. Ovid Trist. Eleg. 4.
at hand continually, and that performed with great c^re and promptnes of mind.
2. Riches and honor, I will make thee great and thy name shall be great. 3.
Multiplicity of seed; I will multiply thee exceedingly. There be three things
in Scripture and Heathen Authors, which are used proverbially, to signify an
huge and exceeding great number, the dust of the earth, the sands of the sea,
and stars of Heaven. And all these are brought to res^mble the exceeding
number into which the seed of Abraham should break forth, Genesis 13. 16. and 22.
17. Genesis 15. 5. 4. The Land of Canaan is promised as an everlasting possession,
and therein holy Government, Church ordinances and other blessings attending
thereon: all which are stated upon Abraham and his natural seed by Jacob, and
we find verified in them.

Touching these blessings we must observe first, that God gave more of the
temporal, less of the spiritual to the natural seed in the first ages: but
in the latter ages more of the spiritual blessings, less of the temporal and
outward to the Christian seed of the Gentiles.

Secondly many of Abraham's carnal seed enjoyed the outward blessings, which
reached not the spiritual; as infinite numbers that dwelt in the Land of
Canaan, and being Jews outwardly did partake in outward privileges beloging to
the posterity of Jacob.

Thirdly, those that enjoyed this outward part of Abraham's blessing and
privileges of the Covenant, cannot be called strangers altogether from the
Covenant of promise: for the Apostle confesses, that the carnal Jew in his
time, was not wholly broken Romans 9. 4.
off from the Covenant and the Service of God, with the promises: which may be
said of carnal Christians, which live within the pale of the visible Church,
with correspondency in some measure unto the ordinances, These enjoying the
outward blessings of Abraham, are in the eye of the Scripture reputed to be
within the Covenant of grace, whereof we have an apparent proof, Deuteronomy. 29. 10.
Where all are said to enter this Covenant to the very hewer of wood and drawer
of water, amongst whom was the carnal, as well as spiritual seed.

Fourthly, it is to be observed, that the possession of the Land of Canaan, as
it was a part of their outward happiness, so it was a type of the eternal
rest, Heb. 4. 1. as shall be proved more at large hereafter.

It may be demanded how the Land of Canaan, which the Israelites possessed for
a time, can be called an everlasting possession.

The answer is, that the word translated everlasting does not ever signify
that which shall have no end, but an age, term or continuance. It is spoken of
the actions and virtues of God: of the time past or future. Of the time past,
and so we read of the bounds of ages, Pro. 22. 28. The paths of ages, Ier. 18.
15. The days of ages, Deuteronomy. 3^. 7. The years of ages, Psalm. 77. 5. The
deserts of ages, Isai. 58. 12. Joshua 24. 2. I held my peace of ^ld, Isa. 42.
14. that is, long time. Of the time to come with determination certain or
uncertain, as until the year of Jubilee, as long as he lives, as long as the
Law of Ceremonies is in force, or as long as the earth endures, and such like,
as, He shall serve thee for ever, Deuteronomy. 15. 17. and is until the year of
Jubilee, Lev. 25. 40, 41. he shall serve them for ever, Lev. 25. 46. that is,
all the days of his life. He shall appear before the Lord for ever, 1 Samuel 1.
2^. that is, as long as he lives. I will praise the Lord for ever and ever,
Psalm. 145. 1, 2. that is, as long as I shall have any being, Psalm, Horat.
Serviet, aeternum qui pactones^iat uti. 1 Samuel 1^. 13.
146. 2. So the cares of this age, Matthew. 13. 22. is put for the cares of this
life, Luke 8. 14. The Covenant of the Sabbath and Circumcision is called
everlasting, Exodus 32. 16, 17. Genesis 17. 13. that is, during the time of the Old
Testament, or until the time of Reformation. The earth stands for ever,
Eccles. 1. 4. Psalm. 104. 6. that is, as long as the world shall endure, as long
as the fashion, tenor or form of the world shall continue, 1 Cor. 7 31. The
grave is called the house of ages, or an everlasting house, Eccles. 12. 7. The
desolations which shall end in the space of 70 years, are called everlasting
desolations, Ier. 25. 9. And that which whiles it lasts, Ovid. Meta. l. 1. Ad
^ea perp^tuum deducite tempora carm^n.
is never interrupted, is said to be everlasting, Psalm. 25. 6. Thy mercies
which are everlasting, that is, which thou always usest, being never
interrupted. So it is a perpetual speech, which is never interrupted or broken
off, though it may have an end. So that we must wisely consider what does agree
to every place, even to the appointed end, and that rather hidden in the will
of God, then made known to men. And if we take the Land of Canaan properly and
literally, it was not the everlasting Inheritance of Israel absolute, but
relative, not for ever, but for a long time prescribed of God, even until the
time of Reformation: But if we look to the thing signified it is an
everlasting inheritance to the spiritual seed.

These promises were freely made of grace, and of mere grace the blessings
promised were conferred upon the seed. Fot Abraham Josh. 24. 2.
himself was an Idolater, when it pleased God to call him out of Vr of the
Chaldees, and to make these rich promises unto him. And as Abraham's calling was
of grace, so are all the promises made unto him when he was first called. The
wages is due unto him Romans 4. 4.
that works upon desert, but the inheritance was given to Abraham by promise.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Genesis 15. 6.
And if faith be reckoned to Abraham for righteousness, he has not to glory
before God. We read indeed the Lord said unto Romans 4. 2.
Abraham, for because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld Genesis
22. 16, 17
thy Son, thine only Son, That in blessing I will bless thee etc. But the
same promise God had formerly made to Abraham, and faith in these promises was
the cause of his obedience; therefore his obedience was not the cause why God
gave the promise. An occasion or antecedent it might be of the renewing of the
promise at this time, but it was no cause of the promise it self, nor of the
accomplishment. For that whitout which, and before which the promise was, could
not be a cause of the promise, or the good promised. Besides, the basis and
foundation of this promise is Christ, whose incarnation could not be merited by
Abraham's obedience. The particle because, is a note of order and consequence,
showing to whom the promise did pertain, not of the cause why it was made, or
the good promised should be performed.

If it be said, the good promised to Abraham is called a reward. Genesis 15. 1, 2.


The answer is, the word reward sometimes does import nothing, but an absolute
and free gift of God, though no action went before to which recompense was due:
as Genesis 30. 18. Leah says, God has given me my reward, because I have given
my handmaid to my husband, Psalm. 127. 4. Children are the Inheritance of the
Genbrard. in Psalm. 126.
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward. There is a reward of a debt,
such as is due to the workman for his labor upon desert: and a reward of
grace, such as God gives to them who labor in well-doing according to
promise. A reward is given to the worker of free grace, but not for his work
as the procuring or deserving cause. There is a relation of order and
consequence betwixt the work and the reward, that the one goes before and the
other follows, but not a proportion of equiparancie, price Ali^ est
compe^satio qu^ pr^^no redditur aliud. Alia qua propter unum redditur aliud.
Psalm. 18. 20.
or degrees, that the one should match or purchase the other. A recompense is
given to obedience, as comfort and solace to them that suffer for well-doing:
but it is not given for their obedience, as wages to the labourer, or lands and
possessions for the price paid in hand. Reward is sometimes called retribution:
but in Scripture not only the reward of good or evil, but simply good or evil
done is thereby signified, though nothing went before to deserve or procure it.
Thou have showed this day how thou have dealt Genesis 50. 15. 1 Samuel 24. 18.
well with me. If I have rewarded evil* unto him that was at peace with me.
The Lord has dealt bountifully with me. He has Psalm. 7. ^^.* Psalm. 1^. 6.
Psalm. 103. 10. and 116. 7. Psalm. 114. 17. and 142. 7. Isa. 3. 9. 2 Samuel 16. 36.
Psalm. 103. 2. Judge. 9. 16. Verbum (...) quod vulgo redditur, retribuere, non
semper significat parpari refer, seu idem repon^re, nimirum beneficium pro
beneficio, injuriam pro injuria, sed etiam priorem con^erre in aliquem, vel
bonum, hoc est, benefacere, etc. Kinch. ad verse. 4 c. 3. Jo^l. Mius in Psalm.
13. 6.
not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities.
Deal bountifully with thy servant. And if a benefit freely vouchsafed be
called a retribution, the retribution promised and of grace conferred upon the
workers of righteousness, does not infer dignity or worth in the work
rewarded. For when God does perform his promise of mere grace, he is said to
retribute, not that he owes any thing to any man, or that he can receive any
that has the reason of a benefit, but because he does good unto them according
as of his rich grace he was pleased to promise. And if God be said to render or
repay a reward, thence it will not follow, that good works can merit ought at
the hands of God: for the word is of far larger signification, and imports no
more sometimes, but to restore to one, that which was his own before; as Matthew.
22. 21. Render to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Luke 9. 42. It is said
of the child that our Savior healed, he restored him to his father. Luke 4.
20. He gave again the book to the Minister. Sometimes it is to give without
respect to merit or desert; as Matthew. 27. 58. Pilate commanded the body to be
given unto him. Acts 4. 33. With great power the Apostles gave testimony of the
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. Numb. 3. 3. and 36. 2. 2 Chronicles. 6. 23.
where the Hebrew has nothing but give, the Septuagint translate it render or
repay. Moreover, it signifies to repay according to vow or promise, as is to
be seen in many places of Scripture: Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Psalm. 22. 26. Psalm. 50. 14.
and 116. 12, 17. Hos. 14. 2. Joh. 2. 10. Nah. 1. 15. That a company of
miscreant wretches should be beloved, saved, and a Son shine; reason cannot
reach it, religion does not desire it, nature does not require it, justi^e does
not exact it, only love has done it.
In brief there is a retribution of justice strictly taken, which is according
to desert: Jud. 1. 7. Jer. 32. 18. Exodus 22. 5, 6. and there is a retribution
of grace and bounty, which is of favor according to promise, as Ruth. 2. 12.
Prove. 13. 21. and 25. 22. not to add, that he that first does good or evil,
is said to retribute; Psalm. 137. 8. Psalm. 35. 12. So that if God be said to
render or retribute according to our righteousness, it is not in respect of
the worthiness of our deeds, as if they deserved it, but of his free promise
and rich mercy, whereby he has bound himself to accept of our sincere
obedience, and graciously to reward it.

As God was pleased freely to make these promises to Abraham, so also to
confirm the same unto him by Oath. By my self have I sworn says the Lord.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of Promise the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath; that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.
Abraham was strong in faith, yet was it not superfluous or altogether
needless, that God of his superaboundant love and mercy, should add his Oath
to the former promise, for the further settling and assurance of his servant.
Here that common saying may be of use, Abundant cautelousnesse does not hurt,
nay, it is of great profit and behoof. But this is to be further noted, that
God had respect to the posterity of Abraham. For Isaac was present then, to
whom the promises were confirmed in his father: which, when both the one and
the other, ought to inculcate to their posterity, it was a matter of no light
moment, that they might holily affirm, that God has confirmed them both by
word and Oath.

In this passage, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to Genesis 18. 6. Romans
4. 3. Gal. 3. 6. Jam. 2. 23.
him for righteousness, both the spiritual good things promised on Gods part
in the Covenant, and the condition required on man's part, are implied. For the
Apostle hence concludes, that Abraham was freely justified by grace through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus: and in this is included all eternal and
spiritual blessings, which do accompany each other. For whom God does
justify, them he glorifieth. In the first expression, the thing required on
our parts was obscurely implied, and we had much to do to find it out: but in
this passage it lies bare. Abraham believed, etc. This condition in Abraham,
the Apostle fully follows against the Justiciaries of his and our times,
opposing it to the condition of works in attaining the blessings of Abraham,
strongly proving that this faith made Abraham the friend of God, and a
justified person, having nothing to glory in this kind before God, from any
work. But seeing this text is so often alleged and pressed by the Apostles,
and so much controverted among men, it is not amiss to handle the words more
at large. In the Original word for word they run thus, He believed the Lord,
or in the Lord, and he imputed that to him righteousness. The Sptuagint render
it, and the Apostles allege it thus, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
to him for righteousness: The word, believed, imports, he thought the words of
God to be sure, certain, stable and constant: and signifies such a belief,
as is opposed to fainting: as it is said of Jacob; when he heard the report of
his sons that Joseph was alive, his heart fainted, because he believed not: but
when he believed, his heart revived. Genesis 45. 25, 26. And David says of
himself, I had fainted* unless I had believed, Psalm. 27. 13. So that it is a
lively motion of the heart or soul assenting unto, and trusting in the word of
God as firm and steadfast. Now whether you read the word following, in or upon
God, as Arias and Pagnine, or God, as the Apostles allege it; it is all one:
for here to believe God, as all circumstances do show, is to put trust and
confidence in God, or with lively adherence to stick or cleave Joh. 5. 24.
unto the word of God. And he imputed, sc. God, or he in whom Abraham believed,
as the construction it self and words following manifestly convince: or, it
was imputed, as Isa. 22. 8. Mich. 1. 7. Ezekiel. 23. 47. Genesis 50. 20. 1 S^m. 18.
15. Jer. 18. 7, 8. and 49. 30. and 2^ 11. Exodus 26, 1. and 39 32. Psalm. 40. 17.
active verbes amongst the Hebrews are expounded passively. The word
translated imputed, is of large signification, and imports to think, reckon,
Romans 6. 11. Psalm. 44. 22. Romans 8. 36. devise, purpose, conclude, Romans 3. 28.
resolve, plot, esteem, foresee, reason, Mark. 11. 31. consult of a matter how
it may be brought to pass, look unto, and take care of. But more properly to
the matter in hand it is to account unto a man, or repute unto a man, or reckon
unto a man any thing to be his, or to be good payment and satisfaction for him
in his accounts. And that we may the better conceive the meaning of it in this
text, let us consider some other passages in which it is used: Blood shall be
imputed unto that man, he has Gen 38. 15. 1 Samuel 1. 13. Lev. 17. 4. and 25.
5^. Numb. 18. 27. 2 Samuel 19. 19, 20.
shed blood. This your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though it
were the corn of the threshing floor. Let not my Lord impute iniquity to me.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Phineas stood up, and
executed judgment, and so the plague stayed, and that was counted to him for
righteousness. If the uncircumcised keep the ordinance of the Law, Psalm. 32.
^. Psalm. 106. 31. Romans 2. 26. Romans 4. 11. and 5. 18. Romans 9. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2
Cor. 5. 19. ^ Cor. 12. 6. 2 Timothy 4. 16.
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision. That righteousness
might be imputed to them also. Sin is not imputed when there is no Law. The
children of the promise are counted for the seed. Let a man so account of us,
as of the Ministers of Christ. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their sins unto them. I refrain, lest any man should
account of me, above that he sees in me. At my first answering no man
assisted, but all forsook me, I pray God, that it may not be laid to their
charge. Even as David also describes the Romans 4. ^.
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works.
If he has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put Philem. v. 18. Romans 4. 4.
that on mine account. Now to him that works, the wages is not counted by
favor, but by debt. Here it hinders nothing, that righteousness imputed
should simply note out a righteousness of grace and acceptance, whenas the
word imputed joined with others noting desert and debt, may signify the clean
contrary. For example, when it is said, that God gives gifts unto the sons of
Psalm 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.
men, all understand a free bestowing of good things amongst them: but when he
says, he gives them the spirit of slumber, Romans 11. 8.
eyes that they should not see, ears that they should not hear: then albeit
the word [ giving] in it self promises some grace, yet being matched with
such words, it has a contrary signification to that which naturally it
signifies: when mention is simply of violent men, and of raveners or
snatchers, by and by all that have judgment understand men of wicked life: But
when it is said, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and that
Matthew. 11. 12.
the violent catch it away; it is easy to know, that this violence and
catching falls not into the lot of the wicked. Likewise the word profane,
sounds in all men's ears some foul and damnable thing: but when it is said,
the Priests profane the Sabbath and Matthew. 12. 5.
are guiltless, all know that it is no word of reproach.

But to reture to the matter, to impute is either to acknowledge that which is
truly in one, to be his indeed, and to attribute it to him, or else to
attribute that to one which indeed is not his. In general it is to transcribe
or transfer and put over the cause of any thing to any one. So Vlpian. in
lege 1. parag. Item quaeritur, de separat: Sibi imputent, quo minus idoncum
fide jussorem acceperint; id est, ascribant and tribuant. Item apud
jurisconsult. Imputare significat acceptum seu expensum far, ut imputare sibi
debet, qui credulus fuit. Legum. 1.. dolu^^ff, ^o per quem factum. To impute
then is to ascribe a matter good or evil, or the cause thereof to any one,
which he has, or has not. The imputation of an evil is twofold, just and
due, when the evil imputed or the cause thereof is in the subject to which it
is imputed: so sin is imputed to him that has committed it, and folly to him
that has not spoken that which is right, Job* 42. 8. and the debt is imputed
to him that undertook to make payment, or give satisfaction. Unjust or
undeserved, when the evil or cause thereof is not in the subject, as when a
fault is imputed to an innocent, and punishment inflicted upon him that neither
offended in his own person, nor undertook to be surety for the offender, 1 Samuel 1. 16. Genesis 38. 15. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 1.

The imputation of a good thing is done three ways, by right, grace and
injustice: because law, justice and right is opposed to injustice and grace.
But here it must be noted, that its one thing to say a man is reputed just,
another to say, this or that thing is imputed for righteousness: a man is
reputed just, but not imputed just; reputation is spoken of the concrete,
imputation of the abstract: imputation is the cause, reputation the effect:
Imputation by debt or right is, when that which is inherent in the subject, or
due to it, is imputed, as wages counted of debt to him that works. But many
things due cannot be said to be imputed, unless the word imputation be taken
improperly for giving or acknowledgement; as we should improperly be said to
impute glory to God for to give or acknowledge. Imputation by injustice is,
when righteousness of quality or fact is imputed to an unjust man, and he is
acquitted contrary to law. Imputation by grace, when righteousness is imputed
to them that be unjust in themselves, and the guilty is acquitted, not of debt,
but of grace, yet not against justice, but upon just and equal considerations.
Righteousness also is put either for some one individual righteous act, done
after a manner pleasing and acceptable unto God, which is called the
righteousness of the fact, or it is put for universal righteousness, which
is either the matter of justification, or at least the thing required on our
part to justification, and is called the righteousness of the person: which
latter is here to be understood, as is more at large to be showed hereafter.
Now from all that has been spoken it follows.

1. That perfect and strict righteousness of quality or work inherent, is and
ought to be imputed of justice to the subject in whom it is: but by gracious
estimation it cannot be imputed in the place or room of righteousness
inherent: for what is accounted by grace, that either is not in the subject, or
it is not really that in the room and steed whereof it is accounted.

2. Works of righteousness done in faith after a manner pleasing and
acceptable unto God, are of grace imputed to the doer for just and righteous
actions, the imperfections that cleave unto them being freely pardoned. Not
that works are able to bear the exact trial of the Law, or can stand as the
matter of justification before the Lord: but that God in Christ is pleased to
accept of our works as good and pleasant, our persons being accepted in his
beloved, and the weakness of our works covered by his intercession. Thus
Phinehas his executing of judgment was imputed to him for righteousness.
Psalm. 106. 31. Deue. 6. 25.
And thus we read, This shall be our righteousness before the Lord our God,
if we take heed to keep all those Commandments. Thou shall restore him the
pledge, when the Sun Deuteronomy. 24. 13.
goes down, that he may sleep in his raiment, and bless thee, and it shall
be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God.

3. Faith or belief may truly be imputed for or unto righteousness, as it is
the sole working instrument and relative action required on our part in the
Covenant of grace, unto free justification. For by faith alone in Christ,
through the mere grace and mercy of God, we obtain full pardon and remission
of all our sins, and so our works come to be acceptable in Gods sight.

4. The righteousness of one being of grace accepted for, or imputed to
another, is righteousness imputative: but this stands not in a bare opinion,
or naked estimation without reality or truth, but in a real donation and
communicating of righteousness unto him, that is esteemed just. True it is,
righteousness imputative is not inherent in them unto whom it is imputed, as
in the subject: but it is made theirs by right of donation.

5. It may also be noted, that the word Imputation, has reference to some
other thing, and commonly comes in betwixt two things, the one the thing
which is imputed, the other that Tertul. advers. Gent. Cap. 30 Ita nomen
^mendationi imputatur. Sen. ad Mart. Magno autori suo imputata. Tacit. 1. Hist.
Otho. Imp. Quis mihi plurimum imputet.
whereunto it is imputed, so that imputation has relation unto both. And to
make this manifest, we may consider these three phrases. The first is, The
obedience of Christ is imputed unto justification, conformable to that saying
of the Apostle, By the obedience of one man many are made righteous. The second
phrase is, Faith is imputed unto righteousness. The third is, Righteousness
is imputed unto life. The equivalent whereof we have, Romans 4. 11. and 5. 17,
18. In the first phrase imputation is betwixt Christ's obedience, as the thing
which is imputed, and justification as the end whereunto it is imputed, and it
has reference. In the second phrase, imputation comes in betwixt faith, as
the thing which is imputed, and righteounesse as the thing whereunto it is
imputed. In the last phrase, imputation comes in betwixt righteousness it
self as the thing imputed, and life as the end whereunto it is imputed.

This passage whereof we now speak, is diversely interpreted by Orthodox
Divines, but all aiming at the same truth, and meeting in the maine, being
rather several expressions of the same truth, then different interpretations.
The first is, That faith is imputed unto righteousness, that the obedience of
Christ apprehended by faith, may be righteousness unto the apprehender. For
faith and believing ever implies the possession of Christ and his obedience in
our hearts; and the imputation of faith unto righteousness, is the thing that
makes Christ possessed by faith to be our righteousness. Christ's obedience is
righteousness in it self, so that it is neither our faith, nor Gods
imputation of our faith, that makes his obedience to be righteousness: but
imputation of faith to us as ours, makes the obedience of Christ possessed by
faith (being righteousness in it self) to be our righteousness. For as the
making of that, whereby we obtain possession to be ours, makes the thing
possessed also to be ours: so that imputation of faith (which is a gift
supernatural and not within our power) makes Christ's obedience to be that
unto us, which it is in itself though it were never imputed unto us. And to
confirm this exposition, that of the Apostle is alleged: With the heart man
believes Romans 10 10.
unto righteousness, and with the mouth he confesses unto salvation. In which
sentence, the Greek word which is rendered [ unto] cannot be rendered [ for]
without darkning, if not perverting the true sense and meaning of that place.
For we are said to believe with the heart unto righteousness, in the same
sense and meaning, wherein we are said to confess with the mouth unto
salvation. Neither is there any reason why faith should be said to be imputed
unto righteousness in any other sense, as concerning the word [ unto] then we
are said to believe unto righteousness: but in all reason the Greek word
which we render, unto, must in both these phrases be taken in one and the same
sense: that is, as we believe with the heart, to this end that we might by
faith (as the only apt and meet instrument, and only covenient and effectual
mean to apprehend and possess) attain to the possession of the
righteousness of God in Christ: even so the Lord our God imputes faith to us
as our own, to this end that the righteousness which we possess by it, may
make us righteous before him, or be righteousness unto us in his sight.

The second exposition is, that faith is graciously imputed, reckoned or
esteemed for righteousness, or in the place or steed of righteousness,
because the righteousness of Christ is imputed to none but believers. For
those sinners only are justified before God, who (we speak of them that live
till they come to years of discretion) by a sound and saving faith do lay
hold of, and rely Quae semper tacentur nunquam affirmantur: Quae affirmantur,
dum reliqua tacentur, sola affirmantur.
upon Jesus Christ, as he is set forth of God to be a propitiation. Hence it
is, that the Covenant of Grace, in steed of the righteousness of the Law
required to legal Justification, which is wanting in us by reason of our sins,
exacteth no other thing inherent in us, as a cause of Justification, or
condition in respect whereof we are justified, but faith alone. And thus in a
fit sense it may be said, that faith is of grace accounted, in steed of legal
righteousness: not that it is the meritorious or material cause of our
Justification, as legal righteousness should have been, if Justification had
been by the Law, nor that it is accepted for the perfect righteousness of the
Law: but because it is the sole isntrumental or conditional cause, required
on our part to Justification, in respect whereof we are acquitted from our
sins. For in the Covenant of works perfect obedience is required at our hands
to Justification: but in the Reputare sive imputare adjustitiam, idem est, quod
in justitiae loco numerare.
Covenant of Grace nothing but faith on our parts is called for, and that not
as the form or matter of Justification, but the instrument only, whereby we
receive remission of sins, and are partakers of the merits of Christ.

The third Exposition is, that when faith is imputed for righteousness, it is
not to be understood materially, as though the dignity, worth and perfection of
faith made us just; but relatively and in respect of the object, that is, to us
believing righteousness, sc. of Christ is freely imputed, and by faith we
receive righteousness and remission of sins freely given of God. And therefore
to say faith justifies, and faith is imputed for righteousness, are phrases
equivalent. For faith justifies not by it is merit or dignity; but as an
instrument and correlatively, that is, the merit of Christ apprehended and
received by faith justifies, not faith whereby it is apprehended and received,
unless it be by an improper speech, wherein the act of the object, by reason
of the near and strict connection betwixt them, is given to the instrument. And
with this exposition for substance of matter agrees theirs, that make an
Hypallage in these words; faith is imputed unto, or for righteousness, as if
the sense was this, righteousness is imputed unto faith, or the faithful are
partakers of the righteousness of Christ. The thing questioned in these
expositions is, whether the words must be taken tropically or properly: but the
matter and substance of doctrine contained in them, is one and the same. For
herein they all agree, that Abraham did believe the whole truth of God
revealed, but his belief which was accepted for, or unto righteousness, did
respect the promised seed. Abraham believed the power of God to perform
whatsoever he promised; he believed whatsoever God plainly promised, and he
believed what God promised though far off, as the giving of the Land of
Canaan: but the principal thing promised was, that in his seed all Nations of
the earth should be blessed, and belief in this promise was accepted for
righteousness. All earthly promises made to Abraham, proceeded from the mere
love and favor of God toward him, and many of them were types and figures of
spiritual, so that in believing them, he must needs believe the promise of
blessing in his seed, which is Christ. Abraham could believe no promise, but he
must believe that God is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him: but he
cannot believe in God, as the rewarder of them that seek him, unless he have
an eye to the promised seed.

The righteousness here mentioned is not the singular righteousness of this
or that act, whereby a man is said to do justly or righteously, which is
called the righteousness of fact: but universal righteousness or the
righteousness of Justification, whereby a man is freely acquitted from all his
sins, and accepted of God as righteous unto life, which is called
righteousness of the person. Faith is not imputed for righteousness, in
respect of the worth or dignity of faith either in habit or act, but in respect
of it is office, whereunto it is ordained in the Covenant of Grace, as it does
embrace Christ, and thereby we are made partakers of the merits of his free and
willing, and perfect obedience to the command of Grace. Faith is accounted for
righteousness in regard of the object, and is a cause of that Justification
which is of grace. A cause, I say, not a bare condition without which the thing
cannot be: bu^ a cause, not meritorious or material, but isntrumental only,
receiving Christ promised and offered in the word of grace. For Romans 3 22.
Phil. 3. 9.
howsoever our righteousness be called the righteousness of the faith of
Jesus, or by the faith of Jesus, faith it self is never called our
righteousness. We read that Christ is made unto us of God 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans
5. 19. Romans 10. 4.
righteousness, that by one man's obedience many are made righteous, that
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes,
that the believer is justified by him, and by faith in him obtains remission
of sins. We find also by conference A^ God did predestinate Christ of grace to
this honor of being God in fellowship of person, and of being the Prince of
out salvation: So God in the Covenant he did make with him, and the commandment
he gave him of laying down his life, did strike it and fulfill it of grace,
not requiring any thing of his Son more then duties of freeobedience, which
should of grace have acceptance, etc. Bain. Col. 1. 19.
of Scriptures, that to be justified by faith, and to be justified by Christ is
in substance all one. And what can be the sense of those places, but this, that
Christ is the meritorious and material cause (so to speak) of our
Justification, faith the condition and instrument, whereby we receive Christ
made of God our righteousness. The Apostle making comparison betwixt the first
and second Adam shows, that as sin comes from Adam alone unto us all, as he
in whom we have all sinned: So from Jesus Christ alone comes righteousness
to all that are in him, as from him that has satisfied the justice of God, and
performed grateful obedience at the commandment of grace, for them all. In
which comparison faith never has the place of our righteousness, but answers
in our participation of righteousness in Christ, to that which is the ground
of our being partakers in the sin of Adam. For, as we were one with Adam, and
in respect of orignall and nature were in him, and one with him, and so by
being in him and one with him, did all in him and with him transgress the
commandment of God: even so, in respect of faith, whereby only we are united
unto Christ, and spiritually made one with him, and ingrafted into him, we all
in him did satisfy the justice of God, or are made partakers of the fruit and
benefit of his satisfaction. Thus our union with Christ and means thereof, is
always to be distinguished from our communion with him, in the participation
of his righteousness, as the fruit thereof. Like as our being in Adam, and one
with him, is to be distinguished from the fruit thereof, which is communion
with him in the participation of his transgression. If faith be only the hand
whereby we put on Christ both as a justifier and sanctifier, then it is not the
garment of righteousness, wherewith we are clothed. But it is only the hand
whereby we put on Christ as a garment, Gal. 3. 27. Romans 13. 13, 14. Faith
justifies as it imbraceth the righteousness of God. But Christ only is the
righteousness of God, allowed and ordained of God to be our righteousness. In
the third to the Romans and elsewhere, often we meet with this phrase, We are
justified by faith: Now in the fifth Chapter of that Epistle, verse. 17. it is
said, that we shall reign in life through Jesus Christ, and verse 19. that by
his obedience we shall be made righteous. What in the first place is called
Justification and Salvation by faith, that in the other is called making
righteous and reigning in life through Christ and him believed on. And so we
read, that of faith, and by faith, and through faith we are justified; but we
never read for faith we Romans 3. 30. and 5. 1.
are justified, Act. 3. 16. First, Peter says, His name has made this man
sound, through faith in his name: And then, the faith which is by him, has
given to him this disposition of body. Is it not plain here, that ^aith has
healed him, is as much as his name, or Christ believed on has healed him: the
one phrase expounding the other. Christ brought in everlasting righteousness
into the world, Dan. 9. 24. But faith was in the world before the coming of
Christ in the flesh, Heb. 11. 2. And the Spirit of God in Scripture evidently
distinguishes betwixt faith, and Christ apprehended by faith: saying, The
Fathers who believed, received not the promise; that is, Christ the matter of
the promise, and consequently of righteousness. Faith they had received: but
the promise they had not received: because Christ (in whom their blessedness
was promised) was not exhibited in their days. For all b^ it by faith they
apprehended Christ ^^^cified to come, and the righteousness, which he was to
bring unto the world at his coming: yet that righteousness in the substance
and matter of it, was never brought into the world. So that the very designing
of a precise time for the bringing in of our righteousness into the world,
declares that that righteousness material, is to be distinguished from
faith, which was in the world in all ages before it was brought in. For faith
was in the world, and did apprehend righteousness, which was to be brought
into the world, long before it came, as well as now long after that
righteousness performed, it can lay hold upon it to justification. For the
faith of Gods children before the day of Christ, and the faith of Gods children
now after the day of Christ did never, nor yet does apprehend any other
righteousness, but that which in that day was brought into the world. For it
is as easy to faith to apprehend righteousness to come, as it is to lay hold
on righteousness past or bygone: like as our faith apprehends many things,
yet to come, as our glorification.

Vorstius and his followers expound this Text in this sense, Romans 3. 28. Gal.
2. 16. Romans 4. 5.
Faith, that is, repentance, conversion and new obedience is accounted for
righteousness, that is, in the place or stead of legal righteousness or
exact obedience, though it be not so indeed. And so they freely confess,
Justification by works, which the Apostle says, is by faith without the works
of the Law. But that they might not seem directly to cross the Apostle, they
say, we are not justified by the works of the Law, that is, exact and every way
perfect, whereunto wages is due by debt; but by works of grace, graciously
esteemed for righteousness, when in the rigor of the Law it is not exact and
perfect righteousness.

But first we read, that God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation Romans
3. 24, 25.
by faith in his blood, that by the faith of Jesus, we might receive remission
of sins: but we find not, that he has ordained Christ to be a propitation
through works, that by works we should be saved. And if God have not taught any
such manner of Justification, it is not for us to receive it. We read of two
ways of Justification, by faith and works: but of a third manner by faith and
works, both as joint causes or con-causes, we find nothing in Scripture.

Secondly, By the doctrine of faith we are bound to acknowledge and confess
that Christ Jesus by his eternal Priesthood, is not only the sole meritorious
cause of all grace or righteousness inherent, requisite to final absolution:
but these presupposed in the party to be absolved, he is likewise the sole
immediate cause of final absolution or justification. Without observation in
some measure to all the Commandments of God, we cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven: but we enter not for the obedience we have performed. To what use
then does our inherent righteousness or observance of Gods commandments serve
us? If it has been sincere and ^^fained, though imperfect, yet the faith that
brought it forth will make a sincere and faithful plea for mercy in the day of
trial, in which he that has been an hearer only, and no doer of the Law, or
has done in part, what God would have done, but not sincerely, nor faithfully,
shall not be heard. Our imperfect obedience then is not the immediate cause of
our absolution, but the obedience and righteousness of Christ. By the
immediate and next cause we understand such a cause as is necessarily
accompanied by the effect, and without whose participation the effect never
does, nor can be-fall any: such a cause as whosoever is partaker of, is by
participation of it, forthwith absolved; such a cause as who so can probably
hope to be partaker of, he may upon the same degrees of probability hope for
final absolution; such a cause, as who so doubts or fears, least he shall
never be partaker of in this life, must upon the same terms doubt or despair
of his absolution or salvation. But if works be accounted for the exact
righteousness of the Law unto us, not the obedience of Christ received by
faith, but the works of holiness in us, are the absolute cause of remission of
sins and acceptance unto life. And what else do the words sound, as they be
interpreted, but, that as exact obedience to the Law, should have been the
matter or cause of Justification from justice, so sincere obedience by the
estimation of grace, is the matter of Justification by grace. They will say, I
know, faith and works are only the condition without which remission cannot
be obtained: but faith is not a bare condition, without which the thing cannot
be, (for that is no cause at all) but an isntrumental cause: and works, if
they be any cause of Justification, isntrumental they cannot be, but the
matter whereupon, and for which we are justified or accounted righteous. Works
do not embrace Christ, but if causes of Justification, they must challenge to
themselves: and therefore how faith and works should be conjoined as
con-causes in Justification it is impossible to conceive, seeing the one, that
is, faith attributes all In eo q^od solvimus est aliqu^ ^atio meriti.
to the free grace of God; the other, that is, works, challenge to themselves:
the one will aspire no higher, but to be the isntrumental cause of free
remission: the other can sit no lower, but to be the matter of Justification,
if any cause at all. For if works be accounted to us in the room or place of
exact obedience in free Justification, do they not supply the place? are they
not advanced to the dignity of works complete and perfect in Justification
from justice?

3. If faith with works be accepted for righteousness to Justification, then
faith justifies not as it imbraceth the promises of mercy, and by it we
partake in the merits of Christ's death and obedience, but as it does give
assent to the truth of the Gospel, and adhere and stick to the Commandments:
for in that sense it is an act or exercise commanded in the Gospel, and not
only as it does receive Christ and the promise of forgiveness. But in
Scripture every where faith in Christ, in the Lord Jesus, or the Gal. 3. 13. 1
Pet. 2. 24.
blood of Christ is said to justify, not faith in other promises, threatenings,
or Commandments.

4. How can it be proved, that in the matter of Justification the Apostle does
oppose faith to works exactly perfect and complete only, and not to the works
of grace done according to the prescription of the Law, as it was given to the
Jews to be a rule how people in Covenant ought to walk. To him that works
Romans 4. 4*
(says he) the wages is of debt: but he that works is not only perfectly
just, but he that is mercenarie, that is, to him that works for his reward,
as if the reward should be given him for his work. For thus the Apostle
argues, When wages is given to an hireling or mercenary, it is of debt. But
Justification or life is not given of debt, but of grace. Therefore it is not
given to him that works, or to the mercenary. Properly God owes nothing to
him that fulfilleth the Law either exactly or sincerely, when they do nothing
but their duty, and there is no proportion betwixt God and them: but because
they seek righteousness and life by works, if God should retribute to them a
reward, he should be thought to do it, as it were of debt.

The Law was given to be a rule of direction to them that be in Covenant: and
works of the Law are works done according to that prescription: which the
Apostle here excludes from being any cause of Justification, though he that
walks according to this Law, being not an hearer, but a doer of the Law, is
blessed in his deed. But of this more at large in the next Chapter.

5. Consider the opposition which the Apostle makes betwixt his own
righteousness, which is of the Law, and the righteousness Phil. 3. 9.
which is of God by faith. I count all things (says he) but as d^ng, that I
might win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. If then the righteousness of God
through faith be the matter whereupon, or for which we are justified, we are
not justified by works: but the righteousness of God through faith is the
matter whereupon we are justified. Christ is the end of the Romans 10. 4.
Law for righteousness to everyone that believes. We are made the
righteousness of God in him. The righteousness of the Law is not 2 Cor. 5. 19.
here put for works done exactly by the strength of nature; but for works
done according to the prescription of the Law, according to which people in
Covenant ought to walk, to whom God has promised, that if they keep his
Commandments, they shall be unto him a peculiar people, ch^sen generation, and
royal priesthood. Exodus 19. 5. Non justificatur homo partim justitia partiali,
and imperfect a inb^rente, partim accepti latione imperfecti properfecto.
By the righteousness of God to understand remission of sins and
regeneration; by faith, faith and works, and by the righteousness of the Law,
works done by the strength of nature, is rather to offer violence unto, then
to interpret this Text of Scripture. And by the same reason the Popish Glosses
upon this Text are confuted as false and vain. Bellarmine would make the sense
this, Faith is imputed for righteousness, that is, faith is justice, by which
Abraham was justified. For if Abraham was justified by works, he has whereof
to glory in himself. But with God he has Romans 4. 2.
not whereof to glory. To him that works not, faith is imputed for
righteousness, therefore faith is not the righteousness of the Law. The
Question there disputed is not by what work Abraham was justified: but after
he had done many and great works, in the manner of Justification, he presented
himself before the throne of grace, not only sub forma pa^peris, but which is
more of an ungodly man, to receive absolution from the hand of grace by a true
and lively faith. And faith is accounted for righteousness by gracious
acceptance: but what is accounted by free favor, that is not truly and really
the thing it is accounted for inherent in us. It will be said, Faith was not
reputed to Abraham for righteousness, after that he excelled with many virtues
having embraced Christ: But the holy Ghost rather testifies, although the
excellency of Abraham's virtue was great, whereby he had increased by long
perseverance, yet he was not otherwise accepted as righteous unto life, but
because by faith he received grace offered in the promise. The faith of Abraham
was great and excellent for degree and measure, but it was not accepted for
righteousness in regard it was strong and eminent: but because it laid hold
upon the promised feed. The faith of Abraham was eminent, but not perfect, and
justified him not absolutely as an excellent virtue, but relatively as it
received the promise of mercy, not as if Abraham was thereby made perfect by
inherent holiness, for then Abraham had whereof to glory in himself, but as
in himself a sinner and ungodly he obtained free and full remission of the
mere grace and favor of God. So that we may conclude from this passage of
holy writ, that Abraham was justified by faith alone: but this his faith though
alone in the act of Justification, no other grace coworking with it, was not
alone in existence, did not lie dead in him as a dormant and idle quality.
Saving faith is lively and operative, attended with every other grace of the
Spirit, setting them upon their work, animating and quickening them thereto,
and regulating them therein. It stirs up sorrow for sin, and purpose of
amendment; it raises the soul earnestly to long after, and heartily to crave
mercy: it comes to Christ as an humble, poor, penitent petitioner for
forgiveness: but that which is done by faith stirring up sorrow, and working
by prayer, is not done partly by faith, partly by sorrow, and partly by
prayers, but by that faith which does enforce to pray. For faith leans upon
the promise, and no promise is made, the condition of prayer being shut forth.
Ask, and it shall be given you, Mark 11. 24. Therefore our Savior Christ
being entreated of many that he would heal them, attributes all the force of
their prayers to faith, Thy faith has saved thee. And so by what faith Abraham
embraced the promise, by the same he offered up his Son Isaac. Works then (or
a purpose to walk with God) justify as Jam. 2. 22, 23.
the passive qualification of the subject capable of Justification, or as the
qualification of that faith that justifies; or as they testify or give proof
that faith is lively: but faith alone justifies, as it embraces the promise
of free forgiveness in Jesus Christ. Abraham's faith was accepted for
righteousness, but Abraham himself Genesis 17. 1.
is commanded to walk before God, and to be perfect. There be diverse phras^s
in the Scripture of the Old Testament, expressing the same thing for substance:
as to walk before God. Genesis 17. 1. (...) LXX (...)
Sept. (...). and 24. 40. and 48. 15. 1 Kin. 3. 6. Sept. (...). Psalm. 116. 9.
Isai. 38. 3. Psalm. 56. 14. 1 King. 9. 4. to walk with God. Genesis 5. 22. and 6.
9. Mal. 2. 6. Mic. 6. 8. to walk after God. (...) LXX. (...).
2 King. 23. 3. Hos. 11. 10. to walk in the name of God. Zech. 10. 12. to
walk in the ways of God. 1 King. 3. 14. Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13, 14. wholly to
follow after the Lord. i. e. to exhibit full obedience to the Lord. Numb. 32.
12. Deuteronomy. 1. 36. Josh. 14. 14. to stand in the sight of (...)
God. 1 King. 17. 1. to walk in the light of the Lord. Isai. 2. 5. to walk in
equity, Isai. 57. 2. to walk in truth, in judgment and uprightness. 1 King.
2. 4. and 3. 6. 2 King. 20. 6. The two first phrases of walking with God and
before God, the Sept. Interpreters do most commonly render, to please God;
though (...).
now and then they retain the phrase of walking with or before God, or walking
after God: and the Apostle seems to have respect Isai. 38. 3.
unto their translation, when he does so allege it, Heb. 11. 5. For he is
reported to have pleased God. In the New Testament there be Phrases that import
the same thing for substance: as to walk in the truth. 2 John 4. to walk in
all the Commandments, Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord. Luke 1. 6. to walk
worthy the Lord, that is, as becomes the sons of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Ephesians. 4.
2. and to please him in all things. Col. 1. 10. to walk in Christ. Col. 2. 6.
that is to do all after the rule and command of Christ, verse. 6. and set
before our eyes his glory, as the white we shoot at in all affairs great and
small. To walk with or before God then is to commit our selves wholly to his
care and divine protection both in life and all our actions, and assuredly to
persuade our selves that he is the present and just beholder of all thoughts,
words and actions; to reverence him as ever present and beholding all things;
to be ready at his beck and command, studiously, readily, chearefully to
receive his Commandments, and at all times reverently to demean and carry our
selves before him: to turn our eyes and fix all our senses upon the Lord, and
to attribute what good soever we enjoy, to the Lord alone. In brief, to walk
before God, is from a true and sincere heart to believe, think and do
whatsoever God prescribes, and that in such manner as he prescribes; to
attend upon the pure worship of God, and to live holily, justly, unblameably:
as they are said to be just before God, who are truly and sincerely just or
such as be righteous by way of eminency Luke 1. 6. Luke 1. 15.
in comparison of others: what is done sincerely, and elegantly, is said to be
done before the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Luke 1. 57. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13. Thus Abraham
was commanded, and by the grace of God enabled to walk with or before God.
Genesis 24. 40. and 48. 15. But sometimes in a p^culiar sense, to walk with God
is to minister before God. 1 Samuel 2. 32, 33. and to walk before the face of
God is to be understood in the same manner: the Metaphor being taken as it
seems from two friends, who well agree betwixt themselves, and willingly take
their journeyes together being at one, and in good agreement. And to go before
the Lord is spoken of John the Baptist in a peculiar sense, Luke 1. 17. noting
that (...).
he went before him as an harbinger to prepare the way for the Lord, as Kings
and Princes have some that go before them, whom when we see, presently we
conceive the King himself is not far absent.

In the old Testament there be two words translated perfect, and they be much
of the same use; The first notes that perfection to which nothing is wanting:
the other that which is complete, absolute. The force of this word seems to
contain in it an heap of perfection: but they are put promiscuously one for
the LXX (...) Sept. (...).
other; as Josh. 10. 13. (...) a whole or perfect day is rendered by the
Chaldee Paraphrast (...): Lev. 23. 15. Septem Sabbatha. (...): the Chaldee
Paraphrast. (...). They LXX. (...). Aq. (...). Sym. (...). LXX. (...).
are sundry ways translated by the Seventy; as simple or plain. Genesis 25. 27.
Jacob was a perfect man, that is, simple, without deceit; blameless, or
without reprehension. Genesis 17. 1. Be thou perfect. LXX. blameless. Job 1. 7,
8. and 12. 4. and 9. 20. without spot. Psalm. 15. 2. Psalm. 119. 1, 80. Lev. 1.
3. Psalm. 18. 24. to which (...) Gr. (...) is opposed. Cant. 4. 7. Pro. 9. 7.
Ezekiel. 43. 22. and 45. 18. (...).
innocent, without mulct or punishment. Psalm. 18. 25. Just or righteous: Prove.
28. 18. Josh. 24. 14. 1 King. 9. 4. Prove. 11. 1. whole or entire. Ezekiel. 15. 5.
Deuteronomy. 27. 6. Josh. 8. 31. holy or godly. Amos 5. 10. Prove. 2. 21. Prove. 29. 10.
Prove. 10. 29. Innocent, without fault or malice. Psalm. 84. 12. Job 8. 20. Psalm.
37. 37. Psalm. 101. 2. Prove. 13. 6. pure. Genesis 20. 5, 6. single or sincere.
Prove. 10. 9. 2 Samuel 15. 11. true. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Prove. 28. 6. Isai. 38. 3. Deuteronomy.
25 15. perfect. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Cant. 5. 2. 1 King. 8. 61. and 11. 4. and 15. 3,
14. and full. 2 King. 20. 3. 1 Chronicles. 29 9. and 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. and 19. 9. and
25. 2. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. In the New Testament there be three words usually
translated perfect. The first signifies, that which does consist of all its
parts or members, which are required to any work, so that nothing is wanting,
nor superfluous: the Metaphor being taken from even or equal numbers, which
may be divided into equal parts. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. And the compound word
signifies ^o amend, or repair and set in joint a part loose, or slipped
aside. Matthew. 4 21. Mark 1. 19. Gal. 6. 1. to fashion fitly and in comely order
or proportion. Heb. 10. 5. and 11. 3. Romans 9. 22. to fulfill or furnish. Act.
21. 5. Luke 6. 40. and to perfect and join or bind fast together. 1 Cor. 1.
10. 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. The LXX. use
this word to give the signification of two others that signify to uphold or
underprop and make equal, Psalm. 17. 5. Psalm. 18. 34. The (...)
second signifies whole or entire. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. James 1. 4. The third
perfect, Ephesians. 4. 12. James 1. 4, 5. 1 Ioh. 4. 17, 18. But all these in use
import the same thing for substance. A thing is said to be perfect three ways.
1. That is perfect which is entire in all integrall parts, firmly knit
together, faculties and functions; Animalia nascuntur (...). Arist. Hist. Any.
l. 7. ca. 8. Psalm. 139. 16. Lev. 22. 21. Mal. 1. 14. Exodus 12. 5.
when there is in all the parts of Sanctification something: as lively
creatures are brought forth perfect, Infants complete in all their parts and
members are perfect. In this sense perfect is opposed to that which is divided,
imperfect, maimed; as an Embryon not yet fashioned in the womb is opposed to a
perfect Infant; Pharisaicall love as partial, lame and maimed, extending it
self to them that loved them only, is opposed to perfect love, which
stretches it self to friend and foe. Matthew. 5. 47, 48. an entire heart is
opposed to an heart and an heart, a double heart that makes a major part
against it self. 1 Chronicles. 12. 33, 38. For in (...).
that which is entire, all things do mutually answer one another, do conspire
into one: that is not entire which dissents from it self, is not one and
whole, or in which there is division and disagreement. Thus Christians
sanctified by the Spirit of grace in every power of the soul, the seeds of all
virtues being ingrafted 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 1 Chronicles. 2^ 9.
in them, and firmly compact and knit together, so that freely, willingly, and
upon advised deliberation they cleave unto the Lord, and without partiality or
willing neglect move to all duties of Piety, Justice and Mercy, are said to be
perfect, though they be not freed from manifold infirmities, no grace of the
Spirit in them be come to perfect growth. An entire, holy, blameless
conversation, directed according to the will of God in every place, state, and
condition of life, is said to be perfect. Blessed are the perfect in the way.
Psalm. 119. 1. Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, then shall I be
perfect. Psalm. 19. 13. I was also perfect before him, and I kept my self from
mine iniquity. Psalm. 18. 23. It is recorded of Asa, that his heart was perfect
with the Lord all his days, though in the same book many infirmities are
noted in him. 1 King. 15. 14. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. Thus Noah, Genesis 6. 6. Joh 1. 1.
Hezekiah, 2 King. 20. 3. are said to be perfect. David to walk in his
integrity, Psalm. 26. 1. yet these examples must not be referred to the second
degree of perfection. The body is entire, when all parts are so knit together,
that each is preserved, and fit for his office: the soul is entire, when all
the parts of righteousness are rivetted together amongst themselves, and in
the whole: the conversation is entire, when no office of life is neglected, no
precept carelessely forgotten or slighted; when no occasions or occurrences
can remove men from their holy purposes undertaken according to Gods word. This
perfect man is set as opposite to the Jam 1. 6.
unstable, double minded, perverse, froward and restless, who are off and on,
turned upside down with every contrary wind, divided He that can be contented
to be naught in any thing, is naught in every thing.
and at odds with themselves; who loppe and straiten the Commandments as will
best stand with their occasions, take and leave at pleasure, rest in the
external acts of piety or justice, or clean depart from Gods Commandments.
The integrity of the upright shall guide him, but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them, Prove. 11. 3. If I say I am perfect, mine own
mouth shall prove me perverse, Job 9. 20, 21, 22, Who so walks entirely shall
be safe, but he that is perverse in his double ways shall fall in one, Prove.
28. 18. So it is noted of Abijam, that his heart was not perfect with the Lord
his God, 1 King. 15. 3. of Amaziah, Vzziah, Jotham, they did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, but not with perfect hearts, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.
and 26. 4. and 27. 2. 2 King. 14. 3. and 15. 3. and of Solomon, that when he
was old, his wives turned away his heart after other gods, and his heart was
not perfect with the Lord, as was the heart of David his father, 1 King. 11. 4.

2. That is said to be perfect, which has obtained an high degree of
perfection, not simply, but in comparison of that which is beneath: when a man
is so habituated in his course, that he has attained a facility and constancy
in well doing. Children newborn are perfect, that is, entire: but when they
be come to ripe age, they are perfect in comparison of themselves as new born
babes. But every growth argues not comparitive perfection, but that only which
is so great, that it may seem to introduce a new form: or when by long
practice a man is so habituated in his course, that he has attained a facility
and constancy in well doing. Children are more perfect then Infants newborn,
and Striplings then Children: but they are not said to be perfect, because the
growth is but small: but when they are come to ripe age, although as age
increases much may be added, they may be called perfect, because then (...).
they have attained as it were a new form. So to be perfect and absolute, the
Philosopher does attribute to men of ripe age. Arist. Hist. Any. l. 2. cap. 1.
de part. Animal. lib. 4. cap. 10. Strong meat (says the Apostle) belongs to
them that are perfect, or of full age. Heb. 5. 14. those that have left the
Rudiments of Christian Heb. 6. 1, ^. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
Religion are called perfect, perfect in respect of them that be babes in
understanding, and stand in need of milk. 1 Cor. 14. 20. The Law makes nothing
perfect. Heb. 7. 19. because it was a rudiment only which was delivered to
children, so that he that is seasoned with the knowledge of the Gospel, is
perfect in respect of them that be instructed only in the Law. We speak
wisdom amongst them that are perfect. 1. Cor. 2. 6. here some understand men,
and by perfect they understand all Christians in general, who are perfect in
respect of them that knew not the Gospel: Others them that in special had
made greater progress in the faith: others understand the word things or
somewhat, that this sense should be, that this wisdom does consist in perfect
things. But however this text be interpreted, the Apostle elsewhere manifestly
confirms this point, showing that some were perfect in comparison of others,
who had not yet attained to perfection. Here it must be remembered, that
howsoever the word perfect be referred to knowledge in the mysteries of
Religion in the writings of the Apostles, yet it is not seldom referred to
practice and manners. In the first reference, they are said to be perfect, who
have obtained an high degree of knowledge in heavenly and divine mysteries: In
the second, they that teach in deed and fact that they have learned what they
profess. Let patience have its perfect work, Jam. 1. 4. that is, let it show
its sincerity and constancy in works, that not in words and gestures, but in
deed and truth it be approved; that it cannot be overcome in the greatest
evils, but does hold out and remain invincible. He that can bridle his
tongue, is a perfect man indeed, Jam. 3. 2. that is, he is not one that is in
exercise to learn, which is the mean to perfection, but has learned indeed
what he professes. He calls that perfect which is performed in truth and
deed, and is not counterfeit: and so ^in is said to be finished, when it is
committed, Jam. 1. 15. and every sound, solid, operative grace, is called a
perfect gift, Jam. 1. 17. and sincere, unfeigned love, is said to be perfect
love, 1 John 4. 18. Christ was made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. as
he learned obedience by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. for there is
an experimental learning. And to this purpose belongs that speech of our
Saviors upon the cross, It is finished: for hereby was signified, that he had
fulfilled all things, which he was to do upon earth, Luke 13. 32. and they
that shed their blood for Christ's sake and for the Gospels are said to be
perfected. Thus the patient are called perfect, because patience is a document
of a mind most exercised in piety and godliness. So the power of God is
perfected in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. for the virtue of Christ is not
perfected in weakness as in the subject, not by infirmity as by the effect:
but when it shows it self in the greatest and principal things. The power
of God is not increased, nor diminished: but then it is said to be perfected,
when in the judgment of man it does that which is most hard and difficult. For
we live and die in God, and this is of the power of God: but when in the
greatest streights, and even in death it self we live and breathe, the power
of God does after a special manner show forth it self, and is perfected in
us, that is, does show it self to be exceeding great, which cannot be
conquered or overcome. In the same manner as the Apostle says, Fath is
perfected by works, Jam. 2. 21. not that works do perfect faith, but that
faith whilst it brings forth good works, does manifest how perfect it is: it
borrows not force from works, but in works does declare what force it has.
Thus the graces of the Spirit are perfected, whilst by the effects it is made
manifest how perfect they are. Psalm. 19. 7. Mat. 5. 48. Psalm 18. 30. Heb. 12.
23.


3. That is perfect, which is every way absolute and complete, to which
nothing is wanting, nothing superfluous: and so the souls of the just are made
perfect in Heaven. In the first degree perfection is necessary to salvation,
without which we cannot be partakers of the eternal inheritance: in the second
and third degree it is to be striven after, though the latter cannot be
obtained in this life. The greatest measure of perfection attaineable in this
present life, is an imperfect perfection: but that imperfection is sin; and
therefore though we come short, we must strive forward toward perfection, that
we might be perfect hereafter.

Integrity is necessary, because the most holy God will never give himself to
be possessed and enjoyed to a spiritual adultresse, who does affect any other
lover more, or besides him. A woman Rev. 14. 3, 4.
may have many friends, but one as an Husband: Conjugall love of it own nature,
is of that kind, that it must be of one, and cannot be communicated to many. If
God be wholly ours, we must be wholly his. And if we join ought with God, or
take in ought with him, we do not, we cannot cleave to him alone. When there
are two objects upon which the heart is set, it is divided: and men of divided
hearts, can have no fellowship or communion with him. We cannot serve God,
unless we serve him entirely: he cannot be our Master, if we have any other.
Matthew. 6. 24. God hears them that pray with their whole heart. Jer. 29. 12,
13. is found of them that seek him with their whole heart. Psalm. 119. 2. Deuteronomy.
4. 29, 30. takes pleasure in them that be entire in their way. Prove. 11. 20.
and accepts their work. Deuteronomy. 33. 11. If a Christian be not entire, he can
never be perfect in degree: for what is defective in parts, can never be made
up by any growth. He can never come to be a perfect man in Jesus Cerist, and
every way complete, in whom the work of grace is imperfect and maimed in the
parts essential or integrall. If a plant be imperfect, it will never be a
perfect tree: If a Child be borne maimed or imperfect, no growth of parts
received can restore what is defective in nature: If a Christian be sanctified
in mind only, or in some affection only, and not in every part, no growth in
what he has obtained, can ever make his sanctification perfect and complete.
Integrity is the qualification of a subject capable of final pardon, and
eternal blessedness through grace. Remission of sins is received by faith,
but faith that embraces pardon, does unite and knit the soul inseparably to
God, and to the word of his grace, it seasoneth every affection, and stirs
them up to their proper functions according as the word directs. Blessed is
the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

God will pass by the imperfections which he espieth in the best service of
his children, when once he sees their hearts to be entire and perfect toward
him. Hypocrisy drowneth many excellent graces, and causes God to take no
notice of them: but integrity is so well pleasing to his Majesty, that if it be
not shaken, he will not see many other infirmities. This is the challenge
against the Church of Sardis, I have not found thy works perfect before God.
Rev. 3. ^.
David had many imperfections, and did often step aside in the way, but he is
not accused to break the whole Law in any thing, save in the matter of Vriah,
1 King. 15. 5. The Holy Ghost has noted sundry defects in Asa, but adds this
of him by way of conclusion, yet his heart was perfect toward the Lord all his
days, 1 King. 15. 14. Contrarily in Jehu, after a large description of many
excellent things, it is observed, But Jehu regarded not to walk in the Law of
the Lord with all his heart; and so his service in destroying Ahabs house
(rewarded with a temporal blessing 2 King. 10. 31. Hose 1. 4. 2 Chronicles. 30. 15,
19.
to the fourth generation) was reckoned murder. Hezekiah is bold to pray in
behalf of them that came unprepared to the Passover, The good Lord be
merciful unto him that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God, though he be
not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. An Husband will
bear with many aberrations in the behavior of his Wife, so long as he is
persuaded of the entireness of her heart toward him: and so deals the Lord
with them that fear before him with all their hearts. Great is the excellency,
many the privileges of the entire and perfect man. Better is the poor that
walks in his integrity, Prove. 28. 6. and 19. 1. Psalm. 1 19. 1. Causall
blessedness is the pardon of sin; but perfection is blessedness in order to
the execution and fulness thereof. The perfect man is actually blessed: but
the cause of blessedness is the free mercy of God. Psalm. 119. 80. Job. 8. 20.
Psa. 37. 18, 19. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
then he that is perverse in his ways, turning away now on this side, now on
that, though he be rich. Integrity advances the poor man above the wealthy,
and yields him more sound comfort and profit both, then all the riches in the
world can. They are blessed that walk in the perfect way: Not they that walk
in the way of the Ministry, or of the Magistracy, but indefinitely they which
walk in any way allowable by the word, with a perfect heart, be it never so
mean or simple, they are blessed. Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
whatsoever it be, be it to be the scowrer of Channels, drudge in a Kitchen, or
to serve in the Galleys.

More particularly. The perfect shall not be confounded. Let my heart be entire
in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. For God will not cast away the perfect
man, neither will he take the wicked by the hand. He may seem to neglect, but
he does not forget them that follow after righteousness: he is thought to
favor, but he does abhor the workers of iniquity. The eyes of the Lord run
to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf
of them, whose heart is perfect toward him: Psalm. 18. 25.
Howsoever they may be weak in themselves, in him they shall be victorious:
his power shall be perfected in their weakness. For Psalm. 37. 18.
as it is in the Psalm, With the perfect man, thou will show thy self
perfect: thou will not fail him in his need. This is the nature of God, that
he frames himself to the dispositions of men, good to the good, hard to the
stubborn, entire to the perfect that wait upon him. The Lord knows the
days of the perfect, and their inheritance shall be for ever: that is, he
sees to what evils they lie open, what help they need, and orders all events
to their Prove. 28. 16. and 10 9, 29.
special good. He that walks in his integrity is safe: no danger can
overtake or meet a man in that way; because he is under the shadow and
protection of divine providence. Righteousness preserves him that is entire in
the way, but wickedness overthrows the sinner, Prove. 13. 6. and 11. 5, 6.
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, Psalm. 25. 21. Integrity is a guard,
that does continually keep watch and ward; and does not only lead men to a
good way, and tell them what is their duty, and fit to be performed; but makes
the way passible for them, and them prosperous in it. An entire heart, is a
channel or Bark in which the graces of the Spirit are contained, and faith
does swim above all storms and tempests: but a mind void of all integrity,
is full of slisters and chincks, that if the most holy liquour of piety be
offered, it is powered in and out together and at once. This is the nature of
integrity, that by it the soul is entire in it self, and has a spiritual
continuity, which may be shadowed forth by the similitude of things corporal:
and therefore so long as integrity is preserved, the heart is apt to contain
and keep safe the graces of the Spirit: if it be cracked grace would be lost,
should not God make up the breaches of it. A soul destitute of grace, is
stark dead; an heart without integrity, not well compacted, is next to death
or destruction; as a ship full of holes, or a body unloosed or dissolved. An
heart well compact and knit fast together in the Lord (as is the entire) is
Prove. 10. 29.
valiant and courageous in all dangers, trials, temptations. It is not put out
of countenance with slanderous tongues, nor shaken with fear of troubles.
Though mine adversary should write a book against me, would I not take it upon
my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me, says Job? The hypocrite in peace
and security may seem strong and valarous: but let God by some affliction drag
him out, as it were by the ears from his lurking hole, and convent him before
his tribunal, and thou shall not see any thing more abject and heartlesse.
Then is that of the Prophet verified, The sinners in Sion are afraid, a fear
is come among the hypocrites. Isa. 33. 14, 15.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell
with the everlasting burning? But the entire heart, even in this case, holds
out confident and courageous. And no marvel, for every man that walks in his
integrity has the privilege of a treble guard, the guard of Gods protection,
of the good Angels, and of a good conscience, for his defense against all
adversary power. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, Ps. 37. 37. Ps.
37. 40. Ps. 91. 11.
for the end of that man is peace: for the Lord shall help and deliver him, he
shall deliver him from the wicked, and save him, because he trusts in him.
The Lord will defend the perfect, and he has given his Angels charge over
them, to bear them in their hands, and keep them in their ways: In which
respect they may say with the Prophet, how many soever rise up against us, they
be more and stronger that be with us, then they that rise up against us.
Moreover, they are blessed of God with a good conscience, which is as a strong
Castle, against which no batteries of the enemy can prevail; he is a most
valiant Champion, who will not be daunted with any proud onset of the
Adversary, which he knows to be weak, and of no strength. As there is
nothing more base, or sooner abashed then a corrupt conscience, destitute of
integrity: So nothing more bold and hardy then a good and perfect conscience.
David in the midst of all his reproaches had the face to profess the name of
God before Kings and Princes, without ever being blanked Ps. 119. 23.
at their presence. And shall a man so guarded, regard the enmity of any? fear
the threatenings of any, though never so mighty? be dismayed at any hard
condition that he is fallen into for the present? No, he will not be afraid for
any evil tidings, for his heart is fixed and trusts in the Lord.

Integrity adds to the glory of our good actions, even such as are but of the
lower sort. There is not the meanest duty whatsoever, which integrity will not
set a fair gloss upon, that in some respects it shall be matchable even to
works far greater in their own nature. A poor laboring man that lives by
his hands, having performed holy obedience to God therein with an entire heart,
may have as much comfort on his deathbed, as the best Minister or Magistrate,
whose service in it self is far more honorable: yea, if his integrity be
greater, his comfort also shall be greater. For God regards not so much the
matter, as the form of obedience: nor so much the thing done, as the affection
wherewith we do it. Wise men regard more the mind of the giver, then the value
of the gift. When we first give our hearts wholly and entirely to God, then is
our service, how small soever, very acceptable unto his Majesty. It is not the
greatness or multitude of those good works which we have done, but the good
disposition of an honest and entire heart in the doing of them, that does bring
comfort, as the internal qualification of that faith, which makes a sound plea
for mercy before the throne of grace. An halting heart dasheth the acceptance
of the most glorious work: an entire heart adds weight to the basest
service. The widows mite was little in worth, had not her good heart raised
it is price. In value it came far short of the superfluities that the rich men
cast into the treasury; but her heart was better, and so her gift greater then
theirs. When Hezekiah had received the sentence of death, what was his comfort?
even this, the conscience of his integrity. O Lord remember how I have walked
before thee in truth and with Isa. 38. 3.
a perfect heart. This was his refuge, though the good works he had done were
in regard of his calling of the highest note, the restoring of the true worship
of God, the purging of the defiled Temple and Priesthood; yet he did not
comfort himself in these so worthy works, but in the perfection of his heart,
knowing well that the work it self, though never so glorious, is of no
esteem, if the heart be rotten, perverse or halting. The entire in Prove. 11.
20.
heart are the Lords delight, greatly beloved of him for the present, and shall
more fully see, feel and enjoy the comfort and happiness of his favor in
time to come. The Lord God will Ps. 84. 11. Isa. 60. 19.
withold no good from them that walk in integrity: for he is both their
Sun and Shield, he will give grace and glory. As the Sun does illustrate,
cherish and quicken all things with its heat and light: So does the Lord visit
the entire, and refresh them by his Spirit, yea, and as a Shield protect them
from all evil. The Prove. 2. 21. Prove. 28. 10. Prove. 20. 7.
perfect shall remain in the Land for ever and leave their inheritance unto
their children. Who so causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he
shall fall himself into his own pit: but the entire shall have good things in
possession, and their children after them shall be blessed.

The effect and token of integrity is a settled, wel-advised and deliberate
desire, resolution, will and endeavor to be informed, what is good and
acceptable in the sight of God, and to direct his ways at all times, and in
all places according to rule of righteousness: for he aims at one mark, and
pitcheth upon the right object. Prove. 20. 7.
The just man walks in his integrity. It is the commendation of David, that
he did that which was right in the sight of 1 King. 15. 5.
God, and turned not aside from any thing that was commanded all the days of
his life.

The fruits of this resolution are these and such like;

First, there is no sin though never so dear, precious or profitable, which a
perfect Christian would not willingly espy out and judge in himself, I will
declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for Psalm. 38. 18.
my sin.

Secondly, it works a dislike of sin in all, even in those which be most
near and dear unto us.

Thirdly, It is joined with a continual care to preserve himself 1 Ki. 15.
13, 14. Ps. 18. 23. 2 Samuel 22. 24.
innocent from all sin, especially his particular and formerly beloved
transgressions. I was perfect before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity.

Fourthly, In all conditions he will look to himself, that he be not carried
away with unbridled passions. In regard of several states, men are subject to
be transported with diverse affections, as with pride, pleasure, security in
prosperity, impatience, fretting, discontent in adversity. Wherefore the entire
Christian does ever look to his heart, that it be not distempered with these
things.

Fifthly, If the heart be entire with God, it will admit his word Prove. 2^. 29.
Psalm. 119. 24. Psalm. ^8. 22. 2 Samuel 22. 23.
for direction in all things. Thy testimonies are my delight and my
Counselors, that is, they govern my mind and heart, of them I take advice.
All thy judgments were before me: and I did not put away thy Statutes from me.

Sixthly, They that are entire are said to have fulfilled after the Isa. 14. 8,
9, 14.
Lord, that is, fully or entirely to have followed him, Deuteronomy. 1. 36. Numb. 14.
24.

Seventhly, The perfect man puts away froward and perverse speeches. The
poor that walks in his integrity is opposed Numb. 32. 1^.
to him that is perverse in his lips, that speaks froward things.

Eighthly, His care is to keep himself unspotted of the world, Prove. 19. 1.
Amos 5. 10.
doing that which is honest, pure, praiseworthy in the sight of God and man.
This note the Prophet David gives; for having said, Blessed are the undefiled
in the way, he teaches us to discern Psalm. 119. 1, 3.
them by this effect, surely they do no iniquity.

Ninthly, He will receive evil at the hands of God thankfully, as well as
good, and bless his name, when he crosses his desires, Job 2. 9, 10.
and takes from him what he delights in, as well as when he grants the
desire of his heart in outward blessings.

Tenthly, An entire heart is ready prepared to serve God, to part with any
thing be it never so dear for Christ, and to suffer any 1 Chronicles ^^. 19 Mark
10. 21. Mat. 19. 21.
thing be it never so hard for Christ's sake.

Eleventhly, He that walks in his integrity will deal conscionably at home
and abroad, in all duties of his general and particular Ps. 101. 1, 2. Joh. 2.
8. 2 Chronicles. 28. 9.
vocation toward all men. I will walk in the midst of mine house in the
integrity of mine heart. I will set no evil thing before mine eyes.

Lastly, He presses toward the mark, and aims at an higher degree of
holiness, Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. One thing I do, I forget that which is behind,
and endeavor hard forward toward the mark, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Integrity is the gift of God, infused into the heart by the holy Ghost; but in
this respect we may not neglect the means ordained of God for the attainment
and preservation of it. God and none but he did place David in the hill Syon,
and give Gideon victory over the Midia^ites, as they both well kn^w, and
firmly believed: but their belief did not emasculate their minds, or tie their
hands from using such strength and valor, as they had.

First, Care must be had to furnish the mind with the affectionate knowledge of
God in Christ Jesus. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy
Fathers, and serve him with a perfect 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
heart. The knowledge of God begets in us a similitude of God. When we come to
understand what he is to us, we are made to him what he requires. As when
sound knowledge enters, it stampeth the Image of God upon the heart: for it
assimulates the mind to the object seen and discerned.

2. All holy means must be used to incorporate the word into the heart, that
it may season every affection, and bear mild universal Sovereignty over us.
For the heart is trans-formed throughout into the nature of the word, and every
power of soul is brought into subjection by an unfeigned, sovereign,
well-rooted faith, it is entire in parts, though imperfect in degrees. Herein
all diligence and pains must be taken by preparation, hearing, meditation, and
observation of all unexpected occasions of grief, sorrow, fear, joy, or such
like, to bring the word into the affections, that it may sweeten their
disposition, and govern their motion.

3. In all endeavors we must include prayer to God in the name of Christ, as a
chief associate: for God ordinarily lets in sanctifying grace at the same
gate, at which honest hearted prayers go out.

4. The fourth means is, for a man always to possess his heart with the
apprehension of Gods presence, and so to keep it in his fear continually; to
walk with God, as being in his eye, and seeing him that is invisible. This
remembrance of Gods all-seeing presence, will make men study to approve
themselves before God in all their courses, and to stick unto him with their
whole hearts. Could the eye of a jealous husband pry into every privy corner
of his wives heart, she would be afraid to hide any strange lover in her secret
affection. If but a man, nay if but a child could look into our hearts, we
durst not deal doubly and deceitfully. What? God sees us, and shall we dare
to dally with him? Shall I give him part of my heart, and reserve another part
for the world, for pleasure, for sin? How should not God find this out? for he
searches the heart and reins, and understands the secret cogitations of
every soul.

5. Another means is diligently to review all works of obedience, and our
affections in the doing of them: and to observe what discomfort and trouble
follows the maimed and defective performance of good duties. And withal when
we take our selves tardy, in an holy in^^gnation to take revenge of our selves,
judging and condemning our selves before God. The very thinking of the after
reckonings we must come unto, when we have done our work, will make us take
heed how we do it. The remembrance of the loss and punishment they shall
sustain, whose works are not perfect before the Lord, will stir up respect
to every Commandment. For who is there that uses for all his actions, at the
days end to call himself to a severe examination, as the hard Master does his
servants, that must not needs in the very midst of his actions, reason thus
within himself; anon all this which now I do, must very narrowly be looked
over, and if the reason why I do it, my affections in doing, the work it
self be maimed, halt or suffer defect in the parts thereof, I shall smart for
it. O the wrings and secret pinches which mine own guilty heart will give me;
yea, the sentence which by Covenant I am tied to pass upon my self, in case my
heart be partial to the Lord, and my work deformed? If my work be not
perfect, shall I not loose all my labor, and be rejected with it?

Lastly, It is good to meditate seriously on the joys of heaven, and the rich
recompense of reward reserved for them that cleave unto the Lord with their
whole hearts. If the happiness of Saints hereafter do rightly affect, and be
soundly believed, a man will be contented to part with all that he has to
purchase that treasure. Whatsoever he has laid next his heart, he will abandon
it with detestation, rather then deprive himself of that eternal inheritance,
which God has prepared.

To stir up himself to strive after perfection more and more, a Christian
must first shame himself for his halting, and make it odious; ah, the division
of my heart, the maimednesse of my service is so apparent, that I cannot
conceal it from my conscience. I have lodged sin, vanity, pleasure, the
world in the closet of my heart, which should have been kept entire for the
Lord. My purposes for good have been weak, my resolutions variable, ofttimes
by occurrences and occasions I have been drawn aside. In holy performances I
have served mine onw corrupt affections, and doing what is right, not done it
with a perfect heart. Mine affection to good has been partial, base,
deformed; In the greatest matters I have been remiss, precise in lesser:
zealous in one, careless in another: ready to run according to inclination,
not looking to the direction of the truth. I have sometimes been forward to
hear, not so careful to meditate, and make the word mine own; eager and fiery
against some particular notorious offenses, but not vigilant to bridle rash
anger, boisterous passions and indiscreet and idle speeches. My love to the
children of God has neither been pure, nor universal: I have been apt to
admire some, dis-esteem others according as they carry themselves toward me,
and fit me in my humor. If he be a cursed deceiver, that having a male in his
flock, does offer that which is halt and lame to the Lord: how justly might I
be confounded, who have wickedly departed from my God, and set my affections
upon things of no value? Will an husband accept of divided love in his wife?
will a Prince regard or take in good part, that which is lame, blind or sick,
for a present from his Subject? O Lord, I have dealt exceeding foolishly in
tendering such spotted service unto thy Highness.

Secondly, He must resolve to keep himself more entirely to Psalm. 119. 69. 1
King. 8. 48.
the commandments of God for the time to come. I have wickedly departed from my
God, but now I will return, and keep his Commandments with my whole heart.
What can I tender unto They are blessed who have attained some perfection in
the exercise of holiness. Every apprentice deemes him happy, who has the
perfect skill of that trade wherein he is exercised. 1 King. 8. ^9. It is a
great shame to leap from pale to sprig, and with the moon to change our
beliefs. Thou art ashamed to be accounted an inconstant man.
his Majesty, less then my self? How can I for shame entreat his favor,
unless I cleave unto him with a perfect heart? Can I desire God to be wholly
mine, unless I be wholly his? Can I be so impudent as to entreat God to love
me with a prime and conjugall love, and give me leave to love sin which he
abhors, to love other things above or equal with his Highness? Can I look
to be married unto Christ in mercy, truth and compassion, if my heart do not
affect him above all, and other things in and through him alone? The Lord is a
great King, his service must be without spot or blemish. His eye searches the
heart, and perfectly understands all secret motions a far off, and will
give to every one as he knows his heart, and according to his ways. Men of
place look to have their pleasure done in all things by such as attend upon
them: and shall I presume to call my self the servant of the living God, when
I do his pleasure in part only and by halves. My obedience cannot be perfect
in degree so long as I live here, but through the grace of God it shall be
universal, and that I might attain absolute perfection in heaven, I will
strive after it in this life. O Lord, I have covenanted to stick unto thy
testimonies, and by thy grace I will keep thy precepts all the days of my
life, unto thee therefore do I fly for strength, support, acceptance. Create in
me, O God, a clean heart, renew a right (constant) spirit Ps. 119. 68. Ps. 51.
10. 1 Kin. 8. 58. Ps. 119. 8.
within me; Establish me with thy grace, that I never fall from my integrity. I
will keep thy statutes, O forsake me not utterly.

In the former overture of the Covenant by Gods appointment they offered
sacrifice, which was a type of Christ, and seal of remission and propitiation
by the blood of Christ, under this expression the same continued: for so we
read, that Abraham built Genesis 12. 7. and 22. 9.
Altars unto the Lord, and offered sacrifice. But unto this, it pleased God to
add other assurances whereby he bound himself to perform the promises which
he freely made of his grace, and did establish the faith of Abraham and his
posterity. This Covenant God confirmed by federall signs in the segments and
fiery lamp. Genesis 15. and then by sacramental signs, as by Circumcision. Genesis
17. which was a seal of promise on Gods part, and an homage or fealty in
Abraham and his seed binding them unto the service which God required under the
Covenant of grace: and Gal. 5. 3. In as much as Circumcision was the sign or
solemn ceremony of this mutual league between God and Abraham, and Abraham's
seed, it is necessarily employed (by the tenor of the same mutual Covenant)
that God should subscribe or seal the league after the same manner, and to
receive the fame sign of Circumcision in his flesh, which Abraham and his seed
had done. Romans 4. 11. Romans 2. 28, 29.
therefore the Apostle put this upon them that will use Circumcision after
Christ, that they are bound to keep the whole Law, not because Circumcision for
the outward act was commanded in the Law, but because it was that homage penny,
which tied them to punctual obedience. We may conceive, that God by this
Commandment might now prove Abraham's obedience therein, imposing a thing
abhorrent to nature, which could not be before sin, because it does
presuppose sin and punishment: And it was a notable pledge of his faith, for
if he could believe God in so dangerous and fearful an execution, they might
believe him in any other command or promise under the Covenant. Circumcision
was not without the shedding of blood, because the Covenant was not yet
established in the blood of the Messiah, and that might lead the faithful to
the blood of Christ, as assuring the purging away of sin by the same. God
could have instituted ^ Sacrament which might have agreed to both sexes, but of
his infinite wisdom, he made choice of that which could have being i^ the
males only: but the female was accounted as circumcised in the male: and
therefore faithful women were the daughters of Abraham, Luke 13. 16. and the
common promise, that God would be the God of Abraham and his seed, did pertain
to each sex of his posterity. Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness
which is by faith, that which is purchased by Christ, and embraced by faith: It
was also a sign of the Circumcision of the heart by the Spirit of Christ,
without which the rite did commend no man to God. Deuteronomy. 10. 16. which
Circumcision of the heart is promised of God as his grace. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and is
fulfilled in Christ, Jer. 4. 4.
C^l. 2. 10, 11. Phil. 3. 3. And it was a seal of the Covenant, and so of all
the promises made therein concerning things temporal to the seed and posterity
of Abraham, as they stood in reference to the Covenant of Grace. All that were
outwardly circumcised, were not partakers of the spiritual blessings promised,
yet was not Circumcision altogether unprofitable unto them: but as they were
within the Covenant, so did Circumcision seal unto them the blessings of the
Covenant. If they were externally in Covenant only and by profession, it
confirmed the promises of the earthly Canaan and some other outward things
whereof they were partakers: If they were internally and effectually in
Covenant, it confirmed the highest blessings unto them, which they obtained by
faith. It appears then, that all are not in Covenant after one manner, nor do
all that be in Covenant, equally partake of the same blessings: they that be
outwardly in Covenant partake the outward and basest part of the Covenant, they
that be truly in Covenant obtain the bighest: but what blessings soever they
enjoy, they are given according to the Covenant of Grace, and not of works,
given of free bounty to them that yield but partial and fained obedience, and
not merited by their works. But of this more at large in the next Chapter.

From all this it follows, First, that all the faithful are of the same
faith with Abraham. The Father and the Sons spiritual be of the same
belief: as they do partake of the same spiritual privileges. It is one God
that justifies the circumcision and the uncircumcision, and it is the same
faith whereby the Promises of mercy are embraced. Zaccheus is called the son of
Abraham, and he believed in Christ as did Abraham.

2. Not only Promises of temporal good things, but of spiritual and eternal
were made to the Patriarks in the Covenant of Grace, and sought and obtained by
them. They looked for a City whose builder and maker the Lord is. Remission of
sins and Heb. 11. 11, 12.
life everlasting was preached in the Covenant, sealed in the Sacrament, and
typified by the Land of Canaan. To conceit the Fathers to be an assembly of
brute beasts, which looked to be fed with earthly blessings alone, is highly
to dishonor them, and lessen the grace and mercy of God toward them.

3. Sacramental phrases, wherein the name of the thing signified is given to
the sign, are ancient and familiar; as Circumcision is called the Covenant,
and the rock Christ. Why then should our Adversaries stumble at this, that in
the Sacrament of the Supper, The Bread is called the body of Christ.

4. In this expression of the Covenant, the spiritual good things promised
therein are limited to Abraham and to his seed. But all Infants whatsoever are
not comprehended under the seed of Abraham. To say many thousand thousands are
excluded from the seals and outward administration of the Covenant, when yet
every one is partaker of the good promised in the Covenant, is to speak of our
selves, and not according to the Word of God. We will not tie the grace of God
to outward means: but ordinarily we cannot affirm they pertain to the
Covenant of Grace, and obtain the highest blessings promised therein, whom God
does not vouchsafe so much as outwardly to receive into Covenant.

CHAP. VII. Of the Covenant of Grace under Moses till the return of Israel
from the Babylonish Captivity.
NOw we are drawing down to Moses his time, and that manifestation of the
Covenant of Grace, which was revealed to the Church by his Ministry. The curse
of Gods revenging justice had now seized upon mankind for many generations,
even thousands of years, so that now it was time for God to remember mercy in
the midst of wrath, and to break out into a clearer expression of this free
gracious Covenant, extended to a people sprung up into a great number, and to
be joined together in an outward policy. The Covenant of free grace running
down in Abraham's seed was daily cast out, and grew wild, as in the
Ishmaelites, Edomites, Syrians, etc. therefore God was now pleased to knit the
seed of Abraham together in a stronger, and (as I may call it) a state
Covenant, that things might grow better and not worse, The body of the people
to whom the Covenant pertained, was now grown populous and numerous, so that
either it must grow wild, and come to nothing by it own weight, or else be
brought under the Covenant of God into a state and national Church.

The Covenant which God made with Israel is called the Old Testament or the
Law, not because it was first, as some suppose, but because it was to wax old,
and to give place to the more excellent Covenant succeeding, and finally to be
abolished. Heb. 8. 13.


But here at the first we meet with a great difficulty, How, and whether at all
the Covenant of Grace, was manifested by Moses?

Some make the Old and New Testament, as the Covenant of works and grace,
opposite in substance and kind, and not in degree alone: and that to introduce
an unsound distinction, viz. of promise set against Covenant or Testament, as
though God conferred Grace unto the Fathers only by promise, and not by
Covenant, leaving all that Moses puts under Covenant to be the Covenant of
works and old Testament, not considering that God calls his promise of Grace
to Abraham a Covenant. Genesis 17. 1. being in every branch a complete Covenant:
not adverting that the Apostle (who knew how to speak according to the sense
of the old Scriptures) calls the promise made unto Abraham a Covenant or
Testament. Gal. 3. 17. and the Covenant of promise, distinguishing the degrees
of manifestation. Ephesians. 2. 12. Neither can it be proved, that ever God made
the Covenant of works with the creature fallen: but whenever the Scripture
speaks of Gods entering into Covenant with man fallen and plunged into sin,
and for sin deserving wrath, it must be understood of the Covenant of Grace,
as shall be showed hereafter.

Others make the Old Testament a Covenant subservient to the Covenant of Grace,
and describe it to be that which God made with Israel in Mount Sinai, to
prepare them to faith, and to inflame them with a desire of the promise and
Evangelicall Covenant (which otherwise had languished in their minds) and to
restrain them from wickedness as it were with a bit and bridle, until the
time wherein God should send the Spirit of adoption into their hearts, and
govern them by the Law of liberty. This they make to agree with the Covenant
of nature in this, that in both the one party contracting is God, the other
man, both has a stipulation annexed, and that the same in respect of the
moral Law: the promise is the same in general, and both lead unto Christ.
But to differ from it in this, that the Covenant of nature was made with all
men, but this with the Israelites alone; that was made with man created and
perfect in Paradise, and had no preludia: this was made long after with some
part of mankind sinners, in Mount Sinai, and had many preludia: that bound to
obedience due by the Law of nature, this to the Ceremonies also: in that the
enjoyment of life in Paradise was promised, here in the Land of Canaan: the
Covenant of nature leads to Christ by accident, as it shows what man does owe
unto God, and what punishment remains if he pay not his debt of duty: the old
Covenant leads unto Christ by it self, for that is the true and proper scope
thereof, God exacting his due of man for none other end, but that the creature
convicted of his imbecility, should fly to Christ. The Covenant of Nature
leanes upon the Creation and general conservation; the old Covenant upon the
Election of Israel, his deliverance out of Egypt, and conservation in the Land
of Canaan.

The Covenant of Nature was written in the heart; but the old Gal. 4. 24.
Covenant did beget to servitude, and so did compel and restrain by force, as
when we leave undone what we would do, or do what we would not for fear:
that is eternal, this temporary, written in Tables of stone; The thirst after
Christ which the Covenant of Nature does stir up in man, is allayed by the
application of Christ either in the Promise, or in the Gospel: but the thirst
which the old Covenant stirred up, could not be allayed, but by the coming of
Christ in the flesh.

With the Covenant of Grace it agrees, that the Author of both is God, both
contracted with man a sinner: both does show sin: both restrain from sin:
both lead to Christ: both the Symbol of the Church: both made by a Mediator,
and life promised in both. They differ in these, that in the Covenant
subservient, God is considered as reproving sin, and approving
righteousness: in the Covenant of Grace, as pardoning sin, and renewing man
in righteousness; the stipulation of the old Covenant is, Do this and live:
Gal. 3. 12. Of the New, Believe, and thou shall not come into judgment. Joh.
3. 18. The Old Testament was added to the Promise of Grace, which went before.
Gal. 3. 16, 17. and shows sin not primarily, but by experience of humane
weakness in keeping Covenant. But the Covenant of Grace does this primarily,
for it teaches expressly that all men are sinners. Romans 3. 9, 23. and that
his happiness does consist in the remission of sins. Romans 4. 6. The old
Covenant did restrain from sin by compulsion. Romans 7. 23. 24. the Covenant of
Grace with a free inclination of mind and soul. Romans 6. 12. The Covenant of
Grace leads to Christ directly: the old Covenant indirectly. The old Covenant
is the carnal Symbol of the Church of the Jews, the new Covenant a
spiritual Symbol of the Church both of Jews and Gentiles. Moses is the
Mediator of the old Covenant: Christ God and man Mediator of the new. In the
old Covenant is given the spirit of bondage; but the Spirit of Adoption in the
new. Romans 8. 15. The old Covenant was a mean to the end: the new the end it
self. The old Covenant did terrify the consciences: the new does comfort: Man
a sinner fallen a sleep is the object of the old Covenant: the conscience
terrified with sin the object of the new. The old Covenant showed the manner
of worshipping God, but gave not ability: the new Covenant does both. The old
Covenant was an handwriting against us. Col. 2. 14. the new an easy yoke.
Matthew. 11. 28. The old Covenant was from Mount Sinai. Heb. 12. 18. the new from
Sion heavenly, amiable and pleasant. Psalm. 2. 6. The old Covenant excludes the
Gentiles: the new admits them. The old promises life in Canaan: the new in
Heaven. But not to examine these things particularly, by this explication it
appears, the Divines of this opinion, make the old Covenant differ from the
new in substance, and kind, and not in degree of manifestation, as also did the
former.

Most Divines hold the old and new Covenant to be one in substance and kind, to
differ only in degrees: but in setting down the differences they speak so
obscurely, that it is hard to find how they consent with themselves. For most
commonly they distinguish them thus: The old Testament promises life to them
that obey the Law, and condemns all not perfectly conformable: the new does
freely pardon sins, and give Salvation to them that believe in Christ. The
old was written by the finger of God in tables of stone: the new by the Spirit
of God in the fleshie tables of the heart. The old was the ministry of death,
a killing letter: the new the ministry of the quickening Spirit. The old did
lay upon the necks of the Fathers an intolerable yoke of rites and
commandments: the new does impose the easy yoke of the Spirit, enduing us
with the Spirit of Adoption and liberty of the Sons of God. The old does
involve the Doctrine of the Grace of the Messiah under the shadows of types
and rites: the new does contain the fulfilling of the tipes and figures. Moses
is the typical Mediator of the Old Testament: Christ is the true Mediator of
the New. The old is sealed by the blood of Sacrifices: the new is ratified by
the blood of the Mediator the and death of the Testatour. The Old by oblations
did not pacify the wrath of God, nor purge the conscience: the new contains
the true propitiation in the blood of Christ. The old was imperfect,
intolerable, weak, and therefore to be abolished: the new perfect, easy, and to
continue for ever, etc. with other the like before mentioned. And many things
herein are spoken truly, but how all these differences should stand, if they be
not Covenants opposite in kind, it is not easy to understand. Some few have
labored to reconcile them one of these two wais. First that the Old Testament
does promise life eternal plainly under the condition of moral obedience
perfect, that is under a condition altogether unpossible, together with an
heavy burden of legal rites and an yoke of most strict policy, but covertly
under the condition of repentance and faith in the Messiah to come prefigured
by tipes and ceremonies, that by this form of doctrine, worship and policy, a
proud, gross, and stiff-necked people might be more tamed, and convinced of
their own unrighteousness: and that by such a pedagogue they might be led to
Christ, who was more obscurely manifested under those shadows. The second is,
By a distinction of Moses his proposition of the Law from God unto that people:
which (as they would) is done either with exaction of perfect obedience
deserving eternal life, and threatening eternal curse to all that continue not
in every thing of the book of the Law to do it, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. or in a
comfortable moderation and (...) promising blessings to those who do what they
can to perform it. The first is a perfect and exact draught of the Law of
prime nature: the second a ^erswasion and encouragement to corrupt nature to
stir up the relics of power and the Image of God upon hope of future good.
The first is propounded to all mankind, this to the Church, though others, take
benefit by it. In the first the Law breaths nothing but wrath to fallen nature,
for that has no grace nor mercy, Joh. 1. 17. In the second Moses speaks
Gospel to the Israelites, for the outward happiness of particulars, and the
prosperity of the whole. The first and rigid proposition is of the Moral Law
alone, and as it was contained in the first writing, Exodus 20. The second is
laid down in Moses whole frame and economy to that people. The first stands
in full opposition to the Covenant of Grace, containing a perfect Covenant of
works: but the second is and may be subordinate to the Covenant of Grace, as
will appear. And this distinction (as they conceive) is further strengthened
by the preparation unto the first delivery, Exodus 19. and what strictness was
there required in the people to prepare themselves for their persons, and what
a strait charge was given not to come near the Mount, least they die, Verse.
12. in the delivery what terrible voices, lightnings, thunders, fire, etc. with
the quaking of the earth, so that neither Priest nor people must come near
least they should be consumed of wrath in the giving of the Law, which when the
people heard and saw, they could not endure, but desired Moses to be Mediator
betwixt God and them, least if they should hear God, they should die: which
was the ground of that Aphorism, Who ever saw God and lived; yea such was the
terror that Moses himself said, I fear and quake, Heb. 12. 21. Thus the
Moral Law was first given by God: but not written till the second going up,
Exodus 24. 12. where God promises to find the tables, and write in them with
his own finger: and such was the fear of the second delivery, that Moses was
glad to lenifie the former by reading the judicialls, which he had writ, and to
offer sacrifice.

And thus Moses goes up the second time, and receives the two tables tarrying
there forty days. Whilst Moses stayed the people brake the Covenant by
Idolatry. God sent Moses down, and by wise providence so ordered, that Moses
brake the Tables of the Covenant; and now was all dashed, and Moses to begin
again to mediate for this sin in Aaron and the people, Exodus 32. 19. Deuteronomy.
9. Hitherto in the delivery and writing of the Law Moral thunders nothing but
wrath: and the more Law, the less obedience, till the Law was veiled and
shadowed from them in the curse of it. Moses having thus travailed and broken
those bare and open Tables, wherein was curse and plague with open face
painted, he is called up again. Exodus 34. Deuteronomy. 2. 1. but consider with what
alteration. For first Moses now must hew the Tables, God would not deal with
that, signifying that he would have the Mediator Moses to have more to do
with the delivery of the second writing then at the first, which was the
prologue to the lenifying of the Law, wherewith man had to do. 2. Moses must
bring the Tables up, and God would write the words before written, which showed
that God could not, nor would not alter the Law, which was a perfect draught of
the first Law imprinted in Adam. 3. Consider that here was no preparation, nor
any terror of wonders, but a soft breath of God in this passage, noting this,
that God had sufficiently thundered wrath in the former delivery, and now seeks
to cover it that the people might hear and obey. 4. Moses must provide an Arc
to cover the Tables, which was not only for the safe keeping of the Tables, but
to cover the wrath and curse, that the people should not see it, which was the
first veil. 5. We do not read that ever the Lord would have either the
people or Priest to read these words out of stone, but as they were mollifyed
by Moses his transcription, in his books especially; wherein Prince and people
were to read the duties of the Covenant and the promises. No more tables,
there they are, but deal not with them, there is wrath at the first opening:
which was the reason why God smote the men of Bethshemesh with such a
slaughter, because they durst look into, and read upon these tables of the
Ark of the Lord, 1 Samuel 6. 19. 6. We read that God, Exodus 34. 5. when Moses
was standing before the Lord with his prepared tables, the Lord descended, and
proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord, and said. The Lord God merciful and gracious,
long suffering and abundant in mercy and truth, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. Thus the Lord would take away the edge of the curse,
though he would write it for ends unmentioned. Then the Lord upon the Mount
rehearsed the Covenant of grace with Israel, and causes Moses the Mediator to
write it, Exodus 34. 27. And now he had in his hand both the Covenant of works
and of grace, the one hid in the Arc, the other open in his hand: the same
Commandments, but the one with wrath, the other lenified by God. 7. When Moses
came down this appearance of God had changed the skin of his face, that he was
glad to put a veil upon him, for otherwise the people could not, nay durst not
behold him, but ran from him, as at first from God, when he delivered the Law
upon Mount (...), which God would have for the very same end, Moses his shining
face signifying the curse and wrath of God in the Law, as a mere draught of
the Covenant of works, which the people could not behold, his veil
signifying the covering of this curse from the eyes of Israel. 8. Consider that
till the Law as a mee^e draught of natures Law was marked and thus veiled at
Moses his proposition of the remedy unto these carnal Israelites, in the blood
of the sacrifices, writ in the Ceremonial Law, it could not quiet them, nor
pacify their consciences. 9. Observe this one thing further, that Moses in the
five books does so shun this rigid proposition of the Law, that the Apostle
when he came to deal with the false Apostles about this acceptance of the Law
as standing full against the Covenant of Grace and Justification by faith,
could find but two testimonies in all Moses, which necessarily convinced this
manner of propounding the Law, the one, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. the other, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
But because this end of the vailing of Moses his face, as tending to signify
the curse of the Moral Law, and the vailing of it from the eyes of carnal
Israel is called into question by some of prized judgment, and that from the
passage of 2 Cor. 3. they spend one proposition in clearing that place to prove
that it was the vailing of the Moral Law in the Curse. For first say they, it
could not be the vailing of the blood of Christ in the Ceremonials; for the
Ceremonies was a sufficient veil to hide that, and to have put an other veil
had been against Gods love, who would have the people spiritual to look into
it for Salvation: one veil was sufficient to hide so precious a treasure. But
to the Text, it is plain in the beginning of the Chapter 2 Cor. 3. 3. that the
Apostle means the writing of the Law in their hearts, namely the Commandments
of the Moral Law by removing the Curse, that the heart may close in with it.
Secondly, Verse. 6. The ministry of the Spirit is opposed not to the Cloud of
Ceremonies, but to the letter of the Law Moral: for this kills, so did not
the Ceremony, but quickening his measure. Thirdly. Verse. 7. The Ministry of the
Gospel is opposed to that which was graven in stone, which was the Moral Law
only. Fourthly, Verse. 13. Moses his veil was put on when Moses was read, and
not the Ceremonial Law alone, as intending the vailing of the Curse of the
Moral Law. Fifthly, That which bears show is Verse. 14. where the Text faith,
that the veil was taken away in Christ. It is true that the Ceremonies were
removed in the coming of the substance, but is it not as true, and here meant,
that the curse o^ the Law was removed by the coming of Christ, and so the
veil made needless, Gal. 3. 13. But Verse. 15. the veil yet remains when
Moses is read, which cannot be the Ceremony vailing the blood of Christ, for
that is removed in act: for the Jews sacrifice not for want of an Altar: but
it is most true of the veil of the Moral Law to cover wrath. For as it was a
mercy to veil it to that people till Christ came, so it is now a judgment
Christ being come to shade it. For it might be, if seen, an accidental cause
to drive them to Jesus the Son of Mary for a Savior. But the knot lies in
the 18. verse, But we all etc. where it is thought, and strongly spoken, that
the veil signifies the Ceremonial Law. It is true there is a flat opposition
of Christian and Jew, the one with open face beholding Christ, the other not
daring to see the glory of the Lord in giving the Law. But all will be evident
if it be showed what is here meant by the Image of Christ, which we behold with
open face, which is not the blood of Christ veiled in the blood of the
Sacrifices, but the Law of God writ in his heart, (promised Jer. 31. 34.) as
the head, which is the new command of the Moral Law, set up for us as a glass
which behoulding by faith, we are changed into the same Image by the Spirit,
and now it will appear that the whole Chapter speaks of the Moral Law.

Another inforcement of this distinction is from the Apostle Gal. 3. where he
disputes against the Moral Law taken as a rigid draught of natures Law, unto
the 23. verse, for otherwise the Law had been no enemy unto him as a branch of
the Covenant of Grace: but at the 23. verse he disputes the good ends of it, as
propounded with Gods moderation. By the Law which we call the Moral Law, Moses
and Paul mean the mere draught of the Law of nature, as it has necessarily
affixed eternal life to the punctual performance, or eternal curse to the
disobeyers in the least title. For the Law is complexum quiddam, containing in
it command* and blessing and cursing. Take command without blessing or cursing,
and it is no more Law with Moses: take simpl^ denu^ciation of blessing and
curse from command, and then it is threatening and promise, but no Law.

This abstract of the Law here considered from the rest of Moses his O^conomy
is pure Law flashing wrath upon the fallen creature, and therefore called a
fiery Law, or fire of Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. And for special cause expressed in
general by the Apostle, Gal. 3. The Law, that is thus abstracted, was added,
because of transgression. For first, in that long course of time betwixt Adam*
and Moses, men had forgotten what was sin, and had obliterated the very Law
of nature. Therefore God sets out the lively Image of it by Moses in this
draught and abstract, to which end, all the commands saving two are propounded
in the negative, that so men by the Church might know the nature of sin
again, Romans 3. 19.

Secondly, God propounds the Law with curse eternal to work death, and to show
Gods eternal displeasure against sin, Romans 4. 15. which was useful not only
to the world and wicked in general, but specially to the stiff-necked and
refractory Nation, to be as a rod to scourge all their rebellions and
backslidings. The Law thus laced with blessings and cursings eternal,
abstracted from the rest of his frame, makes Moses now to begin to breath
blessings, and no less then Gospel. This coming from a pacified God (as Exodus
33. 6, 7, 8.) may be looked on by the fallen creature with comfort, and from
this consideration it is that we affirm this Covenant made with the body of
Israel to be a Covenant of Grace: for it is one, and therefore never by Moses
called Covenants.

Again, It cannot be denied, that so far as it concerned the spiritual
I^raelite (whom God especially eyed and for their sakes infolded the carnal in
the compact) it was a Covenant. Thus far for confirmation of that
distinction. But these distinctions seem not to remove the doubt. Not the
first, because it cannot be conceived how the old Covenant should as a
condition of the Covenant, exact perfect obedience deserving life as necessary
to Salvation, and yet promise pardon to the repentant believer: for these two
are contrary the one to the other. Not the second, because the Covenant that
God made with the Jews is but one, and how should we conceive the Law in one,
and the same Covenant to be propounded as a rigid draught of prime nature, and
with moderation also, as the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace
likewise, when the Covenant is but one, and the conditions the same. Besides,
where the Apostles do oppose the Law and Gospel, or the old and new Testament,
not only the Moral Law, as it was given upon Mount Sinai, but the whole Jewi^h
Pedagogie, or Law of Moses is understood, as it is manifest in sundry passages.
Other things to be observed in that explication I will not insi^t upon at this
present, because they will come to be touched hereafter, as we pass along. The
Law was never given or made positive without the Gospel, neither is the Gospel
now without the Law, although the old Testament be* usually called the Law, and
the new the Gospel: because the Law is predominant in the one, and the Gospel
in the other. Exodus 19. 4, 5.


Some Divines hold the old Testament, even the Law, as it was given upon Mount
Sinai, to be the Covenant of Grace for substance, though propounded in a manner
fitting to the state of that people, time and condition of the Church. It was
so delivered as it might serve to discover sin, drive the Jews to deny
themselves and ^lie to the mercy of God revealed in Jesus: but it was given to
be a rule of life to a people in Covenant, directing them how to walk before
God in holiness and righteousness, that they might inherit the promises of
grace and mercy. This I take to be the truth, and it may be confirmed by many
and strong reasons out of the word of God. As first, by the contract of that
spiritual marriage a little before the promulgation of the Law, described in
these words: Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you
on Eagles wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore if ye will obey my
voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. These are the words which thou shall
speak unto the children of Israel: whereunto the Prophet Jer. 11. 2, 3, 4.
Jeremiah has reference, saying, Hear ye the words of this Covenant, and
speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and say thou
unto them, thus says the Lord Deuteronomy. 4. 13. 1 King. 8. 21. 2 King. 23. 2. Book
of the Covenant, Ex.
God of Israel, Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant,
which I commanded your Fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the
Land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying obey my voice and do them,
according to all which 24. 7. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. and 5. 2. and 9. 9. Jer. 3. 16. Hos.
8. 1. Jer. 7. 23. 2 Chro. 6. 11. Ex. 34. 27, 28. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. Romans 5. 10*
I command you, so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God. And this
without doubt is to be understood of the Decalogue, as it was given upon Mount
Sinai, seeing Moses himself does in express words testify it. God himself
(says he) declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to perform,
even ten words, and he wrote them upon two tables of stone. In these passages
observe, that the Law is called a Covenant, as it is often els-where the
Covenant of the Lord. What Covenant, but of grace and mercy? even that wherein
God promises to be their God, and take them to be his people, if they obey his
commandments. For since the fall of Adam, the Covenant which the Lord has
entered into with his people, was ever free and gracious: For when all men are
sinners by nature, dead in trespasses, and enemies to God, how can a Covenant
betwixt God and man be stricken without forgiveness of former transgressions?
If in the state of innocence perfect obedience should have been rewarded with
life from justice: now that man is fallen by transgression, Chald. Paraph.
(...), 1 Pet. 2. 5. and (...). Sept. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Exodus 19. 5. Onkelos, Reges
and sacerdotes and multitudo regum and sacerd^tum. Regiae potestatis est
praevalere apud Deu^, and res illas ab illo au^erre, quaru^ nulla pridem
facultas suit. D Simo^. log. c. 10. Basil. 1527. R Sal^m* R. Abrah. R. David.
(...). Sept. (...). Vox Segulah significat rem* quandam a^ct a^ and charam,
five thesaurus fuerit, ^ive res alia qu^cunque.
perfect obedience cannot merit forgiveness of sins past, purchase Gods favor
being justly displeased for sin, and deserve everlasting life. When the wicked
and their best works are an abomination to the Lord, it cannot be imagined,
that any Covenant should pass betwixt God and man a sinner, wicked, ungodly,
miserable, but in and through a Mediator.

It was such a Covenant whereby the spiritual seed was made a Kingdom of
Priests, an holy Nation, and a peculiar treasure unto the Lord. The word
Segullah signifies ones own proper good, which he loves, and keeps in store
for himself, for his special use: a rare and exquisite treasure; a thing
desired, dear and singular or proper to a man himself. The Hebrew Logicians
call their fifth predicable, Segullah: Others interpret the word, a beloved
treasure, a glorious thing and to be desired, an holy treasure, a treasure
which has both magnificence, splendor and ornament, Eccles. 2. 8. the
peculiar treasure of Kings. Aquila renders it substance: Sym: treasure, or
peculiar substance, the Septuagint, plenty of riches, so as it does import
multitude or great abundance: Vatablus, a treasure entirely beloved, 1 Chronicles.
29. 3. I have of mine own proper good, of gold; of my proper goods of
excellency, that which was most dear unto me; of gold most pure and refined,
that which is chosen and laid up in a treasury. A peculiar people then is a
people entirely beloved of the Lord, which is proper to him, the possession
whereof pertaines to none other, which he lays up (as it were) in his
treasure, Exodus 19. 5. The Chaldee Paraphrast renders it, ye shall be beloved
before me. Theod^t. a chief, special, or excellent people: and so Deuteronomy. 26.
18. The Paraphrast has it, he chose to himself Israel his beloved, and in
other places. And so other Hebricians, Segullah signifies, that they should be
beloved before him, as a desirable treasure, which Le^ Judah, peculium. Vata^l.
ut thesaurus unice dilectus prae cu^ctis populis. Theod. (...). Sept. (...).
or, abundantia. abundant a^te^ ornamenta, quae sunt pretiosa, itaque recondunt
etiam, etc. (...), Tit. 2. ^4. (...), 1 Pet. 2. 9.
a King delivers not into the hands of any of his officers, but keeps to
himself. R. Menachen in Exodus 19. Mal. 3. 17. The Greek translation turns it,
a people for peculiar possession. Aqu. a peculiar people, dear and precious,
which he will not part withal. In the new Testament both expressions are used:
for Paul calls them a peculiar people: Peter, a people for peculiar
possession, which God does challenge as proper to himself. Vulg. Populus
acquisitionis, Ephesians. 1. 14. This was the privilege of the Jew, which he
obtained by this Covenant, and it is often mentioned to the praise of Gods
free grace and love toward them, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. and 26. 18. The Lord
has chosen Jacob unto himself: Israel, for his peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135
4. But this privilege they could never obtain by the Covenant of works: by it
they could never have been a Kingdom of Priests, or a peculiar people: they
could never have obtained the adoption, or have inherited the Kingdom of
Heaven. These are privileges vouchsafed of mere grace in Jesus Christ, in
whom we are adopted, and made Kings and Priests unto God. Calv. I^stit. lib. 2.
ca. 7. Sect. 7. Romans 9. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Revel. 1. 5. and 5. 10. Exodus ^0. ^.


Secondly, in the promulgation of the Law, the Lord proclaims himself to be
the God of Israel, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Some hold these words to be
the affirmative part of the Commandment, in which the Gospel is preached, and
the promises contained therein offered. Others, that it is a Preface to the
whole Law, or prefixed as a reason to persuade obedience to the first
Commandment. But universally all acknowledge them to be the free Covenant,
which promises pardon of sin, and requires Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
faith in the M^ssiah. God is the God of all creatures, because he made and
does conserve all: but by peculiar right he is the God of his Church, because
he has chosen it to be heir of his Kingdom: whence the people are said to be
blessed, that have God for their God. The Covenant of grace is expressed in
these Psalm. 33. 12. and 144. 15.
words, I will be thy God and thou shall be my people: Wherein God promises to
be favorable to the iniquity of his servants, and to remember their sins no
more: and to bless them with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things. When
God then says to Israel, Jer. 31. 33. and 32. 3^. Ezekiel ^^ 20.
I am your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt; does he not
propound himself as their King, Judge', Savior and Redeemer: Spiritual
Redeemer from the bondage of sin and Satan, whereof that temporal deliverance
was a type. And although Hemming. Syntag. Decal.
there be no express mention of a Mediator in the Law, yet it is included in
the word of promise, I am thy God. From Evangelicall promises, and the
remembrance of them, and a late type, the Lord makes beginning, when he gave
his Law. And it is further to be noted, that as these words, I am the Lord thy
God, are prefixed to the first Commandment in the Law, so are they annexed
Levit. 19. 4, 6, 11, 12, 16, 30, 31, 32, 37. Levit. 18. 5.
to all others in sundry places of Scripture, as an argument to move to sincere
obedience. Least the Jews should fear (as it comes to pass in doubtful
matters) they hear that the rule of life is prescribed unto them of the true
and only God, who is theirs by Covenant. Least diffidence should make them
slack, God comes familiarly, and commends his gracious Covenant unto them. The
reason from all this is plain, that Covenant wherein the Lord promises, or
proclaims himself to be the God of Israel, is the Covenant of grace, which
God made with Israel. But in giving the Law upon Mount Sinai God promised, and
proclaimed himself to be the God of Israel.

Thirdly, Christ our Savior thus recites the first Commandment, Hear O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, therefore Mark ^2. 29. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. And Moses in the
explication of the Decalogue condemns incredulity, saying, Deuteronomy* 6. 16. Exodus
17. 7.
Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah; for there
they tempted God by incredulity. Where it is most apparent, that in this first
Precept we are enjoined to take God to be our God, to choose him to be our
portion, to cleave unto him, to trust in him as our only Savior. And it can
hardly be questioned, whether that Covenant wherein we are bound to take God to
be our Father, King and Savior be the Covenant of grace or no? And by the same
reason it is manifest, that the Law requires faith as well as love and
obedience, and does build these upon it as a foundation. It prescribes faith
in the first place, and throughout, namely that we acknowledge God the
Lawgiver, to be the Lord our God, the only true God, and testify that faith
unto him, by an universal and uniforme obedience to that whole Law and every
title thereof. The Law was given for this end, that it might instruct us in
faith, which is the mother of a good conscience and of love. Christ and faith
is the end and soul of the Law, not understood of the Jews. The sum of the
Law is faith or love, and both these carry the same sense, because though Moses
Romans 10. 4. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Calv. on Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Romans 14. 23.
make mention of love, and Paul of faith, yet that love does comprehend faith,
and this faith does contain love. Certainly, Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, even all works, though good in show, and for substance seeming agreeable
to the rule of the Law, if they issue not from faith, they are vain and
hypocritical, if they be not quickened and enlivened by faith, they are but the
carcass of a good work. And then if God command not faith in the Law in some
sort, why does he command other things, which without it are frivolous? Our
best works are unsavory before God, if they be not seasoned with faith: For
without Heb. 11. 6.
faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore the Lord in Covenant
commanding the observation of his Law, exacteth faith also, without which the
Law cannot be obeyed in an acceptable manner. For when the Law is spiritual,
and commands true worship and invocation, how can it be observed without
faith? Would the Lord have the Israelites remaining in infidelity to observe
the Law? Or did he ever allow man since the fall of Adam, to come or have
access unto him, but only in the name of a Mediator? Or was life and
salvation ever promised to man since the fall, but upon condition of faith in
the Messiah? Indeed the condition of obedience, which God requires and man
promises, is the chiefest thing urged in the Law: but free and gracious
pardon, wherein consists the happiness of the Saints is therein promised and
proclaimed. They under the old Testament lightly following the letter, mistook
the meaning, not looking to the end of that which was to be abolished,
whereunto Moses had an eye under the veil. For they perceived not so well the
grace intended by the legal Testament, which the perfection of the moral Law,
whereof they could not but fail, should have forced them to seek; and the
imperfection of the typical Law, which made nothing perfect, should have led
them to find: but they generally rested in the work done, as was commanded by
either Law, when as themselves were unable to do the one, and the other was in
it self as unsufficient to help them.

Fourthly, after the giving of the Law a Covenant betwixt God and Israel was
established by mutual and willing consent, Deuteronomy. 4. 31. Exodus 24. 3, 4.
the people promising to obey and do whatsoever the Lord commanded. In the
Land of Moab Moses was commanded by the Deuteronomy. 29. 1, 9.
Lord to make a Covenannt with the children of Israel, beside the Covenant
which he made with them in Horeb. This Covenant they entered into was the same
that God made with them upon Mount Sinai, even the same that did contain the
blessings and curses before pronounced. But this Covenant was a Covenant of
Grace, not of works: for God never commanded his people, that he might set them
on high above all people of the earth, and that they might be an holy people
unto him, to avouch him to be their God by a Covenant of works: Moses would
Deuteronomy. 29. 12.
never have exhorted the people by Oath to bind themselves unto the Lord in a
Covenant of works: for that had been to bind themselves unto the most dreadful
curses, whereas they were to enter into this Covenant that they might prosper
in all that they Deuteronomy. 29. 9.
do. That Covenant is of Grace, wherein the good things promised are all free
and gracious: but it was of grace that God promised Deuteronomy. 7. 12. 2 Chro. 6. 14.
to be the God of Israel: and therefore the Lord, when he keeps Covenant with
Israel, is said to keep the mercy which he swore unto their Fathers, and when
he established them for a people unto himself, and is their God, he is said to
perform the Oath, which he swore unto their Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and
to Jacob. Deuteronomy. 29. 13.


The Legal Covenant or Covenant of works cannot be renewed after it is once
broken, seeing it admits not repentance of sin past, but exacts perfect
and perpetual obedience. But this Covenant made with the Israelites might be
renewed after transgression, did admit repentance; When thou art in
tribulation, and Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31.
all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn
to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto his voice: (for the Lord thy
God is a merciful God) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the Covenant of thy Fathers, which he swore unto See Deuteronomy. 30. 1, 2, 3.
1 Ki. 8. 34, 35. Psalm. 106. 45. Eze. 16. 61, 6^. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. Romans
10. 6, 7.
them. And if the Covenant after transgression may be renewed, it is of grace.
The Law which is written in the heart of the spiritual seed is part of the
Covenant of grace: for the righteousness of faith speaks on this wise; This
Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither
is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it.
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the
sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? But the
word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may
do it. But the Law given by Moses is engraven in the heart of the spiritual
Isai. 51. 7. Psalm. 37 31.
seed, or people effectually in Covenant, as they are called a people in whose
heart is the Law. No man will deny the Covenant which God keeps with them
that love him and keep his Commandments, to be the Covenant of Grace. But the
Covenant which Israel entered into, is that which the Lord Dan. 9 4. Nehem. 1.
5. Deuteronomy. 7. 12.
keeps with them that love him, and keep his Commandments.

Fifthly, the godly Kings and people of Israel repenting of their
transgressions and sins committed against God, did oftentimes Josh. 24. 22,
23, 24, 25. Judge. 10. 16. 1 Samuel, 7. 3, 4, 5. 2 Chro. 15. 12. 2 Kin. 11. 17. 2
Chro. 23 16. 2 Ki. 23. 3. Neh. 10. 30, 31. 2 Chro. 34. 31.
renew their Covenant, binding themselves to the Lord to be his people, and to
walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, and to observe and do all the
Commandments of God the the Lord, and his Judgments, and his Statutes, with
all their heart, and with all their soul. But Jehoshaphat, Josiah, Nehemiah,
and other godly Governors, who were well acquainted with their infirmities,
and knew themselves utterly unable to fulfill the Law, would never promise
punctual and exact obedience, in hope thereby to deserve eternal life, or to
receive it from God as the reward of their perfect service: nor flatter
themselves as though they could stand before the Tribunal of Gods Justice in
their own Righteousness, when upon proof sufficient they saw, that no flesh
could be justified in his sight. Without question, they understood, that God of
his free grace had promised to be their God, and of his undeserved and rich
mercy would accept of their willing and sincere obedience, though weak and
imperfect in degree; which is in effect, that the Covenant which God made with
them, and they renewed was a Covenant of grace and peace, the same for
substance that is made with the faithful in Christ in time of the Gospel.

Sixthly, the Covenant that God made with Abraham was the Genesis 17. 1.
Covenant of grace, as it is acknowledged: but the Covenant made with Abraham
is for substance the same with the Covenant made with Israel upon Mount Sinai:
the promise is the same, and the things required the same. For in that God
promised that he would be God all-sufficient to Abraham, to bless him with all
necessary blessings for this life, and the life to come. In Gal. 3. 8.
this he promises freely and of his own mere grace and favor to be their
God, and make them a Kingdom of Priests and an Exodus 19. 6, 7.
holy nation unto himself. In that he requires of Abraham, that he walk with
or before him in integrity: In this he covenanteth, that they should obey his
voice, and keep his commandments. Deu. 26. 17, 18. Jer. 7. 23. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
Jer. 11 3, 4. 1 Ki. 8. 25. 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. 2 Chr. 17. 3, 6. 2 Chr. 6. 14, 16.
Jer. 2. 2.
And what is it to walk with God or before God, but to walk in his Law.

Seventhly, when God gave his Law unto Israel upon Mount Sinai, he
troth-plighted that people unto himself, and himself unto them, and that of
his mere love, not of any merit in them. Thus says the Lord, I remember thee,
the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown: Israel was holiness
unto the Lord, and Ezekiel. 16. 8.
the first fruits of his increase. When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee,
behold thy time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into Covenant with
thee, says the Lord God, and thou becammest mine. But if the Law were a
perfect draught of the Law of nature, Rainold Apol. These. page 211. 1 Timothy 1.
5. Act. 15. 9. Romans 10. 4. Gal. 3. 24. Christum vocat finem i. scopum legis;
quia lex sues sacrificiis, ritibus, etc. Christum intendebat. Zanch de Redem
cap. 11. These. 5. li. 1. The Decalogue written with Gods own hand upon two
tables, was an Epitome of all Ordinances appertaining to the Covenant.
exacting punctual obedience in the least jot and title, as necessary to
Salvation, and flashing out wrath against the least transgression, without any
intimation of repentance, or hope of pardon, the Lord did not at that time
troth-plight himself unto them.

Eighthly, the Law requires faith as well as love and obedience, and does
build these upon it as a foundation. For the end of the Commandment is love,
love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. That love
which the Law requires, either toward God or toward man, must flow from a
pure heart, and faith it is that purifieth the heart. Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness sake, and the Law is a Schoolmasters to bring us unto
Christ. But bring us unto Christ it could not, if it did not point him out unto
us, or presuppose him as promised: He is not the end of the Law, if the Law did
not direct to him, and require faith in him. He is the end of the Law, as the
Law leads and drives us out of our selves, and from all confidence in any
works of the Law, that by faith in Christ we might obtain righteousness. It is
not the property of a Schoolmasters to beat and strike, and not to direct or
teach. That the ceremonies of the Law did prefigure Christ, direct unto him,
and require faith in him, is a thing Exo. 34, 27, 28.
confessed and acknowledged of all men. Now the ceremonies are appendices of
the Law, especially of the first and second Commandments, Exodus 24. 8. Heb. 9.
19, 20, 23. Pigh^disp. Ratisp l. 2.
as they were given to the Israelites. And if they require faith in the
Redeemer to come, how should we think it to be a thing passed over in silence
altogether in the Law. The deliverance of the children of Israel out of Egypt,
was a type of our spiritual deliverance from the bondage of sin and Satan,
by the power of Christ; as appears by the Ceremony and Sacrament of that
corporal deliverance, the Passover, which was a Joh. 19. 36. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
figure of Christ our Savior. Therefore in the first Precept the Mystery of
our Redemption by Christ is taught and contained. That particular mercy
mentioned in that Precept, taught the Israelites to expect spiritual Salvation
in the Messiah promised. In Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 119. 1, 2.
Scripture they are pronounced blessed, who keep the Commandments, and observe
the Statutes and Judgments of the Lord: but withal their blessedness is said
to consist in this, that God Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
imputes not sin unto them, that their sins be forgiven, and
transgressions covered. The true worshippers of God then are happy, not for
their works, but because God is pleased to accept them in Christ, and to pardon
their offenses. This is the true sense of those promises made to or spoken of
them that walk in the perfect way, and do none iniquity. And if life and
Salvation be promised to them that observe and keep the Statutes, Judgments
and Ordinances of the Lord, not for the dignity of the work, but through the
mere grace and mercy of God pardoning transgressions and sins, then is faith
in the Messiah taught and commanded in the Law. The true sense and meaning of
the Law is to be gathered out of the writings of the Prophets: for the same
Spirit that breathed the Law, informed them in what Jer. 4. 1, 2, 3. and 3. 13,
14. etc. Romans 3. 21, 22. The righteousness of the Law is testified by Moses
and the Prophets, etc. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and 31. 12.
sense the Law was given, and how to be understood. But by the Exposition of
the Prophets it is clear, that the Law as it was given by Moses did admit
repentance, and consequently, require faith in Christ. And if the Law did not
command faith in Christ the Messiah, then might not the Jews believe in him:
for they were forbidden to add any thing thereto, or to take ought therefrom.
The Law was to the Jews a rule, according to which they ought both to live and
worship God, to which they might not add the least ^ot or title of their own
heads: so that either they must not worship, praise, pray unto and believe in
God in and through the Messiah, or else faith in him must necessarily be
required. The Decalogue, if we precisely consider the things expressed therein,
does not contain many things written of Moses: but as it was a sum and
abridgement of the whole Law, whereunto every particular must be referred, and
from which, as a fountain it was derived, it is a perfect rule whereunto
nothing might be added. And if without faith it be impossible to please God, or
to obtain Salvation, the Law which promises eternal life to them that keep
it, does require faith as well as love or obedience. For if faith be necessary
to Salvation, it cannot be that man a sinner should be justified, if he could
keep the Law: because he cannot by future works purchase Redemption from former
transgressions. And from all this it follows, that the Law as it was given to
the Jews, is for substance the Covenant of grace, or a rule according to which
the people in Covenant ought to walk. The Law is and ever was a rule of life
to men in Covenant. Matt. 5. 18. One jot or title of the Law shall in no wise
pass, till all be fulfilled: fulfilled in respect of unpartiall and sincere
obedience, for of that our Savior speaks, as is manifest by the words
following, He that shall break the least of these Commandments, and teach men
so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven: except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; that is,
righteousness of habit and practice, which is that which the Law, as it is
taken in that place, required.

Many things are objected to the contrary, which must be cleared before we
pass further. As first, it will be said, that in the Law there is no mention
made of Christ, without which there is no faith. And what the Law reveals
not, that it commands not. But in the Law there is frequent mention of the
Messiah, and perpetual adumbration and representation of him, and Heb. ^0. ^^
and 8 5.
his oblation in washings and sacrifices. The Apostle Paul, where he
professedly handles the chief heads of faith, to wit, that Christ ought to
suffer, and rise again from the dead, denies that he Act. 26. 23. 1 Cor. 15.
3, 4.
said any thing besides that which the Prophets and Moses did foretell should
come. And our Savior proved out of Moses, that he must first suffer, and then
enter into glory. And no marvel, Luke 24. 27, 44
seeing Moses by diverse types and figures shadowed forth the death and
resurrection of Christ, as shall be showed after. But in the Decalogue there is
no mention of Christ. Neither is Moses vvrote of Christ, Act. 3. 2^. and 7. 37.
Joh. 1. 45. that they should believe in him. Joh. 5. 4^. Many Prophets and just
men desired to see his days, Mat. 13. 17. Luke 10. ^4. Iun. in Psalm. 122. ver.
4. Abraham rejoiced to see Christ. Joh. 8. 56. Gal. 6. 16.
that absolutely true. For when God says, he is their God, who delivered them
out of the Land of Egypt, does he not propound himself a Redeemer, a spiritual
Redeemer of them from the bondage of sin and Satan, whereof that deliverance
was a type? But he is not a Redeemer from spiritual bondage but in Christ.
Implicitly therefore in these words Christ is contained and proposed unto us,
which is done according to the condition of those times, wherein as yet all
things were infolded and wrapped up. And it cannot easily be imagined, how
Christ should be revealed in the Ceremonial Law, if there be no mention of him
express or implicit in these words. As the Moral Law does show and discover
sin, so was the Ceremonial Law as a bill or bond put into the hand of God,
whereby they did acknowledge themselves indebted to his Divine Majesty: and as
the Ceremonial Law was a Schoolmasters to point out and direct us unto
Christ: so was the Moral a rule of obedience to them that be in Covenant with
God: which of necessity does presuppose the revelation of Christ in some sort.
The Ninevites in the threatenings denounced against them by the Prophet Jonas
did apprehend a promise of mercy to be employed upon condition of their
repentance: which promise was made in Christ. And is it any marvel then we
should affirm, the knowledge of Christ to be manifested in some sort, in those
words of the Law: if we consider the words of the Law, it does command that we
love God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves: but if we search out the
meaning of the words, we shall find it to be such a love as proceeds from
faith; and from what faith, but in the Messiah? That is the foundation upon
which all works of love are builded. In faith it self or with it, there is a
motion of the soul toward, or a desire of the heart to obtain the good
promised, joined with an hatred of sin and wickedness, which may be called
inchoate love: but true, sound, entire love, whereby we affect God as our
Father most nearly conjoined to us, and reverence him as the fountain of all
good things and benefits, which of his mere grace he conferreth upon the
children of his love, and we daily expect from him, even such as accompany life
and salvation: this is the effect of faith, and follows the apprehension and
habitation of Christ in the heart.

Faith in Christ is not commanded in the Moral Law as it was engraven in the
heart of Adam in the state of innocence: but as it was given to Israel, to be a
rule of life to a people in Covenant, it was presupposed or commanded. For the
general substance of duty, the Law then delivered and formerly engraven in the
heart was one and the same: but not in respect of the subject by whom, the
object to whom, or the grounds whereupon obedience was required. Confidence in
God was required of Adam by the Law of nature written in his heart. Confidence
in God through Christ or the Messiah was required of the Israelites by the Law
published upon the Mount. Adam was to perform obedience to the Lord
immediately without a Mediator, being himself pure and innocent. But the
Israelites being in themselves sinner^. ^ould not in their own names perform
service pleasing and acceptable unto the Lord. Adam knew he was beloved of the
Lord, so long as he continued in obedience, but had no warrant to wait upon his
mercy, when he had broken the Covenant of works. But to the Israelites God
bound himself in Covenant upon Mount Sinai, promising to be their God, and
take them for his people, notwithstanding they were sinners in themselves,
which could not be without forgiveness: and this Covenant they might and did
renew by repentance after transgression. The Law is not to be confounded with
the Gospel, but the sacred and inviolable knot of the one with the other is to
be maintained, unless we shall make God contrary to himself.

The Law does not so directly and expressly teach faith in When Paul says,
Faith came by the Gospel: it is to be understood of the manner of propounding,
without the invvrappings of types: that the Doctrine was ^ taught plainly,
without types and figures. Romans 8. 3.
Christ, but require obedience, yet does it lead us to Christ, and more
obscurely command faith in him. The Gospel does more fully reveal Christ, and
the grace of God in him, commanding faith by name: but it does also urge,
press, and exact obedience. Thus sweetly do the Law and Gospel consent
together. But here it is to be noted, that faith is commanded in the Law, which
exacteth every thing that is good, but it is given to us, not by the Law, but
of the holy Ghost. The distinction of the Law and Gospel as they are opposed
one to another is clear and evident: but as the Law was given to the Jews it
is not opposite, but subordinate to the Gospel. The Law in it self considered
exacted perfection of works as the cause of life: but when that was impossible
to man by reason of the infirmity of his flesh, it pleased the Lord to make
known to his people by the ministry of Moses, that the Law was given, not to
detain men in confidence of their own works, but to lead them unto Christ.
Whatsoever the Law teaches, whatsoever it promises, whatsoever it commands,
always it has Christ for the scope thereof. For though the Law of
righteousness promise a reward to the keepers thereof; yet after it has shut
up all men under sin, it does substitute another righteousness in Christ,
which is received by faith, not purchased by the merit of works. And therefore
the Apostle does reprehend the Jews, as perverters of the true sense and
meaning Romans 10. 4, 5, 6, etc.
of the Law, when they sought to be justified by their works, and shows that
Moses taught them to look for Salvation in the Messiah, and seek for that
righteousness which is by faith* Whereby it is manifest, that the Law was
given (...) be a manuduction unto Christ, in whom we have Redemption from all
things, from which by the Law of Moses we could not be justified; and a rule to
the faithful according to which they must frame their conversation. For what
word was that which Moses says was near, even in their hearts, but the Law
which the Lord gave upon Mount Sinai, and promised to write in the hearts of
his people under the Covenant of Grace.

And from this ground it is not hard to answer what is further objected against
this truth, as, If faith be commanded in the Law, then being justified by
faith, we are justified by the works of the Law. For faith is not a work of the
Law nakedly and absolutely considered, as it exacteth perfect obedience of man
in his own person: but of the Law as it was given to the Jews, to direct them
unto Christ, who is the soul and life of the Law. And though it be commanded
in the Law, as it is in the Gospel or new Covenant, yet it justifies not as a
part of Regeneration, or an act of obedience and work of Grace by it worth or
dignity, but in respect of that office whereunto it is assigned of God, and as
it receives the promises of mercy. It is a s^phisticall form of reasoning to
say, Faith is commanded in the Gospel, therefore if we be justified by faith,
we are justified by the works of grace. The arguments are like, and both
faulty. For justification by faith in Christ is opposed to justification by
the works of the Law: because he only is justified before God by the Law, whose
acts being examined by the Law, are found just and righteous according to that
which the Law requires: but he is justified by faith, who being in himself
ungodly, believes in Christ for salvation. So that according to the Apostles
meaning, wheresoever faith be commanded, he is justified by faith without the
works of the Law, who is acquitted from sin by the mere and rich grace of God
in Jesus Christ received by faith: And to seek justification by works, is to
rest upon our works for salvation, as they that answer in all things to that
righteousness personal which the Law requires. Justification by faith, and
justification by works are opposite, and so is faith and works: but faith is
not opposed to one act commanded, whereby the promise is received, for then it
should be contrary to it self: but to works whereby the Law is fulfilled in
our own persons: to works I say, not to one work: because no one work can
justify, but all are necessary.

If it be said, the Apostle does every where oppose the Law and the Gospel, or
the old and new Testament. The answer is from the same ground; that in the
Scriptures of the new Testament, the Law as well Ceremonial as Moral is
opposed to faith or the Gospel: and yet the Ceremonies of the Law did prefigure
Christ, as all men acknowledge. Therefore the Apostle does not perpetually and
absolutely oppose the Law, and the Covenant of grace: for he teaches expressly,
that faith establishes Romans 3. 31.
the Law. For he understood the force and sentence of the Law to consist in
faith: but because the Jews addicted to the latter of the Law, did pretermit
the force and life of it, Paul proves the Law so taken and separated from
faith, to be the cause, not of life, but of death: as that which did not only
want Christ, who is the soul of the Law, but is opposite to him. And therefore
Paul does this, because the Jews, (faith being let pass.) did seek
righteousness in the dead works of the Law, and did oppose the Law to the
Gospel and Christ, who was the end and scope of the Law. This will be more
plain, if we shall examine the particular passages of Scripture, wherein this
matter is handled. The Apostle says, the Covenant from the Mount Sinai
gendreth to bondage, figured by Gal. 4. 24.
the bondwoman and her son, who were cast out of Abraham's Family. The
Apostle his argument may be drawn thus; the same proportion which Hagar the
handmaid had to Sarah her Mistress in Abraham's house, the same proportion
has the old Testament to the new, in the Church of God* the same proportion
which Hag^^s off ^pring had to Sarahs, the same proportion had the children of
the Law, that is, the Jerusalem which then was, unto the Jerusalem which is
above, that is, to the children of the Gospel or sons of promise. Now Hagar was
sometimes a visible and principal member of Abraham's family, a kind of second
wife to Abraham, and Ishmael her son was for a while Abraham's presumed heir:
yet after Hagar did begin to despise and contest with her Mistress Sarah, and
Ishmael to flout or persecute Isaac, Abraham's heir apparent and son of promise,
both mother and son were cast out of Abraham's house, and deprived of all hope
of inheritance in the Land of promise. Sarah bearing the type of the true
visible Church then on earth, did pronounce that sentence Genesis 21. 10.
of Excommunication against them; Cast out the bondwoman and her son, and
God ratifying in heaven what she had bound on earth, injoyns Abraham to put her
sentence in execution, Genesis 21. 12. The Covenant likewise which God made with
this people upon Hagar or Mount Si^^i, was ^s the be* trothing of Israel unto
himself. The Law of Moses, whilst it was lawfully used was the only Catechism
or Introduction, without which there was no entrance into the Church of God.
The children of this Covenant, did by virtue of it become the presumed heirs
or children of God. But when the deputed or nursing mother came once to contest
with the true Spouse of Christ, with the new Testament or Gospel: and after her
children, the Jerusalem which then was, began to persecute the children of the
Jerusalem, which is above; the mother with her children, that is, the Law with
such as sought to be under it, were cast out of the true visible Church, by the
Apostles, unto whom ou^ Savior had committed the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven. For it now stood in such opposition to the Gospel, as Hagar did to her
Mistress Sarah at the time when ^he and her son committed those misdemeanors,
for which both of them were cast out of Abraham's house. The Jerusalem which was
on earth, was sometimes, or in some part rather a consort than an opposite or
adversary to the Jerusalem which was above. So was the old Testament or Law,
and all such as lawfully used it, rather subordinate allies, then foes or
adversaries to the new Testament or heirs of promise. They that used the Law
as a Schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ, to them it was the Covenant of
grace for substance. Unto such as used the old Testament as they ought, only as
an Introduction to the new, there was indeed but one Testament: For as the
Schools speak, Vbi ^^um propter aliud, ibi ^^um tantu^. But such as rested in
the Law, and used it not as a pedagogie to Christ, but sought justification by
the observation of the Law Moral or Ceremonial, and opposed Christ the soul
of the Law, such were held under damnable b^^dage, and cut from Christ. And in
this sense the Covenant made upon Mount Sinai did beget children unto such
bondage, for which they ought to be cast out of the Family of God. And in this
sense the two dispositions differ, not only in circumstances, but in substance:
they be not only two, but opposite. By the way let it be observed, that by the
former Covenant upon Mount Sinai, is understood the Law given by Moses, both
Ceremonial consisting in diverse rites and commandments, and Moral, as the
Jews sought to be justified thereby, who refused Christ.

The Old Testament then and the New, are sometimes compared and considered by
sacred writers, as the thing including and included, the Husk and the Grain.
The Gospel before Christ's time, was in the Law as the Corn new set in the
^are. And the Law and the Gospel, and the two Testaments, thus considered, are
rather one than two, at least there is an unity of subordination betwixt them.
The same Testaments may be considered sometimes as abstracted or severed each
from other. Thus the Gospel or New Testament since our Saviors death and
resur^ection, is become as pure Corn, threshed and winnowed. The Old Testament
or Law (thus severed from it) remains only as the chafe or husk; If we thus
consider the Law or Old Testament, as the Jews embrace it, that is, altogether
severed from the new, to which alone we Christians adhere by faith, they are
not only two, but two opposites or contraries. This opposition or subordination
between the Legal and Evangelicall Testament is opened by the Apostle, saying,
If the first Covenant had been faultlesse, then should no place have been
sought for the second. F^r finding fault with them he says, Behold the days
come (says the Lord) when I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel,
and the Heb. 8. 7, 8, ^* 10. Jer. 31. 32, 3. ^
house of Judah: not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers,
in the day wh^^ I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the Land of
Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not says
the Lord. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord: I will put my Laws into their mind and
write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a people. But what Law was it, which the Lord promises to write in the
hearts of his people? was it not the Law given before by Moses? concerning
which also Moses expresses the same promise that Jeremy does; The Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart, and the Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Now that Law God himself had
delivered in writing, and commanded Moses Exodus 34. 1, 27.
also to write the same. Therefore the words of the Prophet as touching the
writing of Gods Law in our hearts, can import nothing but this, that the Laws
which were before by the ministry Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3.
of Moses delivered only in Ink and Paper, should by the power of the holy
Ghost, through the faith of Christ be wrought and written in the affections of
the heart: that God in Christ would not only administer outwardly the letter of
the Law, whether in writing or preaching, but would by the regeneration of the
Spirit, give grace inwardly to the obedience thereof. And as the Law written in
the tables of the heart, and engraven in tables of stone, is one for substance:
so is the new and the old Testament. The Law is not opposed to the Law: but the
writing to writing. Writing in tables of stone pertained to Moses or to the Old
Testament: writing in the heart to Christ, or the new Covenant. The Law is the
same, but otherwise administered in the hand of Christ, then in times past in
the hand of Moses. Moses gave the Law in tables of stone, but could not give
power or ability to do what the Law required: but Christ writes the Law in
the heart, and inableth the faithful in some measure to do what he
commands. And in the same place the Lord by the Prophet shows, that when he
made this Covenant with Jer. 31. 32.
the Fathers which they brake, he declared himself to be an husband unto them,
or joined himself in marriage unto them. But God never joined himself in
marriage unto a people, but by the Covenant of grace. It may be said the
Apostle shows the former Jer. 3. 14.
Covenant to be faulty, or that another Covenant was lacking. But that is not
mentioned to prove the Covenants to be two in substance opposite one to the
other: but because the first Testament did not contain the Image of the things
themselves, and therefore was not to be rested in, as if we could be justified
by Heb. 10. 1.
the works of the Law, or ceremonial observances annexed: but must be used as
an introduction to lead us unto Christ, who is the very Image of the things
themselves. This first Covenant therefore could not be fulfilled or effectual,
but by the bringing in of a second, which was prefigured thereby. For the blood
of Bulls and Goats was not availeable to purge away sin: but did prefigure
the blood of Christ, which is effectual to purge our consciences from dead
works. The blood of Bulls and of Goats, and Heb. 9. 13. 14.
the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying
of the flesh, sc. from a trespass merely committed against the Law of
Ceremonies: but the bloody sacrifice of our Lord and Savior Christ, whereof
the legal Sacrifices were tipes and shadows, was alone appointed of God, and
is effectual to cleanse us from all sins committed against the Moral Law of
God, and to purify us from such dead works, as, not expiated by his blood,
would bring forth everlasting death. Of necessity therefore the first Covenant,
because it is of grace, must bring forth a second, Joh. 1. 17. Joh. 5. 46.
in which is fulfilled that which in the first is prefigured. The Law was given
by Moses, and the righteousness of faith was taught by Moses, as our Savior
testifies. Why then does the Apostle in the words following add by way of
opposition, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ? The sense of the place
seems to be this, That the Law prefiguring Christ, and redemption in him, and
teaching and commanding what oug^^ to be done, but neither giving grace to do
it, not containing the substance of the thing prefigured, was given by Moses:
but grace to do what was commanded came from Christ, in whom also the
substance of what was prefigured by the Ceremonies, is fulfilled. But if the
Law of Moses sent the Jews to Christ, and directed them how to walk believing
in him, but of it self did not give grace or truth, of necessity it must make
known Christ 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 9. (...) or as some books have it: (...): Sir.
verba viva Ar. Serm^nem vivum.
in some sort, and command faith in him: which is proper to the Covenant of
grace. The Law is a killing letter (says the Apostle) and the ministration of
death and condemnation. But the same Law, which is called a dead or killing
letter, is styled a lively word, or lively oracles, that is, such as give life:
The words of Paul therefore are not to be understood absolutely of the Law, but
as it was Act. 7 38. Lev. 18, 5. Ezekiel. 20. 13. Neh. 9. 29.
separated from Christ and the Gospel, of men who did rest in the Law, and
sought to be justified by it: whereas Christ was the end of the Law, which the
Jews not perceiving, they erred from the truth, and perverted the true sense
and scope of the Law. For the ministry of Moses, as it is referred to the mind
and counsel of the Lord, is bright and illustrious: but the carnal people
could not behold that brightness, and therefore the Law is veiled to the
carnal Jew, that he cannot behold the light that shines therein. Even unto
this day, when Moses is read, the veil 2 Cor. 3. 15, 16.
is upon their heart. Nevertheless, when it shall turn unto the Lord, the
veil shall be taken away. That is, when Israel shall be turned unto the Lord,
the veil shall be taken away, that in the law it self they may see Christ,
whom now being blind by reason of their indurate mind, they could not fee. For
there was a double veil drawn over their eyes, the first of hatred against
Christ, the second of the Law it self, in which Christ was revealed, but not
so clearly as in the Gospel: which double veil shall be taken Isa. 25. 7.
Romans 4. 15. and 3. 20. and 7 9.
away, when they shall be converted unto Christ. The Law works wrath, and
discovers sin: yea reviveth it. What the Apostle speaks of the Law, in
these and other above rehearsed passages, is to be understood of the whole
Jewish pedagogie, viz. the Law Moral and Ceremonial as it was given by Moses.
And as here, the Law is said to work wrath, and terrify: so Psalm. 19. 7, 8,
9. and 119. 47.
elsewhere it is said to cause the soul to return, to enlighten the eyes. and
rejoice the heart. Of necessity for the reconciliation of these sayings of the
Prophet and Apostle in show contrary, it Beza in Romans 2. 27. Calv. in 2 Cor. 3.
17. Col. 2. 13. The ceremonies are visible words preaching Christ, and they
preached our guile, and wrath belonging unto us.
must be granted that the Law animated by Christ is pleasant and delightful,
but as it is barely considered in opposition to Christ and to the Gospel, as
it exacteth perfect obedience, but gives no ability or power to perform what
is required, it wounds, terrifieth, kills and works wrath.

Of the Law there is a twofold use and consideration. One as it is a rigid
exactor of entire obedience, and handwriting against us for sin, and thus of
it self barely considered, it wounds, but heals not, it reviveth sin,
but mortifieth it not. The other, as it points to Christ in whom Salvation is
to be found, and directs how to walk in all well-pleasing before the Lord:
and thus it is an easy yoke. The Law considered without Christ wounds,
kills and reviveth sin by reason of our Corruption: But the Law considered
in Christ, and as it points unto him, kills corruption, and converteth the
soul. In the Epistle to Gal. 3. 10, 17. Act. 7. 53. The law was give^ ad
ordinationes angeloru^, Sir and Ar per mandatum, as Romans 13. 2. as a son is
said to do, ad nutum patris: as (...) is used, Number. 16. 34 or secundum, juxta
o^dinationes, as (...) signifies, Genesis 1. 21 parallel to this are Gal. 3. 19.
Heb. 2. 2. The reason and truth of these sayings seem to be, that the Angel which
appeared to Moses in the bush, v. ^5. and was with him in the wilderness, v. 39.
did out of the midst of the Angels, which did on every side compass him about,
give the Law upon Mount Sinai, whereof the Sanctuary was a figure. (...) is the
same that decretum vigils.
the Galathians the Apostle opposes the Covenant of Grace to the Law in many
things; as that the Law accurseth every one that continues not in all things,
that are written in the book of the Law to do them: that it was four hundred
and thirty years after the Covenant, which was confirmed before of God in
Christ, etc. But it is to be remembered, that in those passages the Apostle
disputes against the Jews, who trusted in the works of the Law, and thought
by the blood of Bulls and Goats to be purged from their sins, or of them that
joined the Law with Christ in the matter of Justification, as if Justification
had been in part at least by the works of the Law; which the Apostle every
where condemns as contrary to the intent and purpose of the Lord in giving the
Law. The contrariety then of the Law or Old Testament, even of the Law as it
bears the figurative sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and so points us to
him, unto the new Testament, or Covenant of grace, is not in themselves, but in
the ignorance, pride and hardness of heart of them, who understood not, or did
pervert the right end of the Law, as if it was given for Justification. The Law
as it opposed to Christ, does accurse every one that continues not in all
things, that are written in the book of the Law to do them: because he that
trusts in the Law, is convinced by the Law to be a transgressour: but the Law
as given to them that be in Covenant, does reprove every transgression, and
convince every man of sin, who continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the Law to do them, but does not accurse the offendour in every
jot or title, because in Christ sin is pardoned and forgiven. To the Jew, who
rested in the works of the Law, and refused Christ, the Law which was given
four hundred and thirty years after, did make void the promise, or Covenant
confirmed before of God in Christ: But according to the true meaning of the
Law, and to them that used it aright, it did not make void the promise but
establish it. What the Apostle cites of the Law out of Deuteronomy, and notes
of the giving of the Law after the promise, is for substance preached by the
Prophet Jeremy at the Lords appointment, when he speaks of this Covenant of
grace without all question. Hear ye the words of this Covenant, and speak
unto the men of Judah, Jer. 11. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and say unto them, thus says the Lord God of Israel, Cursed be the man that
obeys not the words of this Covenant, which I commanded your Fathers in the
day that I brought them forth out of the Land of Egypt from the iron furnace,
saying, obey my voice and do them, according to all which I command you: so
shall ye be my people, and I will be your God. That I may perform the oath
which I have sworn unto your Fathers, to give them a Land flowing with milk
and honey, as it is this day: Then answered I and said, so be it, O Lord. Then
the Lord said unto me, proclaim all these words in the Cities of Judah, and in
the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this Covenant, and do
them. This Covenant then, which God made with Israel, was for substance one
with that he had made before with the Patriarks, that is, it was a Covenant of
grace and mercy: though the Law, to them that rested in the works thereof, and
perverted the right use and end of the Law, was a killing letter and
ministration of death.

CHAP. VIII. A particular explication of the Covenant that God made with
Israel, and what Moses brought to the further expressure of the Covenant of
Grace.
THis doubt being thus discussed, we may proceed with more facility to lay open
the particulars of this Covenant. God of his free grace and mercy made this
Covenant with Israel upon Mount Sinai, fifty days after the Israelites were
delivered out of Exodus 19. 28.
Egypt: as fifty days after the deliverance of his people from the bondage of
sin and Satan, the same Lord proclaims his Gospel or new Covenant upon Mount
Sion in Jerusalem, the Metropolis or Isa 2. 2. Micha 4. 2. Gal. 4. 24. Heb. 12.
18.
royal seat of Abraham or David's seed. God, I say, of his infinite love and
undeserved mercy did make this Covenant: for if he remember mercy, when he
performs his Covenant, then it was of mere grace, that he entered into
Covenant. Also it is of mercy Ps. 103. 17, 18. Nehem. 9. 32. Hos. 2. 19.
that God does troth-plight him unto any people; for the promise runs, I
will betroth thee unto me for ever: yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies. But
when the Lord made this Covenant, he betrothed himself unto Israel. And when he
made this Covenant, he did more fully proclaim his great name, and make his
mercy better known, then formerly he had done, for Exodus 14. 6, 7.
ought we find. For he passed by before Moses, and proclaimed, The Lord, the
Lord God, strong, merciful, and gracious, longsuffering, abundant in goodness
and truth: keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression
and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity
of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and the fourth generation.
Which glorious description of Almighty God is often Numb. 14. 18. Psalm. 86. 15.
Psalm. 103. 8. and 145. 8. Nehem. 9. 17. Jon. 4. 2. Exodus 6. 3.
mentioned by Moses, and the Prophets, as the ground and foundation of their
faith, hope and comfort. And whereas he had appeared to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob by the Name of God Allmighty: Now he was known to the Israelites by his
Name Jehovah: which Name denotes both Gods being in himself, and his giving
of being unto, (that is, the performance of) his word and promise, in which
latter respect he here says, he was not known to the Fathers by this Name, or
as the Greek and Chaldee translate it, he manifested not, nor made known this
Name. They being sustained by faith in Gods Almighty power, without receiving
the thing promised, Act 7. 5. Heb. 11. 9, 10. But now their children should
receive the promise, and so have full knowledge and experience of Gods power
and goodness, and of the efficacy of that his Name Jehovah, which therefore
they sung to Isa. 49. 23. and 52. 6. and 60. 16. Ezekiel. 28. 22, 23 24, 26. and
30. 19, 25, 26. Exodus 19. 18, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 4, 22.
his praise, upon their full deliverance from the Egyptians, Exodus 15. 3. So
upon performance of further promises or judgments, he says, they shall know
him to be Jehovah.

This Covenant was given with tokens of majesty and terror: for Mount Sinai
was all of it on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and all the Mountain
trembled exceedingly, and the voice of the Trumpet was going and waxing strong
exceedingly. The Mountains saw the Lord and trembled, Hab. 3. 10. they leaped
like Rams, Psalm. 114. 4. The earth quaked, the heavens also dropped at the
presence of God, even Sinai it self at the presence of God, the God of Israel,
Psalm. 68. 9. Judge. 5. 5. The mountain burnt with fire unto the midst of
heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness, Deuteronomy. 4. 11. and from
this, it may be, the Law is called fiery, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. The Prophets Deuteronomy. 4.
35, 36:
use the like words to signify the Majesty of God, Psalm. 18. 9, 10, 12, 14,
and 97. 2, 4. with clouds and smoke God often manifested his glorious presence
to his people, Exodus 40. 34, 35. 2 Chronicles. 5. 24. and 6. 1. and 7. 1, 2. Isa. 6.
4. Revel. 15. 8. And as Princes publish their decrees with the sound of the
Trumpet: So God to his ancient people revealed the pleasure of his will, and
gave answers unto them in thunderings and voices, Joh. 12. 28. Rev. 4. 5. and
6. 1. and 10. 3. and 8. 5. And hence (it may be) the two reverend Ambassadors
of his voice and divine Majesty, are called the sons of thunder, Mark 3. 17.
This is noted as one difference betwixt the old and new Testament, Ye are not
come unto Heb. 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
the Mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto
blackness and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of words, which voice they that heard, entreated that the word should not
be spoken unto them any more. For they could not endure that which was
commanded. And if so much as a beast touch the Mountain, it shall be stoned or
thrust through with a dart. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City
of the living God, and the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the souls of just men
made perfect. It may be hereby God would testify his anger and displeasure
against sin, not as yet expiated by the blood of the Messiah, and warn the
Israelites to deny themselves, stand in awe of his Highness, and cleave
inseparably unto the word of his promise.

If any man shall think, that Christ the second person in Trinity to be
incarnate, who is called the Angel of the Covenant, or Messenger of the
Covenant, ( scil. by whom it was sent unto Moses) Mal. 3. 1. and the Angel of
his presence. Exodus 23. 20, 21. and 33. 14. Isai. 63. 9. did deliver the Law
unto Moses, I will not gainsay it: because it is expressly said, that Moses
was in the Church in the wilderness with the Angel, who spoke to him in the
Mount Sinai. Act. 7. 37. who is called Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9. And this Covenant
of Grace was made in Christ, the promised seed: for God was not the God of
Israel but in and through the promised Messiah: whose person and offices are
more fully described, whose death and resurrection is more lively typified in
this expressure of the Covenant then in either of the former. Had ye believed
Joh. 5. 46.
Moses (says Christ himself the Author of truth) you would have believed me:
For he wrote of me: that is, Christ was, if not the sole subject, yet the only
scope of Moses his writings. And as Moses, so the Prophets that followed after
him, who wrote by the same Spirit, and under that expression of the Covenant,
did speak of Christ more fully and plainly then he had done before. In the
first promise it was revealed, that the Messiah should be the seed of the
woman, to Abraham it was made known, that he should be of his seed: but in the
writings of Moses we learn, that he was to be both God and man, or that God
was to be incarnate, and to have his conversation amongst men, after a more
peculiar manner then in the ancient times of the world he had. The promise runs
thus, And I will dwell amongst the children of Israel, and will be their Exodus
29. 45, 46.
God, and they shall know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them forth
out of the Land of Egypt, that I may dwell amongst them: I am the Lord their
God. The same promise is renewed or repeated, And I will set my Tabernacle
amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor Lev. 26. 11, 12, 13. Ezekiel. 37. 26,
27, 28.
you, and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my
people. The Chaldee translateth the first place, I will settle my habitation
(or divine presence) amongst the sons of Israel. And where in the Hebrew it
is, I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel. Onkelos and Jonathan read
it, I will place my Divinity. But what Divinity? whether the holy Spirit, or
rather the Word, as we read, The Word was made flesh, and dwelt Joh 1. 14.
amongst us; when Christ took our nature upon him, and came and dwelt amongst
his own, then was this promise punctually fulfilled. Or if it be referred to
the habitation of God by his Spirit amongst the spiritual seed of Abraham, as
we find the word often used. Romans 8. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 19. 2 Timothy 1. 14. Ephesians. 3.
17. Jam. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 12. then it implies the incarnation of Christ, and his
dwelling amongst the Jews, because that was to go before the plentiful
habitation of the Spirit in the hearts of the faithful. And if the Evangelists
words have not reference to the forecited places, they do allude to a passage
in the Prophet Zachary, whence Zech. 2. 10, 11, 12.
they may be interpreted. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Sion, for lo I come,
and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord: And many nations shall
be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in
the midst of them, and thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto
thee. The Prophets describe the Psalm. 11. 1.
Messiah to be the Son of David, and David's Lord, The Lord said unto my Lord;
The Chaldee has it, The Lord said unto his Psalm. 110. 1.
Word, namely the Messiah or Christ, who is the eternal Word of God, by whom
he made and does conserve all things. And in other places the Paraphrasts put
the Word of God, for God or Lord, and that sometimes when the second person in
Trinity is not necessarily to be understood, and Isai. 1. 14. my soul. Targ. my
word. Jer. 1. 8. I am with thee. Targ. my word. Isai. 45. 17. By the Lord.
Targ. By the word of the Lord. Genesis 3. 8. The voice of the Lord. Targ The voice
of the word of the Lord, or the word, the Lord Genesis 22 15, 1^. I have sworn by
my self. Targ By my word. Psalm. 103. 13. The Lord. Targ. The word of the Lord.
Psalm. 16. 1. In thee. Chald. In thy word. Psalm. 103. 18. The Lord has. Targ.
The word of the Lord. Genesis 31. 24. God came to La^an Targ. The word came. So
Genesis 20. 3. Genesis 28. 15. I will be with thee. Targ. my word shall be thy help
Hos. 1. 7. I will save them by the Lord their God. Chald. I will redeem them
by the word of God their Lord.
sometimes the word or promise, they so render, as Psalm. 119. 76. According to
thy word unto thy servant, where the Chaldee has Memar. And so Psalm. 130. 5.
And in thy Word (or promise) I trust. But if the second person be not ever
meant by the word of God, as the Paraphrast uses it, yet certainly in many
places it must be so understood: and that this word was to be incarnate, was
most certainly foretold, Psalm. 102. 11, 26. Heb. 1. 10. For the very literal
meaning of the Psalmist will enforce thus much, that this place was to be meant
of God, not simply or absolutely, but of God incarnate. For the eternal
duration of the Godhead is not measurable by days or years, but the
incarnation of the Son of God, or his duration in the flesh, may be accounted
by number of years for the time past, yet are his years as man to continue
without end, without any decay or diminution of that nature which he assumed.
And Psalm. 68. 19. Psalm. 103. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
if out of any one place of the Psalms, where he does entreat of the
deliverance of the Church, it do appear that the Messiah is true, and very
God, by the same reason, wheresoever he speaks of the deliverance of the
Church, God and the Messiah shall be the same. But it is most certain in
sundry passages, he that is God, is also the Messiah; And for that reason what
is spoken of the mercy of God in the Psalm following, may be understood not of
the mercy of God absolutely, or considered in the Godhead only, but the mercy
of God to be incarnate, to be made King and Judge of the earth, which may be
cleared by the very letter and circumstance of the text. For the expected
comfort, whereupon this Psalmist pitcheth, is this, The Lord has prepared his
throne in the heavens, verse. 18.
and his Kingdom rules over all: And this is that Kingdom and that throne,
which Daniel foretold, that God long after his time would erect, Da. 2. 44. To
be born of God, what is it, but to Joh. 1. 12, 13.
be born of immortal seed, and what is that immortal seed, whereof St Peter
says, we are born again, but the flesh and blood of the Son of Isai. 40. 6, 7,
^.
man, who is also the Son of God, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood
is drink indeed, which nou^isheth us not to a bodily, but to 1 Pet. 1. 23, 14.
a spiritual and immortal life, which presupposes an immortal seed. We are
begotten and borne again by the preaching of the Word, as by the instrument or
means: and by the the eternal word, that is (by Christ himself) as by the
proper and efficient cause of our new birth. Thus much St Peter's words in that
place will enforce us to grant according to the letter. For having before
declared, that the word of God (by which we are borne again) does live and
endure for ever, he thus concludes, and this is the word, which by the Gospel
is preached unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 25. Moses also and the Prophets did foretell,
that the Messiah (or merciful one, or gracious Saint, as he is called, Psalm.
16. 10.) should Psalm. 8. 6. H^b. ^. 7. Psalm. 16. 10, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18,
19. Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3.
be made for a little time lower then Angels, and after crowned with glory and
honor, and set over the works of the Lords hands: that he should suffer death
and rise again: be laid in the grave, but not see corruption. That he should
be the great Doctor of the Church, a Priest after the order of Melchisedech:
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whom God would set upon his holy hill of
Sion. His death and resurrection, Kingdom and Priesthood was prefigured by the
Sacrifices and Serpent, the Priest hood of Aaron and Kingdom of Israel. But of
these things more fully in the new Covenant.

This Covenant was made in Christ the promised Messiah, in and through whom the
faithful obtained the blessings promised: but according to the administration
of this Covenant Moses was the Mediator: and herewith in this expression is
embellished above the former. The Law was ordained by Angels in the hand L^v.
26* 46. Deuteronomy. 5. 5. 27. 28.
of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. that is, by the labor and ministry of Moses:
which though some do^^t of, is yet confirmed from this, that Christ reserves
himself to be a Mediator of a better Testament. Heb. 8. 6. There is but one
Mediator true and spiritual, scil. Christ: but Moses was a Mediator only
typical. The Mediation whereby men are truly and effectually united unto
Christ, cannot fall upon any person who is not endued with infinite power and
virtue, who is not God as well as man: but the Mediation of Moses was of this
use, to show what was the true manner of worshipping God, but did not inspire
force and power to follow it, nor reconcile men to God, but propound those
things, whence it might easily appear, that there is need of another
reconciliation.

Moses an Israelite and part of that people with whom God made the Covenant,
was comprehended under the one part confederate: but as he undertook the
function of Mediator imposed upon him of God, he was not now simply an
Israelite, but a Mediator interceding betwixt God and the people Israel, that
he might be a more illustrious type of Christ; Moses was called in as a
Mediator on both parts: On Gods, when he called him up to receive the Law and
all that message which God sent unto the people: on the peoples, when they
desired him to receive the Law, and they would do it. Further, never was
mortal man more near unto God, to whom for this end he is said to appear face
to face. He called Abraham friend, but Moses was Gods favorite. Deuteronomy. 5 5, 27.
Again, no man either in love, knowledge, authority so near the people, which
makes them idolize him unto this day. Moses thus constituted a Mediator, did
first as a Mediator prevail with God for the suspending of his justice, that
it should not break out upon the people for their failing in highest degrees
in moral obedience. Secondly, with the people he prevailed to bind them in
Covenant unto God, and make profession of that obedience Exodus 24. 4, 5, 6.
which the Lord did require and call for. Thirdly, he was never denied any
thing from God, which was for the good of that people, though God denied some
of his requests for himself: but what was needful for the good of that people,
specially spiritual Deuteronomy. 9. 18, 19, 20, 21. and 10. 10.
and eternal, that was procured by the blood and mediation of Christ blessed
for ever.

The Law was given to one Nation, whom God did choose to Ez^k. 16. 8. Psalm. 147.
19, 20.
be his peculiar people, scil. Israel, with whom God entered into Covenant, and
it became his. He shows his Word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his judgments
they have not known them. Therefore they have not known the Judgments,
because God did not make them manifest unto them: as we say, a place is full of
darkness; because the Sun does not enlighten it with his beams: Not that
God is the efficient cause of their darkness, but that he does not hinder or
remove the cause of their ignorance, or he does not shine upon them by the
revelation of his Word. That the earth is lightsome, this it owes to the
Sun: but that it is darksome, to it self: God is the Author of all good,
the cause of our faith, but ignorance and infidelity are of our selves. And
these words, He has not dealt so, do import a mere negation, and not a
similitude: they deny the thing it self, and not the manner of Psalm. 76. 1.
Romans 3. 2.
the thing alone, as might be proved by many instances: but this may
plentifully suffice, that in the whole Scripture, we shall never find this
phrase to note a negation of the manner of the thing, but a negation of the
thing it self. So that this is the meaning of the Prophet, He has not dealt
so with any Nation, that is, he has not revealed his Statutes and Judgments
unto them.

This Covenant God made not only with the Fathers, whom he brought out of the
Land of Egypt, (...) with their posterity. Ye stand this day all of you before
the Lord your God: your Captains Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12.
of your tribes, your Elders and your Officers, with all the men of Israel,
your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the
hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water: That thou should enter into
Covenant which the Lord thy God makes with thee this day: Neither with you
only do I make this Covenant, and this Oath: ver. 14, 15.
but with him that stands here with us this day, before the Lord our God, and
also with him that is not here with us this day. And that it might be the
better established, he gave special charge and commandment, that the words
which he had spoken by Moses and the Prophets, should be publicly read, often
inculcated, and expounded unto them: and that all his visitations of this
people, whether in mercy whilst they obeyed his voice, or in judgment for
their disobedience, should be registered to remain Deuteronomy. 4. 10. and 6. 6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 78. 6, 7, 8.
upon record as so many ruled cases and presidents, and published and rehearsed
unto their children, that they might learn to set their hope in God, and not
forget his Commandments. But this Covenant was so made with the Jews, that if
any stranger amongst them, or near adjoining Heathen did turn unto the Lord,
he was not to be excluded. When a stranger shall sojourne Exodus 12. 48. Deuteronomy.
23. 15, 16.
with thee and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near, and keep it: and he shall be as one
that is borne in the Land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

The good things promised in this Covenant are temporal or spiritual: but the
temporal as types of spiritual. First God promised to give them the Land of
Canaan for their inheritance, and therein length of days, riches, and honor,
victory over their enemies, protection and peace. If ye shall diligently keep
all these Deuteronomy. 11. 22, 23, 24, 25. and 1. 8, 39.
Commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the Lord your God, to
walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him: Then will the Lord drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and
mightier then your selves. Every place Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 38. and 6. 18, 19.
whereon the soles of your feet shall tread, shall be yours: from the
wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the
utmost sea, shall your coasts be. There shall no man be able to stand before
you: for the Lord your God shall lay the fear of you, and the dread of you
upon all the Land that ye shall tread upon, as he has said. Thou shall keep
therefore his Statutes and his Commandments which I command thee this day,
that it may go well with thee, and with Deuteronomy. 4. 40.
thy children after thee, and that thou may prolong thy days upon the earth,
which the Lord thy God gives thee for ever. And it shall be, and ^. 33. and 6.
3.
when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land which he swear
unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11.
thee great and goodly Cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all
good things, which thou filledst not, and wels dug, which thou diggedst not,
Vine-yards, and Olive Trees, which thou plantedst not, etc. Wherefore it shall
come to pass, if ye hearken unto these judgments, and keep and do them: That
the Lord thy God shall keep unto Deuteronomy. 7* 12, 13, 14, 15.
thee the Covenant and the mercy which he swear unto thy Fathers: And he will
love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of
thy womb, and the fruit of thy Land, thy Corn, and thy Wine, and thine oil,
the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the Land which he
swear unto thy fathers to give thee. Thou shall be blessed above all people,
and there shall not be male or female barren amongst you, or among your
cattle. And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none
of the evil diseases of Egypt, ( which thou know) upon thee: but will lay
them upon all them that hate thee. The Lord thy God brings thee into a good
Land, a Land Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9. and 11. 14, 15.
of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths that spring out of the valleys
and hills, a Land of wheat and barley, and Vines and Fig Trees, and
Pomegranates, a Land of Oil, Olive and Honey. A Land wherein thou shall eat
bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it: a land whose
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou may dig brass. The Lord has
vouched thee this day to be his peculiar Deuteronomy. 26. 18 19.
people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments: And to make thee high above all nations which he has made, in
praise and in name, and in honor, and that thou may be Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 2, etc.
an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he has spoken.

Secondly, The Lord promised to choose a place to cause his name to dwell there,
and set his Tabernacle amongst them and walk with them. But when you go over
Jordane, and dwell in the Land Lev. 26 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11. Deuteronomy. 12. 10, 11,
12. and 16. 6.
which the Lord your God gives you to inherit, when he gives you rest from
all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety: Then shall there be a
place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there,
thither shall ye bring all that I command you. And I Lev. 26. 10, 12.
will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you: And I
will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. For the
Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his habitation: Psalm. 132. 13. 14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

Thirdly, Free forgiveness of sins is likewise promised in this Covenant.
This is employed in that he promises to be their God: for if he be theirs, he
will be favorable to their iniquities, and remember their sins no more. And
so much is expressed, when upon repentance and turning unto him, he has
proclaimed himself ready to receive them into favor. If from thence Deuteronomy. 4.
29, 30.
thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul. And it shall come to Deuteronomy. 30. 1, 2, 3.
pass, when all these things shall come upon thee, the blessing and the curse,
which I have set before thee, and thou shall call them to mind among all the
nations whither the Lord thy God has driven thee, And shall return unto the
Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice according to all that I command thee
this day, thou and thy children: That then the Lord thy God will turn thy
Captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from
all nations. When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because
they have sinned 1 King. 8. 33, 34. Man as capable of Justification is ^
sinner, as be actually receives Justification a Believer.
against thee: and shall turn again unto thee, and confess thy Name, and
pray, and make supplication unto thee in this house: Then hear thou in heaven,
and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the
Land. Moreover, the Lord made himself known to be the God, that pardons
iniquity, transgression, and sin, when he gave this Covenant unto his people.
But of this before.

Fourthly, Eternal life is promised in the Covenant: for God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living: and therefore the faithful Jews, which have God
for their God do live still, not Math. 22. 32. Math. 19. 17. Luke 10. 25, 28.
in earth, but in heaven. The life which is promised to them that keep the
Law, is eternal: but in this Covenant life is promised to them that keep the
Commandments. Not only long Psalm. 34. 12, 13.
life and good days, in the Land of Canaan, but eternal life is assured by
the promise to them that keep Covenant, as eternal death and destruction is
comprehended under the curse denounced against them that break the Covenant.
Express mention of Gal. 3. 13.
the King some of Heaven perhaps is not found in the Old Testament: but
eternal life is comprehended under the terms of life and blessing, as
eternal death under the terms of death and the Curse. Eternal life in
heaven, eternal death in hell, the Law notes, though it do not expressly
name them, Which things unless they had been commonly known in the days of
our Savior, the penitent Thief about to die, had not thought of a Kingdom,
nor the Lord promised Paradise to him, when he asked a place in the Kingdom of
the M^ssiah.

But all these promises were made of fre^ grace and of free love accomplished.
Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5.
thy God has cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the
Lord has brought me in to possess this Land: but for the wickedness of these
nations, the Lord does drive them out from before thee. Not for the
righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, do thou go to
possess their Land: but for the wickedness of these Nations the Lord thy God
does drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which
the Lord swear unto thy Fathers, Abraham, Verse. 6.
Is^^k, and Jacob. Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God gives thee not
this good Land, to possess it, for thy righteousness, for thou art a
stiff-necked people. True it is the promises run upon this condition, If ye
obey my voice and do my Commandments. But conditions are of two sorts,
antecedent or consequent. Antecedent, when the condition is the cause of the
thing promised or given, as in all civil contracts of Justice, where one thing
is given for another. Consequent, when the condition is annexed to the promise
as a qualification in the Subject, or an adjunct, that must attend the thing
promised. And in this latter sense, obedience to the Commandments, was a
condition of the promise; not a cause why the thing promised was vouchsafed,
but a qualification in the subject capable, or a consequence of such great
mercy freely conferred.

Of them that slip aside and transgress the Covenant, God calls for and
commands repentance, that is, it is his will and command, that they be think
themselves of their evil doings, confess their iniquities, and turn unto the
Lord. The frequent and earnest exhortations of the Prophets made to backsliding
and rebellious Israel, that she should acknowledge her wickedness, and return
unto the Lord, is a full Commentary of that which Jer. 3. 7, 22. and 4. 1, 2.
Ezekiel 18. 27, 28 Ezekiel. 18 31, 32. and 33. 11, 13.
God required of them in this Covenant, in case they should turn away from the
holy Commandment. The Lord protests by his Prophet Ezekiel, that he has no
pleasure in the death of him that dies; but rather that he should repent and
live: and the same for substance he made known to Israel in the Covenant which
he stroke with them: sc. that if they transgress and go astray, he does
admit, will accept and approve, nay command their unfeigned repentance, and
coming home unto the Lord, that they might live. This question, Why will ye
die, ye house of Israel! is put forth to the people in Covenant, and not
indifferently to all and every man living: It is manifestly spoken of the house
of Israel, whom God had spared, notwithstanding their manifold and great
provocations, to whom he not only gave space of repentance, but used means to
bring them to repentance, by sending Prophets unto them to admonish them of
their sins, to denounce the judgments of God against them for their
impenitency, and earnestly to exhort them to cast away their transgressions,
that they might live. God then does approve, and command the return of his
people that have gone astray, he waits for their amendment, uses means to
bring them to the knowledge of themselves, is not wanting to them in any thing
that in justice or promise he ought to do for them: but yet it is not his will
effectually to bring every man to repentance, whom he does command to repent.
The Commandment of God shows what is our duty, but not what God will work in
every man: the commandment lies upon them that be obstinate and rebellious,
but they have not grace to will their conversion or amendment. Nevertheless,
we must not think, either that God does dissemble, or that he is the author
of man's impenitency: for man's corruption, pravity and wilfulness is the cause
of his going on in evil; and his impotency, is not a mere infirmity, which he
does bewail, but a stubbornness, which he does foster and cherish by all means.

The condition of this Covenant (in the sense aforesaid) is faith in the
promised Messiah, which is implied in the promise, I will be thy God, and
commanded in the precept built upon it, Thou shall have me to be thy God. For
God is not the God of Israel, but in and through the Mediator, neither can
Israel take God to be their God, but by faith in the Messiah. In the Prophets
we meet with no exhortations more common then these, Trust in the Lord, commit
thy self unto the Lord, roll thy burden upon him, lean upon the Lord: but
what the Prophets exhort-unto, that is commanded in this expressure of the
Covenant: and trust in the Lord man a sinner cannot, unless it be in and
through a Mediator. Israel is commanded to seek the Lord, and walk before him
in all well-pleasing. But without Heb 11. 6, 7. Quod addit Apostolus, nondum
venisse fidem, Gal. 3. 23. quamd^^ Dei po pulus sub legis custodia detinebatur,
id alio spectat, scil. fides Apostolo eo loco est eva^ge lica fontis
misericordiae Dei, Romans 3. 29. in Christi filij Mediatoris sanguine declaratio,
quam fidem (...) vocat. quippe revelationis Christi gradum excellentissimum:
eadem prorsus ratione, qua Johan. aj^^at spiritum, John 7. 39. Jer. 31. 33 34.
and 32. 33, 34. quae comparate tantum dicuntur, non autem absolute, quasi haec
nullo gradu jam tum contingerent.
faith it is impossible to please God. For he that comes to God, must believe
that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him. We
cannot seek God, nor pray unto him without faith, for to seek God is to trust
in him. But all men will confess the Israelites were by Covenant bound to
seek God, and pray unto him. As Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jepthah, David and
Samuel, through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, etc. So the faithful and true Israelite by faith walked with God,
and became heir of the righteousness, which is by faith. As God is one who
shall justify the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith:
without question in the Covenant of Grace he taught the Circumcision to seek
justification by faith, and not by the works of the Law. Nevertheless herein
God called for, and his Israel was bound to yield obedience to all his
Commandments. Strict, exact, perfect obedience the Lord does require, so that
the least failing must be acknowledged to be a sin: uniforme and sincere
obedience is so required, that without it there can be no Salvation. Perfect
obedience is commanded, that if a man will trust in his works to be justified
thereby, he must either bring that which is every way complete, or be cast in
judgment. Sincere obedience, though imperfect is approved, that the
imperfection of their best works being covered, and their transgressions
graciously pardoned, they might be accepted by faith in Christ, who is the end
of the Law, as righteous unto eternal life. This distinction was formerly
propounded, but now is more largely to be confirmed.

The Law requires perfect and exact obedience: for secret faults, even thoughts
arising from corrupt nature, before they attained Romans 7. 7.
full consent, are therein condemned: and he that trusts in his works, if he
continue not in every thing that is written in the Gal. 3. 10.
book of the Law to do them, he is accursed. But to them that be in Covenant
the Law was given with such moderation, that sincere obedience was accepted of
them, though attended with Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
many imperfections, as is clear by that of the Psalmist, who can understand
his errors, cleanse thou me from secret faults, keep back thy servant also
from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression. The godly
Governors and people of Israel were well acquainted with the meaning of the
Law, and what obedience should be accepted at their hands: And when 2 Kin. 23.
3. 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13, 14. Neh. 10. 29, 30, 31.
they promised, and bound themselves by Oath to walk in all the Statutes,
Judgments, and Ordinances of the Lord, or of the Law of Moses, they did
neither pervert the sense of the Law, nor promise punctually to fulfill the Law
in every jot and title. Therefore they understood the tenor of the Law as it
was given unto them, to admit of upright, unfeigned and true obedience, the
imperfection that cleaves unto their best works being graciously pardoned. I
have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Psalm. 119.
106.
judgments. Did the Prophet think himself able punctually to fulfill the Law?
How will that stand with his Prayer, Enter not into judgment with thy servant;
for in thy sight shall no man living Psalm. 143. 2.
be justified. No, but he knew sincere and willing obedience, which he promised
and would perform, should be taken in good part. And this is further apparent
by the prayers of the faithful, Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine
integrity. Remember Psalm. 26. 1, 11. Isai. 38. 3. Neh. 1. 5, 9. Psalm. 25. 10.
Dan. 9. 4. Jer. 31. 32.
how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight. It never came into the heart of these Worthies
to conceit, they had been able to justify themselves before the bar of Gods
justice in any particular action, great or small, as if it had been without all
defect or stain, being tried in the rigor of justice; nor could their
integrity ought avail them, if no obedience did find acceptance with God, but
that which is every way complete. It is said of Josiah, that he turned 2 Kin.
23. 25.
to the Lord with all his heart and with all his soul, and with all his might,
according to all the Law of Moses; that he declined not to the right hand, or
to the left: Of David, that he kept the Commandments 2 King. 21. 3.
of God, and his Statutes: that he kept the Commandments of 1 Kin. 11. 34. 1
King. 14. 8. 1 King. 15. 5.
God, and followed him with all his heart, to do that only which was right in
his eyes: that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned
not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save
only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite: and 1 King. 22. 43.
of Jehoshaphat, that he turned not aside from doing that which was right in
the eyes of the Lord: Of Asa, that his heart was perfect before the 2 Chro. 15.
12.
Lord all his days: Of Asa and the people, that they sought the Lord with all
their heart, and all their soul. From these passages we cannot prove either
that these servants of God did, or that it is possible for men in this life to
fulfill the Law exactly, or that the Law is given with such moderation, as that
the imperfections which did cleave unto these, and the best servants of God,
were no sins: because in phrase of Scripture the words will not bear that
weight, it may be confuted by Text it self, setting down several
imperfections even in them, who are said not to have turned aside from the
Commandments, and it is directly contrary to diverse other passages of holy
writ. But thence we may soundly gather, that the Law as it was given to Israel,
does admit and allow of sincere and unpartiall obedience, though it be
imperfect and answer not to that exactness which is required.

These words, Do this and live, must not be interpreted, as if they did
promise life upon a condition of perfect obedience, and for works done in such
exactness as is required: but they must be expounded Evangelically, describing
the subject capable of life eternal, not the cause why life and salvation is
conferred: and by doing sincere, uniforme, unpartiall obedience, not exact
fulfilling of the Law in every title is to be understood. Do this and live,
what is it more then this, If ye will obey my voice, and do my Commandments,
Psalm. 112. 1.
ye shall be to me a peculiar treasure. Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, and delights greatly in his Commandments. Psalm. 106. 3.
Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness at all
times. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of Psalm. 119.
1, 2.
the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with
the whole heart. Who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, Jam. 1. 25.
and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the
work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. To them who by patient Romans 2. 7.
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, eternal life: which
passages are to be understood of sincere and upright walking, and show who are
justified, and to whom the promises of life pertain, but not why they are
justified. And in like manner that of the Apostle, The doers of the Law are
justified, may be expounded Romans 2. 13.
Evangelically, not of them that fulfill the Law, which should be justified by
their works, but of them that soundly obey, who are justified of grace by
faith, not for their works. And hence it appears what works the Apostle
opposes to faith in the matter of justification: not only perfect works done
by the strength of nature, of which sort there be none at all: but works
commanded in the Law as it was given to Israel, such as Abraham and David
walked in after they were effectually called, such as without whose presence
faith it self could not be existent, such as are necessary in the person
justified: these works are opposed to faith, in the matter of justification,
not that faith can be without them, but because they cannot be causes together
with faith in Justification. And of necessity, if faith be opposite to works
exactly perfect, it must be opposite to them that are imperfect and stained in
part, that be impurely pure: because the Covenant of Grace calls for
perfection, though it accept sincerity, and in all reason perfect
righteousness should rather be accepted for righteousness unto life, than
that which is imperfect and falls short of that which is required.

For the better administration of this state and national Covenant, it pleased
God to ordain suitable Ordinances for the teaching and applying of this
Covenant, scil. of Ministry and Priesthood. The first of these the Apostle
opens, setting down the state of the Gentile and Jew before Christ came,
compared both together, and how both stood in comparison to the Church after
Christ, in regard of this Ordinance of teaching. As the Gentile Gal. 3. 23, 24,
25.
before Christ was a man constrained to live without a shelter: the Jew at the
same time is better provided for: for he had the Law taught to cover his head
in a storm, that it be not too violent, But we after Christ dwell in
well-grounded, yea, seiled rooms, that we need not to fear the blowing,
beating, or flowing in of the Sea, rain, or wind, for we have the Ordinances
of the Gospel. The Gentiles before Christ ran wild like beggarly bruits
without all schooling; the Jew a great deal better for the time being, he had
a Schoolmasters to teach and nourture him, even, The Lord did think it good
to set forth the state of minority in such kind of attires and habiliments as
might best suit with the fancy of minority: and so to teach and clothe his
Church with types and Ceremonies, which is a kind of Imagerie, and therefore of
the two the Jews had more liberty in that kind, then Christians in times of
the Gospel.
the Law to bring him unto Christ. But happy Christians after Christ living in
the University of the Church under the free Tutors of new Ordinances. The
Schoolemastership of Moses was a good Ordinance for the body of the people
under Covenant with God, as we find this calling needful and profitable in a
Commonweal, though inferior to the honor and worth of an University. There
was not a man of them undiscovenanted who took not benefit some way or other by
this pedagogie. For some were kept thereby from notorious evils, as children
that learn little at School, get good in this, that they are kept from shrewd
turns. Others get much ability of knowledge, though they never looked at
Christ; as some at School learn to write and read, cast account and make a
bond, though they never intend any better use of their learning. But the
spiritual Jew got some true measure of grace to Salvation, though they reached
not to that pitch and measure which is attaineable under the Ordinances of the
New Testament; as in some good Grammar Schools those grounds of learning may
be obtained, whereby men may be serviceable to the Church or Commonweal in
some measure, though they come not to that ripeness and maturity, which may be
gotten in the University.

For the manner of this pedagogie under Moses, we are not to conceive, that he
taught his Scholars in things too hard for their capacity and practice only to
set them to others to ask: for it is the part of a bad master to set his
Scholars too hard a task, that they might run to their fellows to make
exercises, this is the way to non-proficiency. But Moses in the Ceremonial
Ordinances did point out Christ, and so as a good Schoolmasters directed unto
him; and by showing unto the Jews their weakness and inability, convincing
them of sin, terrifying their consciences, he did drive them unto Christ, and
informed them how to walk being in Christ, that they might inherit the
promise. Thus the Law entered that sin might abound, it discovered Romans 5. 20.
Gal. 3. 19. Romans 7. 11. and 4. 15.
sin, wrought wrath, wounded, terrified and killed, and withal revealed the
remedy to be had, not in the Law, but in Christ, that the distressed might not
rest in the Law, but seek unto Christ, and live. In a School we must have rods
to keep refractory boys in awe, and idle boys to their books, according to
the common Proverb, A rod in a School is always in season. This was found
with Moses in his School, and used as occasion was offered. The Ceremonies
were as an handwriting against Col. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 15. The Ceremonies are
visible words preaching Christ, and they preach guilt also and wrath belonging
unto us, by consequent and to the Jew directly. Ceremonies as they are a mere
carnal kind of instructing* do witness against us.
them, as they witnessed their uncleanenesse, or bound them to the debt of the
Law: and a curse was denounced against them that should not continue in all
things that was written in the book of the Law to do them. Schoolmasters
must have Apples and toys to train up boys of better and softer natures, who
be won with a Nut and lost with the shell: This the School of the Law wanted
not in the hand of Moses, as the outward temporal blessings of this life
plentifully spoken too, and distributed by the hand of Moses in his Book: The
Jews were as Infants and little children that are much pleased with rattles
and other toys: and Moses the rather to win and keep them in obedience,
does make large promises of corporal blessings and an earthly inheritance, as
did befit the state and condition of that people. But if these prevail not, he
has his Ferula and gentle rod, which is the commination of temporal
calamities and judgments to be inflicted upon transgressors. It is expedient
a Schoolmasters have some other practices besides Rods and Nuts to break
their wills, and make them corrigible and teachable, tractable and gentle, which
the Law provided for abundantly, having to do with a stiff-necked people,
and stubborn Scholars. Three kinds of impositions Moses propounded unto his
Scholars to bear.

First, in the pedagogie of the Law he restrained them from some free
creatures, whereunto they had strange natural desires, as meats and drinks;
making some unclean: as mothers lay Apples before the eyes of their children,
which yet they must not touch upon pain of a frown, chiding or whipping, to
break their wills, and train them up in obedience.

Secondly, He laid before them some other indifferencies, which if they did
adventure to use, they must undergo such and such hardship as was not worth
the while: their enjoyment not worth the payment, as we read Levit. 15. in
many washings and purifications.

Thirdly, He prescribed such duties about the free creatures, which were
dangerous, painful and costly for the present, if it were possible to bow
their uncircumcised hearts: wherein he prevailed, and they profited
abundantly. In all which he increased their homage to God, more than at the
first in the Covenant of works with Adam, or in any former manifestation of
this Covenant. And in these respects the Law might well be called a burden
unsupportable, which neither the Jews, nor their Fathers Acts 15. 10.
were able to bear.

A good Schoolmaster will not scorn to teach rudiments to lesser boys, every
letter and syllable: so Moses and his successors taught all the rudiments and
legal precepts to all the Jews, wherein though some stick as their furthest
perfection, yet some went further to higher degrees, and all learned by them
some partial obedience to draw on them and theirs some partial blessings. Of
this sort were these, Touch not, taste not. It beseemes Col. 2. 21.
an able Schoolmaster so far as he has ability and authority to teach his
Scholars Greek, Hebrew, Logic, principles of higher learning, especially
when an university is not at hand: so Moses in this pedagogie did rise to teach
higher things to the spiritual Israel, as the blood of Christ folded up in the
blood of the sacrifice, for the purging of their hearts from dead works, and
the mortification of sinful corruption in their burnt offerings, that so they
might discover how they were delivered from the eternal curse of the Law. Now
when his spiritual Scholars felt the bondage of the Law, and came to learn
the remedy, the very thing learned was their motive and reward, that they did
not so much need rods or nuts, that is, the promise of temporal blessings, or
denunciation of temporal judgments, and the want of such learning was a smart
rod to beat them.

Moses also brought in the Priesthood as a settled ordinance for that present,
which for the persons were to succeed him; The things which they had proper
were two. First to offer Sacrifices for the people and thereby to cleanse them
from the breach of Ceremonial commands put upon them by Moses to testify
their homage. But the blood of those sacrifices, was a tipe of Christ's Heb. 9.
9. and 10. 4. and 9. 23.
blood our true and unchangeable high Priest, whereby the conscience is purged
from the guilt of sin, and from all failings in the least and highest degree
of moral obedience. And though the carnal Jew saw it not in their sacrifices,
yet the spiritual, which brought a right sense of sin and fitting
disposition, both saw it and reached pardon in these sacrifices by faith in the
blood of Christ tipified by them. And hence we see in what respect, the Gal. 3.
21. Heb. 8. 7. and ^^ 13.
Law is said to be weak and unable to give life, to purge the conscience, or
pacify the wrath of God: because it was not the blood of Bulls or Goats, but
of Christ, the immaculate Lamb of God, who thorough the eternal Spirit offered
up himself a sacrifice to the Father, that did purge the conscience, and bring
in eternal redemption, which was not shed but tipified under that Covenant,
though the spiritual seed by faith laid hold upon i^, and were partakers of
the benefits thereof.

Secondly, It was the effect of this ordinance to offer up prayers to God for
the people upon their Incense. To run into every particular in this kind were
infinite.

The effect of this Covenant, that it brings forth children, but in some kind
of bondage, pressed and kept under with servitude. For the heir so long as he
is under Tutors and Governors differs Gal. 4. 3, 4.
not from a servant, though he be Lord of all. The Jews were children and
heirs, but tutored and kept under with many Ceremonial ordinances and
observations as appendices to the Law, expedient for that time and state. But
there is a twofold servitude; one to damnation, which shuts the sons of such
disposition out of the Kingdom of Heaven, which was figured by the bondage of
Ismael and Hagar. This the Covenant does not beget in it self, but in them
that rejected Christ the soul of the Law, and trusted in their works to be
justified thereby. The other of sons, which are held under the nourture of
the Law and legal rites, but rest not in them, but by them are led unto
Christ; which abide still in the house, and partake of the dignity of sons
though under Tutours; and this servitude is an effect of the Covenant thus
administered.

Under this Covenant the natural seed of Abraham bore the face of the Church
and state, and God had promised abundance of temporals, and of spiritual a
scantling: But all under the outward administration of the Covenant, were not
in like manner partakers of the blessings promised in Covenant. For some had
their part in the temporal blessings only, and the outward ordinances; others
were partakers of the spiritual blessings promised. But whatsoever good thing
any of them enjoyed either temporal or spiritual, it was conferred upon them
freely according to the Covenant of Grace, and not for the dignity of their
works. It is true, the promise is conditional, if they obey, they shall reap
the good things of the Land: but obedience was not a causall condition, why
they should inherit, but consequent, what they must do when they should
inherit the Land. God would not that his people should live dissolutely in the
promised Land: but he gave them not that inheritance for their righteousness.
Certain it is also, that God did reward partial obedience with temporal
blessings, as he spared some upon their temporary humiliation and fained
repentance: and he permitted some obstinate and rebellious to abide in the
promised Land, and take root and prosper for a season: but this he did of his
free bounty, that he might perform the Oath which he swear unto the Fathers.
So that herein there appears no intexture of the Covenant of works with the
Covenant of Grace, nor any moderation of the Law to the strength and power of
nature for the obtaining of outward blessings. But rather that God of his
abundant goodness is pleased freely to confer outward blessings promised in
Covenant upon some that did not cleave unto him unfainedly, that he might make
good his promise unto the spiritual seed, which by word and oath he had
confirmed unto the Fathers. In this expression of the Covenant it pleased God
to add unto the former, another seal for confirmation of their faith, sc. the
Passe-over which was a tipe of Exodus 12. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Christ, the immaculate Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world; ourtrue Passe-over, who was sacrificed for us, as well as a seal of
their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt. And the celebration of the
Passover, was as a grateful remembrance of their most powerful and gracious
deliverance from the fiery furnace, and consequently of their possession of
that good Land, which the Lord had promised to give them: so was it a testimony
of their faith in the blood of Christ, whereby they were set free from the
powers of darkness, and the curse of the Law, and restored into spiritual
liberty, being made heirs of the kingdom of heaven. And from all this we may
see, wherein this expression of the Covenant does exceed the former, and
wherein it differs from, and falls short of the new Covenant: of which in the
latter end of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of the Covenant that God made with David.
THis Covenant of Grace was further manifested to David, to whom the Lord does
most abundantly and familiarly make known the riches of his free grace and
love. And is this O Lord the manner of men? 2 Samuel 7. 19. Or as Junius reads
it, and that after the manner of men, O Lord God, that is, thou dealest
familiarly with me, as a man deals with man, Amam: idque secundum
consuetudinem hominis seu hominum: (i) ac si amicus cum amico ageret,
S^hingler. Huc adducit, Chald. (...) Et hoc, hic agendi modu^ conveniens est
filijs hominum. q d. ita ^olet amicu^ cum amico colloqui and familiariter animi
sui sententiam depromere. Sept. (...), etc. Em. Sa. Lex hominis. q d. sic mecum
agi^, ut solet h^mo cum amico.
1 Chronicles. 17. 17. And thou have provided for me according to the manner of men
concerning this excellency, O Lord God, or, thou have provided for me this
excellency, according to the manner of men. I see, for I provide for: for the
Hebrews, when they have not compound verbes, do use simple in their stead,
Pisc. and aspexeris me secundum rationem hominis (i) humanam [quoad] hanc
excellentiam. Engl. according to the manner of high degree or great dignity.
Sept. (...).

The Author of this Covenant is the Lord Hab. 1. 12. Deuteronomy. 34. 4. Sept. (...),
Joh. 18. 30, 37. Isa. 26. 4. 1 Samuel 2. 2. Psalm. 18. 32. and 28. 1. and 2 Samuel
2^. 2, 32. Sept. (...), ^ Sam. 23. 3. Sept. (...). al (...), 2 Samuel 22. 47.
Isa. 30. 29. The rock of Israel, Psalm. 8^. 26. The rock of Salvation, Sept
(...).
God, the God of Israel, the God that has bound himself in Covenant unto
Israel, who does watch over them, walk in the midst amongst them, is their
shield and buckler, and strong Tower of defense. The rock of Israel, the
everlasting rock, that is, the mighty, stable, and immutable foundation and
defense of the faithful, who fly unto him, and trust in him. So God is
called, the Rock of their Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Psalm. 95. 1. Sept. (...),
the rock of their strength, Psalm. 62. 7, 8. Psalm. 31. 3. Isa. 17. 10. Sept.
(...), Psalm. 71. 3. Psalm. 31. 3. Sept. (...), the rock of my heart, Psalm. 72.
26. Sept. the God of my heart: and besides him there is none other, Isa. 44. 8.
a rock of refuge or affiance, Psalm. 94. 22. Sept. (...), Psalm. 18. 3. Sept.
(...) Rock and Redeemer are put together, Psalm. 19. 15. Rock and Salvation,
Psalm. 62. 7.

This Covenant was made in Christ, and Christ is more clearly manifested in
this breaking forth of the Covenant, then in any of the former. As first, that
he was God and man in one person; the Son of David, who should come of his
loins, and yet David's Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 22. 42, 45. Act. 2. 34.
Lord. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies my footstool. Then in respect of his humiliation and
glorification, his sufferings and exaltation. Thou will not leave my soul in
grave, nor suffer thine holy one to Psalm. 16. 10. Act. 2. 26, 27. and 13. 36,
37. Psa. 8. 6. and 22. 1 Heb. 2. 7, 9. Psalm. 110. 1.
see corruption. Thou have made him for a little inferior to the Angels, sc.
as concerning his sufferings: Thou have crowned him with glory and honor. Sit
thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Also in
respect of his offices, that he should be both King and Priest; a King to rule
and govern his elect, to bridle and subdue his enemies; I will declare the
decree, Psalm. 2. 5, 6, 7. Heb. 1. 5. Act. 13. 32, 33. Psalm. 110. 2.
the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son: I will set my King upon my holy
hill of Syon. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. A Priest after the order
of Melchisedech, confirmed by oath, anointed with the oil of gladness. The
Lord has sworn and will Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 5. 8. and 7. 1^. Ps. 45. 7.
not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. God,
even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows,
that is, above all Christians, who are thy fellows, consorts and partners in
the anointing. To offer up himself once for all a sweet smelling Sacrifice
unto the Father, for the sins of his people. Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou
Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Exodus 21. 6.
would not have, but mine ear have thou boared, or dug open: that is,
thou have made me obedient to thy voice: or mine ear have thou boared, as thy
servant for ever. The Septuagint to make the sense plainer, say, but a body
have thou fitted to me, or prepared me: meaning that his body was ordained and
fitted to be a Sacrifice for the sins of the world, when other legal
Sacrifices Heb. 10. 5, 10.
were refused as unprofitable. Lo I come, or am come, scil. into the world, to
give my self a Sacrifice for sin. In the volume, Heb. 10 10. Joh. 6. 38. Psalm.
2. 8.
or role of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy will; by the
which will we are sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus once.
In respect of his kingdom, power, glory, dignity, dominion and rule or
government. Ask of me, and I will Psalm. 72. 8, 11.
givethee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost Psalm. 89. 30,
37, 38.
parts of the earth for thy possession. He shall have dominion from Sea to Sea,
and from the River unto the ends of the Land. All Kings shall worship him, all
Nations shall do him service. His seed shall be for ever, and his throne as
the Sun before me. As the Moon it shall be established for ever: And as a
faithful witness Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 13. Ps. 22. 23.
in heaven. His seed will I establish for ever; that is, Christians borne of
God, which are called Christ's seed and children, as Christ is called the
everlasting Father. Thou have ascended up on high, Isa. 9. 6. Psa. 68. 18. Ephesians.
4. 8, 9.
thou have led captivity captive, thou have taken gifts for men, that is, thou
have given and distributed gifts among men, which are the Ministers of the
Gospel, given for the good of the Church. Ps. 89. 34, 35, 36. 2 Samuel 7. 28.
Thou have told this goodness unto thy servant, Psalm. 89. 24. My truth also,
and my mercy shall be with him, Ps. 132. 11. The Lord swear unto David in
truth, Ps. 22. 1.


This Covenant the Lord made of his rich mercy and grace, which he confirmed by
Oath, My mercy I will not make frustrate from with him, nor deal falsely
against my faithfulness. I will not profane my Covenant, nor alter that which
is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, if I lie unto
David. Once have I sworn, as God spoke once, Psalm. 62. 11. that is,
unchangeably: for an oath cannot be revoked, there is no danger of inconstancy.
David himself was a type, and did bear the person of Christ, and many things
spoken of David, were more properly fulfilled in Christ the person typified,
then in David: as, My God, my God, why have thou forsak^n me. They parted my
Mat. 27. 46. Psalm. 22. 18, 19. Joh. 19. 2^, 24. Ps. 41. 9. Joh. 13. 18. Ps 69.
21. Job 29. 28, 2^.
garments among them, and for my coat they cast lots. They pierced my hands and
my feet. He that eat bread at my table, has lift up the heel against me.

The things promised in this Covenant particularly, above those that were
mentioned in the former breakings forth thereof, are

1. That God would be with him, whethersoever he went, and 2 Samuel 7. 9. Psalm.
89. 22, 23.
make his way prosperous, and cut off all his enemies from before his face,
that he might make him a great Name, like to the name of the great men upon
earth. And thus the Lord delivered him from the hand of Saul, and all his
enemies, who did oppose him that he should not reign, O ye sons of men, how
long will ye turn Psalm 4. 3, 4.
my glory into shame? How long will ye love vanity, and seek after leesing?
Selah. Know ye, that the Lord has wonderfully separated to himself the man
that is godly: the Lord will hear when I call upon him.

2. That he would appoint a place for his people Israel, and plant 2 Samuel 7.
10. ^ Kin. 5. 3. 1 Chronicles. 20. 9.
it, that they might dwell in a place of their own, and move no more, nor be
disquieted any more by wicked people, as in former times. And so God gave
Israel rest from all their enemies round about, and settled them in peace and
quietness by the hand of David.

3. That when the days of David were fulfilled, and he shall 2 Samuel 7. 12, 1^
sleep with his Fathers, he would set up his seed after him, which should
proceed out of his body, and he should build an house or Temple for the Name of
the Lord God of Israel. I purpose (says 1 King. 5 5. ^ Chron. 20 10 which is
called an house of rest, Psalm. 132. 8. 1 Chro* 28. 2. 2 Chro. 6. 41. and the
Lords seat or habitation, Ps. 132. 13 Ps. 68, 17. 1 Kin. 8. 18, 19, 20.
Solomon) to build an house unto the Name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spoke
unto David my Father, saying, Thy Son, whom I will set upon thy throne for
thee, he shall build an house unto my Name. And at the dedication of the Temple
he makes mention of this promise: The Lord said unto David my Father, whereas
it was in thine heart to build an house unto my Name, thou did well, that
thou wast so minded: Nevertheless thou shall not build the house, but thy son
that shall come out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto the Lord. And
the Lord has made good the word, which he spoke. I have built thee an house to
dwell in, an habitation for thee to abide in for ever. ^ Kin. 8. 13.


4. He promises to be a Father to David's seed, and take him 2 Sa. 7. 14. Psa.
132. 12. Ps. 89. 26, 27.
for his Son. He shall call upon me, thou art my Father, my God, the rock of my
salvation. And I will make him my firstborn, higher then the Kings of the
earth; that is, the Prince and chief Col. 1. 15, 18. Heb. 1. 2. Just in
institut. l. 2. tit. ^9. de baered. qualit and differ. ult.
of the Kings, the most glorious and famous of all Kings. As Christ is called
the first begotten of every creature, not that he was created before all other
creatures, but because he is the Lord, Prince and head of every creature, and
has dominion over all creatures: and so the heir of all things, as heir, is
sometimes put for Lord or owner, and pro haerede gerere, is, pro Domino gerere.
Haeredes enim veteres pro Dominis appellabant.

5. That his house should be established and his Kingdom for ever 2 Samuel ^.
16. 1 Chronicles. 22. 16 Ps. 89. 29. Psa. 89. 36, 37. 1 Kin. 11. 38. And if thou
hearken unto all that I command, etc. I will build the^ a f^rme house, etc.
before the Lord, even his throne should be established for ever. His seed will
I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of Heaven. His seed
shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be as the Sun before me. He shall
be established for evermore as the Moon, as a faithful witness in the heaven:
that is, his Kingdom shall be perpetual and glorious. For although the Moon
waxes and waineth and seems sometimes to be gone, yet it is continually
renewed, and so stable: which is a fit resemblance of the Church, which has
not always one face or appearance in the world, though it be perpetual. And
though for the sins of the people and David's house, the state of his Kingdom
and house Ps. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33.
decayed, yet God reserved still a root, till he had accomplished this promise
in Christ.

6. That his house should be as the Morning light, when the Sun 2 Samuel 23. 4.
Ps. 132. 15, 16. Her victuals I will bless, her poor I will satisfy with
bread, Psalm. 18. 28. The Lord has lightened my candle, that is, given me
comfort, joy, prosperity after troubles. 2 Samuel 23. 5.
arises, the morning I say without clouds, and as the grass of the earth with
clear shining after rain: that is, it shall shine with all light of glory and
prosperity, and flourish or be green perpetually, as the herbs and grass
which is refreshed with seasonable rain and heat.

These gracious and free promises God made to David and to his house, and to
the whole Kingdom of Israel, not for their righteousness, but of his manifold
and great mercy. And as he promised them without consideration of their desert,
so of his rich grace and love undeserved, he made them good. For David's house
was not such as it ought to be before God, they kept not promise and Covenant:
but the Lord was merciful and gracious, he did not forget his truth, nor
suffer his mercies to fail* If his children Ps. 89. 30, 31, 32
forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break 2 Samuel 7. 14,
15. 1 King. 11. 11, 12, 32, 33, 34, 36. Psalm. 132. 11, 12.
my statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes: But my loving
kindness will I not take from him, neither will I falsify my truth. True it
is, the Lord did correct the posterity of David for their sin with moderate
correction, and for their profit, that they might be partakers of holiness:
But even when it did not bud or come on according to that which seemed to be
promised, the Lord was most faithful in his promises: for it was their sin
that kept them down. And for this (says the Lord 1 King. 11. 39.
to Solomon) I will afflict the house of David, but not for ever: for the whole
spiritual kingdom was restored in the Messiah. I will make the horn of David
to bud, I have ordained a lamp Psalm. 132. 17, 18. 1 King. 15. 4.
for mine anointed: that is, I will make the Kingdom and power to increase.
For David's sake did the Lord his God give him a light in Jerusalem, and set up
his son after him, and established Jerusalem. Yet the Lord would not destroy
Judah, for David his 2 King. 8. 19.
servants sake, as he had promised him, to give him a light, and to his
children for ever. Great deliverance gives he unto his King (he is the
magnifier of salvations unto his King) and shows mercy Psalm. 18. 51.
unto his anointed, to David and to his seed for ever.

7. That the Priests should be clothed with salvation, and the Psalm. 132. 16.
Saints with joyfullnesse: that is, the ministration of the Priests should be
profitable and saving to the people, which should be an ornament to them, as a
garment of honor, and the people should sing cheerfully. The salvation of the
person only is not here meant, but the conservation of the ministry; as if it
should be said, I will cause that the ministry of the Priests be safe, that it
shall not be troubled with ungodly men, nor defiled with the filth of error:
and that it shall be effectual in the minds of the godly, and many by the
blessing of this ministry may obtain eternal happiness. It may also be
applied to the private salvation of the Priests, because they should be
defended and protected from above, and adorned with blessings of all kind.
Great and precious are the promises which God has given to Israel in this
Covenant: as that God by visible testimonies of his presence would be pleased
to dwell amongst them, and not forsake them, that he would hear their prayers,
when they prayed before him toward his holy Temple; that the Church and
polity of Israel should continue, that it should be effectual, and the people
blessed with rest, peace, 2 Samuel 25. 5. Romans 11. 29. Lam. 5. 19. Gal. 3. 20. 2 Samuel 25. 5. Sept. (...). Psalm. 5. 4. (...). Psalm. 23. 5. Isa. 21. 5. Sept.
(...) Ps. 178. 19* Psalm. 132. 17. Judge. 20. 22. Genesis 14. 8. Sept. (...). and
22. 9. (...), Lev. 1. 7, 8, 12. Sept. (...), Al. (...). Prove. 9. 2. Sept.
(...). Aquin. (...). Sym. (...). Th. (...). Josh. 2. 8. Psa. 50. 21. 1 King. 2.
3, 4. 1 King. 3. 6. 1 King. 8. 57, 58. 1 Chro. 28. 7. I will establish his
Kingdom for ever, if he endeavor to do my Commandments. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Psalm,
78. 71. Psalm. 101. 1, 2. Hodie non imperavi, quia nemini been seci.
joy and blessings of all sorts spiritual and temporal.

This Covenant that God made with David is everlasting, that is unchangeable:
because the gifts and calling of God is without repentance. His word shall be
established for ever in Heaven: and though the course of the promise be
interrupted for a time, it shall bud, and spring, and bring forth fruit.

It is also a well ordered Covenant in all things, fitly marshalled, disposed
or set forth as an army in comely order, orderly addressed, prepared, settled,
furnished, directed, firm and sure: that is, the good things promised were all
prepared and in readiness, and should be performed in comely order, and fit
season. But the ordering of this most desired and saving Covenant, was in the
power and pleasure of God, both in respect of his house, the Kingdom, and the
whole Church of Christ, who had faithfully promised, and would effectually make
good in his own time, whatsoever he had spoken.

And it is a sure Covenant faithfully to be kept and observed: a Covenant that
God does remember, takes heed unto, and will make good for his mercy sake. For
the Lord is faithful, and will not deny himself, though we be inconstant,
unfaithful and apt to start aside.

The condition of this Covenant is, that they should walk in the ways of the
Lord, and keep his watch; take heed to the charge of the Lord their God, and
keep his statutes and his Commandments, and his judgments, and his
testimonies; to walk before the Lord in truth, with all their souls. The Lord
our God be with us, as he was with our Fathers that he forsake us not, nor
leave us: That he may bow our hearts unto him, that we may walk in all his
ways, and keep his Commandments, and his Statutes, and his Laws, which he
commanded our Fathers. Particularly, He that rules over men, that is, the
Israelites, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. And thus it is observed
of David, That he f^d Jacob and Israel according to the integrity of his heart,
and guided, or led them by the discretion of his hands; that is, with most
prudent and discreet administration managed he them. This was that which David
promised, I will sing of mercy and judgment to thee, O Lord, will I sing: I
will do wisely in the perfect way, oh, when will thou come unto me. The
Priests they must justly and holily administer their office. Let the Priests be
clothed Psalm. 132. 9.
with righteousness: The Prophet speaks not so much of the righteousness of
their persons, but of their office: the first is a great ornament of the
ministry, the other more necessary in respect of the body of the Church; sc.
that they fulfill their ministry, teaching sound and incorrupt doctrine,
exhorting, admonishing, comforting, sacrificing, and performing all other
offices and services which the Lord commanded. The whole body of the people,
they should walk in holiness, sing of the praises of God, and give up
themselves unto God as an holy people, zealous of good works.

As for the execution of this Covenant; First, David did fight the wars of
God, and the Lord was with him, and did prosper 2 Samuel 7. 2. 1 Chro. 17. 2. 1
Chro. 23. 25. 2 Samuel 5. 9, 10, 12. 1 Chro. 1^. 1, 3. and 16. 1, 2, 3, etc. Ps.
132. 1, 2, 3. A^xia animi sollicitudine.
him, until his enemies were subdued, and the people had rest and peace from
them that were round about them.

2. He prepared a place for the Ark of the Lord at Jerusalem, and set it
there. David prepared a place for the Ark of the Lord, and pitched for it a
tent: And he gathered all Israel together to bring up the Ark of the Lord unto
his place which he had ordained for it. Remember David, and all his
afflictions; how he swore unto God, and vowed a vow unto the mighty God of
Jacob.

3. He set the courses of the Priests in their offices, and the Levites 2 Chronicles
8. 14. and 29. 25. 1 Chronicles. 23. 28, 29, 30. 1 Chronicles. 24 1, 2, etc.
in their watches, for to praise and minister before the Priests every day, and
the Porters by their courses at every gate. The office of the Levites was under
the hand of the son of Aaron, for the service of the house of the Lord in the
courts, and chambers, and in the purifying of holy things, and in the work of
the service of the house of God, etc. So David and the Captains of the Army 1
Chro. 25. 1, 2.
separated for the ministry, the sons of Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun, who
should sing prophecies with Harpes, with Viols, and with Cymbals. He appointed
also divisions of Porters of 1 Chro. 26. 1^.
the chief men, having the charge among their brethren, to serve in the house
of the Lord. And of the Levites, Abijah was over the treasures of the house of
God, and over the treasures of the dedicate things. And Shelomith and his
brethren were over all the treasures of the dedicate things, which David the
King; and verse. ^6.
the chief Fathers, the Captains over thousands, and hundreds, and the
Captains of the Army had dedicated.

4. He made preparation for the house of God, exhorted the Princes, and
encouraged his son Solomon unto the work. I have 1 Chro. 28. 11, 12, 20, 21.
1 Chro. 29. 2, 3.
prepared with all my power for the house of my God, gold for vessels of gold,
and silver for them of silver, etc. Moreover, because I have delight in the
house of my God, I have of mine own gold and silver, which I have given to the
house of my God, beside all that I have prepared for the house of the
Sanctuary. And the verse. 7, 8, 9.
Princes of the families gave for the service of the house of God, five
thousand talents of gold, and ten thousand pieces, etc. And they with whom
precious stones were found, gave them to the treasure of the house of the Lord.
And the people rejoiced when they offered willingly; for they offered willingly
unto the Lord with a fit heart.

5. God gave Solomon a large heart for wisdom and understanding, to go in
and out before the people. Behold, I have done 1 King. 3. 12, 28.
according to thy words; lo I have given thee a wise and an understanding 2 Chronicles. 1. 7, 12.
heart, so that there has been none like thee before thee, neither after thee
shall arise the like unto thee.

6. The Lord magnified Solomon in dignity, in the sight of all 1 Chro. 29. 25.
Israel, and gave him so glorious a Kingdom, as no King had before him in
Israel. And the King gave silver and gold at Jerusalem 2 Chronicles. 1. 1^. and 9.
27. 2 Chronicles. 9. 22. ver. 23.
as stones, and gave Cedar trees as the wild fig trees, that are abundantly
in the plain. So King Solomon excelled all the Kings of the earth, in riches
and wisdom. And all the Kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to
hear his wisdom that God had put in his heart. And they brought every ver.
26. 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12, 13. 1 King. 6. 1. 2 Chronicles. ^. 1^.
man his present. And he reigned over all the Kings from the river, even unto
the Land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

7. Solomon built the Temple upon the Mount Mo^iah, the place appointed and
appropriated by the Lord, according to the pattern showed unto him by his
father David. So Solomon began to build the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, in
Mount Moriah, which had been declared unto David his Father, in the place that
David prepared in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

8. Also he dedicated the house of God, blessed the people, praised God for his
goodness, prayed unto the Lord that his eyes ^ Chron. 6. ^^, 20, 21, etc.
might be open toward this house day and night, even toward this place,
whereof the Lord had said, that he would put his name there, that he would
hearken unto the prayer, which his servants pray in that place. This prayer of
Solomon the Lord answered first by signs of acceptance: for when he had made
an end of praying, fire 2 Chronicles. 7. 1, 2.
came down from Heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices:
and the glory of the Lord filled the house, so that the Priests could not enter
into the house of the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had filled the Lords
house. And then the Lord appeared to Solomon 2 Chronicles. 7. 12, 13, 16.
by night, and said to him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place
for my self to be an house of Sacrifice. And I have now chosen and sanctified
this house, that my Name may be there for ever: and mine eyes, and mine heart
shall be there perpetually. And if thou will walk before me, as David thy
Father walked, to do according Verse. 17, 18.
unto all that I have commanded thee; and shall observe my Statutes and my
Judgments, Then will I establish the throne of thy Kingdom according as I
made the Covenant with David thy Father, saying, Thou shall not want a man to
be ruler in Israel.

Hitherto things succeeded prosperously, the King going before, the people
followed with joy and cheerfulness, and the blessing of God accompanied them.
But when they turned aside, and forsook the statutes and commandments, which
the Lord had set before them, and went and served other Gods, and worshipped
them, then the Lord afflicted the house of David, and the house which he had
sanctified for his name, he cast out of his sight, and made it a Proverb and a
common talk among all people, and an astonishment to every one that passed by.

In this Covenant therefore the internal efficacy and outward administration
is to be distinguished: or some things are absolutely promised, or if upon
condition so as God will make good the condition; others are conditionally
promised, so as they take not effect, because the condition was not made good.
In the first sense, God promised a Son to David, who should sit upon his
throne, and build an house unto the Lord God of Israel: He promised also to
establish his throne for ever: but that took not effect in Solomon, but in
Christ, who came of the loins of David, and in whose hand the spiritual
Kingdom was established for ever-more. I will establish thy seed for ever; and
I will build thy Psalm. 89. 5. Verse. 30.
throne from generation to generation. If you seek for corporal succession in
the stock of David, it failed together with the Kingdom: but this eternity is
to be found in Christ, who builded a Kingdom, that shall never fade; an
heavenly and spiritual Kingdom, which shall not cease, before things that are
in Heaven do perish and vanish away, that is, never; not earthly and
corporal, which is subject to change and alteration. In this sense 2 Samuel 23.
5.
David says, This was all his Salvation, and all his desire, although he made
it not to bud, that is, he rested in this alone, that God would effect and make
good his promise; not for their righteousness, (for David's house was not such
as it ought, kept not Covenant with God) but for his great names sake. In the
second sense many things were promised, which never took effect, and yet God
is faithful and true, because the condition was broken. To the spiritual
house of David, so to speak, was promised pardon of sin, adoption, comfort,
joy, and an heavenly inheritance; all this was made good, for God freely called
them by his Spirit, and by his power kept them by faith unto Salvation. Though
the house of David lost the Kingdom and government in Israel, yet God
preserved his posterity until Christ came, in whom the throne of David was
established for ever: for this was absolutely promised. But the temporal glory
of David's house, and the peace of Israel was changed, because they changed the
ordinances, neglected the charge, and brake the Commandments of God. If his
sons forsake my Law, and walk not in my Psalm. 89. 31, 32*
judgments: If they profane my statutes, and keep not my Commandments; Then
will I visit his transgressions with the rod, and his sin with scourges. If ye
turn away, and forsake my statutes and my Commandments, 2 Chronicles. 7. 19, 20,
21, 22.
which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods and worship
them, Then will I pluck them up out of my Land which I have given them, and
this House which I have sanctified for my Name, will I cast out of my sight,
and will make it to be a Proverb and a common talk among all people. And this
House which is most high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passes by
it, so that he shall say, Why has the Lord done thus to this Land, and to this
House? And they shall answer, Because they forsook the Lord God of their
Fathers, which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and have taken Sep. (...).
hold on other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them, therefore has
he brought all this evil upon them. David's heart was not perfect with the Lord
in the matter of Vriah, and for that cause the sword of God never departed from
his house. When Solom^n waxed old, and gave his heart to pleasure, his
outlandish wives enticed him to Idolatry: and the Lord rent ten tribes from the
house of David. In after times the house of David fell away more and more, the
Priests neglected the charge of God, and the people grew profane, obstinate,
impenitent: and then the Lord abhorred his people, was wroth with his heritage,
and gave his glory unto the enemies hand. Jerusalem was laid wast and desolate,
the Temple burnt with fire, the Princes led captive and made tributary, the
aged were despised, the young men made slaves and bond men, maidens d^floured,
and children dashed against the walls. They were slain with the sword, burnt
up with famine, languished through oppression, misery and sorrow, had in
contempt and derision daily, but there was none to pity or comfort them.
Nevertheless, the promise of God was firm and sure to all the seed, in
respect of the things absolutely promised, for the infidelity of man cannot
make the faith of God of none effect.

Hence we learn, two things are to be considered in the Covenant, 1. The
persons in Covenant according to the external administration, or according to
the effectual purpose and internal administration. 2. The good things
promised not only temporal, but spiritual. For they are either such as are
absolutely necessary to salvation, or such as concern the welfare of a
Christian, his peace, joy, cheerful and constant walking with God without
offense, and such like. To the first sort, the promises of the Covenant are
made sincerely, but conditionally, If they do well they shall be accepted; if
they consent and obey, they shall inherit the good things of the Land. To the
other being effectually called, all other promises are made absolutely, or at
least shall absolutely be made good, because God will give them to do what he
requires. Effectual calling is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. It is wrought freely, effectually,
certainly, but when, where and as the Lord will, not conditionally, nor
according to promise to this or that person. God promises he will preserve his
Church, and uphold the seed of David: but to this or that person God has not
promised, that he shall be brought home, or gathered to the flock. The Covenant
made presupposes man called, and taking hold of the Covenant, it does not
promise that he shall be effectually wrought upon, and powerfully drawn to lay
hold upon the promise. Faith is the gift of God, which he gives as he
pleases: but to the believer he assures all other necessary good things, with
continuance in faith, according to his free Covenant.

Of good things spiritual there be two sorts, as was said, some absolutely
necessary, as faith, repentance, pardon of sin, perseverance, eternal life,
and these are all most certainly promised, and assuredly conferred. And though
Justification and eternal life be conditional, promised unto and so bestowed
upon the unfeigned believer: yet may they be called absolute, because God gives
to the man in Covenant every thing necessary to Salvation. Other things are
good in themselves and profitable, as joy and cheerfulness of heart,
deliverance from scandalous and reproachful evils, wounding conscience, and
grieving the Spirit. And these are not promised, nor evermore bestowed upon the
faithful. David may be an instance hereof; He was not preserved from
sinne-wasting conscience, and staining the soul, but was recovered from the
danger thereof. To repent of the sin, and to be pardoned of free grace, was
necessary to Salvation, God therefore vouchsafed this sure mercy unto him. To
be kept from falling was not of that necessity, God therefore suffered him to
fall to cure pride of heart, make him know himself, and magnify the riches of
his grace in his recovery.

This is evident from this, that in the Covenant as the Lord promised mercy,
which he performed, so he threatened judgment, and destruction against them
that did disobey, if they persisted obstinate and would not return. And
therefore both in showing mercy, and inflicting punishment, the Lord dealt
according to promise. Sometimes when the house of David sinned, the Lord spared
them, but then he gave them hearts to humble themselves, and so the judgment
was prevented. Thus says the Lord* Ye have forsaken me, therefore have I also
left you in the 2 Chronicles. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Sept. (...). Sept. (...).
hands of Shishak. Then the Princes of Israel, and the King humbled themselves,
and said. The Lord is just. And when the Lord saw, that they humbled
themselves, the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will send them deliverance
shortly, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of
Shishak. Nevertheless they shall be his servants: so shall they know my
service, and the service of the verse. 12.
Kings of the earth. And because he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord
turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether. And also in Judah
the things prospered. Sometimes the Lord poured his wrath upon Judah and
Jerusalem, according as he threatened, but he let them go on in the
stubbornness of their hearts, until they had filled up the measure of their
iniquity, and till there was no remedy. So he gave them into the enemies hand,
and suffered his Name to be polluted amongst the Heathen, when he had tried by
all means to bring them home, but they would not repent. The Kingdom of David
was for ever established, and God preserved a Church and people unto himself,
according to his good pleasure, for this was absolutely willed and foretold,
but performed according to promise of free grace and love. Thus God is serious
in all his Promises and Commandments, according as he is pleased to give them:
and effectually brings to pass his own purpose of grace, according to that
which he has promised. With this promise they press the Lord in their
captivity, Why do thou forg^t Lam. 5. 20. 21. Sept. (...). Psalm. 80. 4. Psalm.
126. 1, 2. Psalm 4. 7.
us for ever, and forsake us so long time? Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and
we shall be turned: renew our days as of old: Turn us, O God, or restore us,
to wit, from sorrow to joy, from captivity to liberty: cause thy face to shine,
that is, to be light, cheerful, comfortable: and we shall be saved.

CHAP. X. Of the Covenant that God made with Israel, after the Babylonish
Captivity.
WHen the people of Israel was almost clean destroyed and wasted in the
Babylonian Captivity, the Lord by many ample promises did assure, that he would
deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, and bring them again into their
own land, set up the tokens of his presence amongst them, and delight in them
to do them good. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says Isai. 4^ 1, 2. Genesis
34. 3.
your God: speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; for she has received
of the Lord double for all her sins: that is, she has been punished enough
and more then enough for her transgressions. Jer. 1^. 18. and 17. 18.
Behold, the Lord will come with strong hand, and his arm will rule for him:
behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. He Revel. 18. 6. Isai.
40. ^0, 1^.
shall feed his slock like a sheepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
arm, and carry them into his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel: Isai. 41. 14, 15,
16.
I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel.
Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou
shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as
chafe. Thou shall fan them, and the wind Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 17. and 20. 8,
9.
shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou sh^lt
rejoice in the Lord, and shall glory in the holy One of Israel. When the poor
and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I
the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will verse. 18. 19.
not forsake them. I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the
midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a poole of water, and the
dry Land springs of water. But now thus says the Lord that created thee O
Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not; Isai. 43. 1, 2, 3.
for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers,
they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy
God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom,
Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Remember Isai. 44. 21, 22, 23.
these, O Jacob and Israel, for thou art my servant: I have formed thee: thou
art my servant, O Israel; thou shall not be forgotten of me. I have blotted
out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins: return
unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord has done
it: shoot ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing ye mountains;
O Forest and every tree therein: for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and
glorified himself in Israel. Th^^ says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that
formed thee from the womb; verse. ^4.
I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens above,
that spreads abroad the earth by my self. That frustrateth 25.
the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad, that turns wisemen
backward, and makes their knowledge foolish: That conf^rmeth the word of his
servant, and performs the counsel of his messengers, that says to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah, Ye shall be
built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof. That says to the deep,
Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers. That says of Cyr^s, He is my
sheepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, (...) sayin Isai. 45. ^^.
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be
laid, Thus says the Lord, The labor of Egypt, and merchandise Isai. 45. 14,
15.
of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature shall come over unto thee, and
they shall be thine, they shall come after thee, in chains they shall come
over: and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto
thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none else, there is no God.
Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting ver. 17.
Salvation; ye shall not be ashamed, nor confounded world without end. Hearken
unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house Isai. 46. 3, 4.
of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the
womb. And even to your old age I am he, and even to hoare hairs will I carry
you: I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry and will deliver you. I
will bring near my righteousness: it shall not be verse. 13.
far off, and my Salvation shall not tarry: and I will place Salvation in
Sion for Israel my glory. Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Isai. 48.
20, 21.
Chaldean with a voice of singing, declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the
end of the earth: say ye, The Lord has redeemed his servant Jacob. And they
thirsted not when he led them through the deserts, he caused the waters to flow
out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.
The promises to this purpose are very many, and because it was an hard matter
to persuade the faint and drooping spirit broken with long and grievous
calamities, the Lord is pleased to confirm his promises by sundry arguments,
some whereof we will here repeat, because the ample promises of their return,
and the repair of the City and Temple, does give some light what Covenant the
Lord made with them after their return.

First, God promises to deliver them, because they had been beloved of him of
old time. I am the Lord thy God, the holy One of Isai. 43. 3, 4, 5, 6. Isai.
46. 3, 4.
Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Fear
not, for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee
from the West. I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not
back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth.
Even every one that is called by my Name: for I have created him for my glory,
I have formed him, yea, I have made him.

Secondly, The Lord has not sold them for price or gain, therefore he might
redeem them without money. Awake, awake, Isai. 52. 1, 2, 3. fortem posce
animum.
put on thy strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem the
holy City; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised
and the unclean. Shake thy self from the dust: arise, and sit down, O
Jerusalem: loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of
Zion: For thus says the Lord, Ye have sold your selves for naught: and ye
shall be redeemed without money.

Thirdly, By former experience he does assure them of their future Isai. 52. 4,
5.
return into their own place. For thus says the Lord God, My people went down
aforetime into Egypt, to sojourne there, and the Assyrian oppressed them
without cause. Now therefore what have I here, says the Lord, that my people
is taken away for naught? they that rule over them make them to howl, says
the Lord, and my Name continually is blasphemed. Therefore my people shall know
my Name: therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he that does speak.
Behold it is I.

Fourthly, This shall be to the Lord for a name and glory. For Isai. 48. 11.
and 42. 8.
mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how should my Name
be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another. I will cause the
Captivity of Judah, and the Captivity of Israel to return, and will build them
as at the first. And I will cleanse them from all Jer. 33. 7, 8, 9. Ezekiel. 36.
22, 23.
their iniquity, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed
against me. And it shall be unto me a Name of joy, a praise, and an honor
before all the nations of the earth, that shall hear all the good that I do
unto them: and they shall f^are and tremble for all the goodness, and for all
the prosperity that I procure unto it, etc.

Fifthly, That they might not faint through the long and great calamity which
went before deliverance, the Prophet in the Name of the Lord, sets before
them the glory and dignity of the Messiah which followed his humiliation.
Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and
be very Isai. 52. 13, 14.
high. As many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred more than any
man, and his form more then the sons of men) so shall he sprinkle many
nations, the Kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been
told them, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they
consider. Another Prophet directing the faithful how to behave themselves in
that long and grievous Captivity, scil. to wait patiently for the
accomplishment of the Promise, because the vision would speak in its appointed
season, and not lie, he does unfold the Doctrine of free Justification by faith
in Christ more plainly then formerly it had been expressed in the Law of
Moses, adding, Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright Hab. 2. 4.
in him: but the just shall live by his faith. Whence the Apostle infers,
that we are justified by free grace, and not by the works of the Law in the
fight of God. In the Original Gal. 3. 11.
it is, The just shall live in his faith: but that particle is often very well
(...)
rendered by Deuteronomy. 6. 5* Mar. 12. 30. Luke 10. 27. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Heb.
10. 38. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Hos. 12. 13. Psalm. 78. 2. Act. 17. 28. Psalm. 18. 30.
Matthew. 17. 21. Phil. 4. 13.
Of, or By: and it is all one whether we read it, The just shall live by, of,
or in faith, the sense being, The just shall live the life of grace here, and
of glory hereafter in or by faith. That which the Prophet speaks in general
of all the Promises of God, that the godly might certainly and constantly hold,
in what thing they ought to rest in the midst of all storms and tempests, and
whence they may live securely in the distresses of death, that the Apostle does
specially interpret of Justification and life eternal, which we obtain by
faith. The Prophet and Apostle both speak of a lively faith, which is
effectual to bring forth good works: but we obtain life eternal by faith, and
not by works. To live here is to obtain life or glory, not to lead our life
according to the Law, or rule of righteousness: as the drift of the Prophet,
and Exposition of the Apostle, opposing the life which is by faith, to that
which is by the works of the Law, which could not be, if to live by faith had
been to direct our life according to the Law. Though then the righteous man
must exercise himself in righteousness, yet he is justified and lives, that
is, obtains life eternal by faith, and not by the works of faith.

Now the Lord, the strong Redeemer of his people, according Jer. 24. 6, 7. and
50. 20, 34. Ezekiel. 20. 34, 35, 37.
to the word of his Prophets, brought back their Captivity with joy in his time
appointed, planted them in their own Land, brought them into the bond of his
Covenant, and set up his Tabernacle amongst them. When the Lord (says the
Psalmist) brought back the Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.
Psalm. 126. 1, 2.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then
said they amongst the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. And
the Prophet Zachary, As for thee also, by the blood Zech. 9. 11.
of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no
water. By this great, special, late and new blessing, the Lord did bind his
Israel unto him more strongly then heretofore. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Jer. 23. 7, 8. and 16. 14, 15.
Lord lives, which brought up the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt.
But, the Lord lives, which brought up, and which led the seed of the house of
Israel out of the North Country, and from all Countries whither I had driven
them, and they shall dwell in their own Land. In respect of this late and new
blessing vouchsafed, the Covenant that God made with his people now brought
back and planted in their own Land, may be called New: but in respect of the
Author, matter, form, end, effects, and means of administration, teaching and
applying, it was one with the former. Nevertheless, the Covenant which God
made with his inheritance upon their delivery from the North Country, did
exceed the former which he had made with their Fathers, when he brought them
out of Egypt, in diverse respects.

First, the Mediator in and through whom this Covenant was made or promised,
is more plainly revealed, both in respect of his person, humiliation,
resurrection, place of his birth, time of his coming, kingly office, and
manifest tokens whereby he should be known, then in the former expressions.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, Jer. 23. 5, 6. and 33. 14, 15. Isai. 40. 2. Zech. 3. 8.
and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice
in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely,
and this is his name, whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness.
Surely he has borne our griefs, and Isai. 53. 4.
carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted: but he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed: yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he ver. 10.
has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see the travel of his soul, ver. 11.
and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many: for he shall bear their iniquities. But thou, Bethlehem Mich. 5. 2.
Matthew. 2. 6.
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel: whose goings forth
have been from of old, from everlasting. Seventy weeks Dan. 9. 24.
are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to finish the
transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the
vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Rejoice greatly, O Zech. 9.
9.
daughter of Zion, shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King comes
unto thee: he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass,
and upon a Colt the foale of an Ass. In the Promise of this Covenant, these
and the like descriptions we have of the promised Messiah, by whom the
Salvation of the Church is wrought, and in whom all the Promises of God are
established.

Secondly, Spiritual benefits and the graces of the Spirit were more
plentifully bestowed upon the Church, under this Covenant, then formerly. For
thus the promise runs, I will set mine Jer. 24. 6, 7.
eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this Land, and I will
build them, and not pull them down, and I will plant them, and not pluck them
up. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me
with their whole heart. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray
unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me and find me, when
ye shall search for me with all Jer. 29. 12, 13.
your heart. And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me:
for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord?
They shall come with weeping, and with supplications Jer. 30. 20, 21. Jer. 31.
9.
will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, in a
straight way wherein they shall not stumble, for I am a Father to Israel, and
Ephraim is my first born: Therefore they shall come and sing ver. 12.
in the height of Zion, and they shall flow together to the goodness of the
Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock,
and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall
not sorrow any more at all. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit Isai. 4^. 3, 4, 5.
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring: And they shall spring up
as among the grass, as the willowes by the watercourse. One shall say, I am
the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name
of Israel.

Thirdly, in the very tenor and administration of the Covenant it self it did
excel. For this Covenant after it once began, did continue without
interruption, until it was perfected by the New Testament properly so called,
whereas the former Covenant was broken or did expire. For during the time of
the Babylonish Captivity, neither Judah nor Israel had either wandering
Tabernacle Jer. 23. 6, 7.
or standing Temple: But in this Covenant, God did so assist Zerubbabel in the
building of the Temple, that he brought forth Zach. 4. 7. ver 9.
the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto it; He laid
the foundation of the house, and his hands also finished it: and the Lord so
preserved it, that it continued until Christ taking our nature upon him, came
and dwelt amongst his people. I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all
Nations shall come, Hag. 2. 7, 8, 9.
and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The silver is
mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts. The glory of this latter
house shall be greater then of the former, says the Lord of Hosts: and in this
place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts. And so we commonly find the
promise of calling the Gentiles, and bringing them into the sheepfold of Jesus
Jer. 16. 19.
Christ, is commonly annexed to this Covenant. O Lord, my strength and my
fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction: The Gentiles shall come unto
thee from the ends of the earth, and Jer. 32. 37, 38, 39.
shall say, surely our Fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things* wherein
there is no profit. Behold I will gather them out of all Countries, whether I
have driven them in mine anger, and Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18, 19. Eze. 20. 40, 41, 42,
43. Lam. 4. 22. Thy punishment O daughter of Zion, is finished, he will not
add to give thee to be carried away, scil. after thou shall return into thy
Country out of present Captivity.
in my fury, and in great wrath, and I will bring them again into this place,
and I will cause them to dwell safely: And they shall be my people, and I will
be their God. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. And I will
make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to
do them good: but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. And in these respects, this Covenant which pertained to the old
Testament might be called an inchoation of the new: because the old ordinances
distilling grace in some measure into the whole Covenant, were to continue,
until Christ should be incarnate, and erect a new Tabernacle, which should
stand and continue for ever: when a new people should be added to the Lord, and
the old ordinances, because of their weakness, being taken down, a new form
should be set up, to abide for ever.

And from all this, we may briefly observe in what accidents the old and new
Testament differ one from another, when for substance they be one and the same.
They both flow from the free grace and mercy of God looking at poor sinners in
Jesus Christ. They have both one common matter: the obedience of Heb. 5, 8.
Act. 3. 19* Ephesians. 1. 14.
faith required, and life everlasting, and all secondary good things promised
by the imputation of the righteousness of faith, and free adoption in Jesus
Christ. They have both one object Jesus Christ, who being promised to the
Fathers in prophetical Scriptures, God has in due time exhibited under the
Gospel. They have both one general end, viz. the praise of the glorious grace
of God in Jesus Christ. Both Covenants are struck with mankind, as invested in
one and the same real and formal consideration, whither before or after
Christ, viz. with sinners, and those which work not, but believe in him that
justifies the ungodly. In both the same spirit sealed up the truth of the
Covenants to all under Covenant: for seeing the adoption, and inheritance in
some measure belonged to the Fathers in the old Testament, the earnest of that
inheritance cannot be denied them. But the new Covenant does in many things
outstrip the old, which do nothing derogate from their substantial and real
unity and agreement.

First, In the old Testament the Lord did proclaim himself to be merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth, which he confirmed
by great and wonderful deliverances of his people out of Egypt and Babylon:
but yet at first he gave his Law with signs of Majesty, glory and terror, yea
of anger and displeasure against sin and wickedness. But the new Exodus 19. 18.
Heb. 12. 21, 22, 23. Ephesians 2 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18.
Testament was given with manifest tokens of love, favor and free mercy, God
being reconciled in the Son of his love, and therein he has revealed his
superaboundant and transcendent love, mercy and long suffering, as shall be
showed hereafter.

Secondly, In the old Testament Christ was known to be the seed of the woman,
the selected seed of Abraham, his blood and death typified in Moses, his person
and office, humiliation and resurrection foretold by the Prophets, but all
these were more obscure and dark to the Jews: but in the new Testament Joh.
1. 12, ^^. Romans 1. 4. Gal. 3. 19. 2 Co. 1. 20
he is openly manifested to be the Son of God, made unto us of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, to whom the promise was made, and
by whose love and authority, as the great Testator of heaven, they are all
made, put forth, ratified and established.

Thirdly, The commandments of the old Testament were many Heb. 7. 16. Col. 2.
14, 15.
of them carnal* standing in ceremonial observances, and containing an
handwriting against them: and the promises were many corporal, as of an
earthly inheritance, so that by them their faith was to ascend up to spiritual
and heavenly things, and the spiritual promises were obscure, in number fewer,
and such as were far off. But the commandments of the new Covenant are
spiritual, Mat. 6. 33.
and the promises spiritual, plainly revealed, nigh at hand, ratified by the
coming of Christ, particular: earthly things are promised as an additament to
them that seek the Kingdom of heaven, and included in the spiritual.

Fourthly, Moses was the Mediator of the old Testament, a Gal. 3. 19.
typical, imperfect Mediator, as not a right middle person; a Heb. 9. 15. 8.
8. 6. and 12. 14.
Mediator in respect of the outward administration, and that by the power and
virtue of Christ, but the force of that Covenant had foundation in Christ, and
it was in and through Christ, that the federates were partakers of the good
things promised. But Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant, a true and
perfect Mediator, a right middle person between God and man; who has revealed
the Gospel, satisfied revenging justice, brought in everlasting righteousness:
who alone is able to remove the guilt of sin from the conscience, repair the
lost image of God in his people, bow their hearts to walk in obedience, and
procure acceptance to their service.

Fifthly, The old Testament was confirmed with the blood of Heb. 9. 18, 19, 20.
Heb. 9* 14. Mat. 26. 28.
beasts, because the typical Mediator was not Testator, and so was not to
die: but in the new Testament the true and perfect Mediator, was also the
Testator, and so the Covenant was confirmed by his precious blood.

Sixthly, The Law was written in tables of stone, yet so as it was Exodus 31.
18* Deuteronomy. 9. 10. Deuteronomy. 30. 6, 11* 12. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10.
engraven in the tables of the heart, though not in that plenty and abundance
that afterward: for under the old Testament God would have both letter and
spirit, but more letter and less spirit. But the Gospel is written in the
fleshie tables of the heart, yet so as it is committed to writing: for in the
new Testament the Lord would have both letter and spirit, but more spirit and
less letter then in the old Testament.

Seventhly, The old Covenant was made with one selected Nation, though
Proselites, if any offered themselves, might not be excluded; but in the new
Covenant, the world in opposition to Mat. 28. 1^ Dan. 7. 14.
the Jewish Nations, all Nations, people and languages are taken to be
federates.

Eighthly, The Law was weak, unable to give life, to purge Gal, 3. 21. and 4.
9. Heb. 8. 7. and 9. 13.
the conscience, to pacify the wrath of God, and therefore to be abrogated,
when Christ was come, whereunto it pointed, and the new ordinances were set up
and established: but the Gospel contains the unsearchable riches of God, is
the power of God Ephesians. 3. 8. Romans 1. 16. Mat. 26. 28. ^ Heb. 9. 14, 15. and 12.
24.
to Salvation, to continue for ever, and the blood of the new Testament does
expiate sin, purge the conscience, and speak better things then the blood of
Abel.

Ninthly, The federates under the old Covenant are compared unto an heir under
age, needing a Guardian, Tutour or Schoolmaster, little differing from a
servant, subject to the bondage of Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Gal. 4. 23, 24, 25.
the Ceremonial Law, and servitude of spirit, because the curse of the Law was
more severely pressed, and the blood of Christ, whereby freedom was purchased
more covertly and sparingly revealed: but the federates under the new are
grown up unto a ripe age in Jesus Christ, freed from the bondage of
Ceremonial ordinances, endued with holy liberty, partakers of the spirit of
adoption, whereby they cry Abba Father. But of the privileges of the federates
under the new Covenant, and the excellency of that Covenant in the Chapters
following.

CHAP. XI. Of Truth and Uprightness.
IT has often been said, that God accepts true, unfeigned and upright
obedience, and when the servants of God entreat mercy, we find they allege
the truth, uprightness, and integrity of their hearts, to show they were
rightly qualified to make a faithful plea for mercy: therefore (I conceive) it
will not be out of place here to show what Truth and Uprightness is, and then
proceed to the doctrine of the new Covenant.

Truth the Septuagint renders righteousness: for uprightness Genesis 24. 49.
Isa. 38. 19. and 39 8. Josh. 24. 14. Isa. 45. ^9. Pro. 28, 6. Pro. 8. 20.
and integrity they put truth: and for the paths of judgment, they have it,
the paths of truth. And in this sense to do truth, Joh. 3. 21. is, not to do
perversely, to do right, justice, integrity, as to deal perversely or unjustly,
Isa. 26. 10. they translate, not to do truth. In like manner, lies or
false-hood, deceit and fraud they translate injustice; as a false-witnesse, is
in them, Job 27. 4. Deu. 19. 18. Levit. 5. 22. Psalm. 44. 17. Jer. 5. 31. Amos
8. 5. Hos. 12. 7. Luke 16. 9, 11. Mal. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 22.
a witness of injustice, or an unjust witness, they swear falsely, is, they
swear unjustly: the Prophets prophecy false things, unjust things they render
it: a false balance, is a deceitful balance, or unjust balance, or balance
of injustice. And injustice is opposed to truth, and iniquity or
unrighteousness put for falsehood or deceit: the Mammon of iniquity, that is,
deceitful riches, is set against the true treasure, which will not deceive.
Iniquity was not found in his mouth, says the Prophet, that is, guile or
deceit. The deceitful, the Septuagint translates, the unrighteous and
guilefull man, Psalm. 43. 1. So that these four, Truth, Uprightness,
Righteousness and Integrity, do signify the same thing for substance, 1
King. 3. 6.
and most certain it is, they be so conjoined, that where one is, the other
cannot be wanting. But though the thing be one for substance, that is signified
by all these, and they be sometimes used indifferently, yet they note formal
and distinct conceits, and so may be considered.

Truth implies or presupposes these things;

1. Knowledge of Gods will. Truth of judgment goes before Mat. 16. 12.
truth of heart: for corrupt doctrine is as sour leaven, that leaveneth the
whole mass, makes the whole to savor of it.

2. Soundness or solidity in grace, opposite to those superficial and
shallow-planted graces, that may be found in temporary Christians, enduring but
for a time. This is truth in the reins or Psalm. 51. 6.
inward parts, which seasoneth the heart throughout, and makes it true, whereas
the heart of the temporary is false and unsound; because his graces are
superficially or slightly rooted.

3. Sincerity or godly simplicity without fraud, craft or guile, where the
inside and outside are one, the heart and mouth equal and well consenting.
Truth is an ingenuous life without deceit and dissimulation, Ephesians. 4. 15.
Holiness of truth is true or sincere holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. To keep the
truth, Isa. 26. 2. is to embrace true piety and true virtue without hypocrisy,
without lying, or perfidiousnesse. To serve God in truth, Josh. 24. 14. 1 Samuel
12. 24. is to serve God unfainedly, from the heart, according to his 1 King. 2.
4.
will. To walk in the truth, Joh. 3. 3, 4. is to walk sincerely or in godly
simplicity. For truth is ingenuous, void of simulation. And in this sense some
understand that of the Apostle, Love rejoices in the truth, that is, love
sincerely or in truth rejoices 1 Cor. 13. 6.
with them that rejoice. Truth is opposed to lying and falsehood, and to empty
shadows and rites: and thus it may be applied to Ephesians. 4. 25. Joh. 4. 23, 24.
this purpose, as noting a plain simplicity contrary to lying and empty
shows. To stay upon God in truth, Isa. 10. 20. is unfainedly, and not in word
to stay upon him. To preach Christ in truth, Phil. 1. 18. is sincerely to
preach him: A true heart is single, Act. 2. 46. resolved not in some things,
but in all to walk with God, or as the Lord has appointed. Thus a true
Christian has but one mind, one intention, one delight, one face, one tongue;
he is all but one man, all the powers of the soul go but one way.

4. Purity, or clear shining innocence in all things, free from the mixture of
leaven in manners or doctrine. The Apostle Peter writes to the dispersed
Jews, to stir up their pure minds: 2 Pet. 3. 1.
what is that, but minds furnished and seasoned with an holy perspicuity of
truth. Paul prays for the Philippians, that they Phil. 1. 9. 10.
might abound in all knowledge and in all judgment, that they might be able to
discern things that differ, that they might be sincere. And the same Apostle
testifies to the Corinthians, he was afraid of them, lest their mind should be
corrupted from the ^ Cor. 11. 3.
simplicity that is in Christ. The word used by the Apostle in all three places
signifies properly something tried by the light of the Sun. And it is a
Metaphor (as some suppose) taken from the custom of the Eagle, whose manner is
(if we may believe those that write the natural story) to bring her young out
of the nest before they be full fledge, and to hold them forth against the full
sight of the Sun; the sight whereof those of them that can with open eye
endure, she retains and brings up as her own; the rest that cannot brook
it, and wink at it, she rejects and casts off as a bastardly brood. Others
think it rather taken from the usual practice of Chap-men in the view and
choice of their wares. A wise wary Chap-man that has to do with a deceitful
Merchant, Draper or other, one that keeps his wares in obscure places, where
the defects of them cannot so easily be discerned, or has false lights, that
may help to give a counterfeit gloss to them, he will take no ware of him
upon his word, but he will first diligently view it, toss it and turn it to
and fro, over and over, try how it is in the midst, as well as at both ends,
bring it forth into the light, hold up his cloth against the Sun, see if he can
epsy any defect or default in it, he knows he may easily else be
overreached. The like must be our practice in all matters of faith and 2 Cor.
2. 17.
manners: and this is to walk in the truth, when we have our conversation
honest, and hold the truth of Doctrine purely, as we may endure the trial of
the light. Thus the Apostle joyneth sincerity and truth together, as one and
the same, or as the special 1 Cor. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and general, sincerity being a branch of truth. This is our comfort, that in
simplicity and sincerity of God, that is, godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation.

5. Firmness and constancy in every holy duty of our general or personal
calling, of piety or righteousness. A faithful spirit is steadfast with God:
the ground of declining is lack of truth. Their heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in Psalm. 78. 8. Psalm. 78. 37.
his Covenant. If the heart be not true, what show soever a man makes, he is
but like an Apple, rotten at the coare, or as an house built upon the sand, the
one of which, though beautiful, will soon putrify, the other, though fairly
set, will quickly fall. A man may have many worthy gifts, but if he want
sincerity, upon a sudden may be taken from him, both that which he has, and
that which he seems to have, and his end be as the fig tree, which making
only a show with leaves, having no fruit, being cursed, lost even those also,
and withered away by degrees, being good for nothing but the fire. For as a
stomach ill affected with choler, though never so wholesome meats be received
into it, yet it cannot hold them, but is provoked: so where there is this
obstruction of the soul, the wilful love of any sinful course, or
subordination of grace to boisterous, distempered, earthly passions, pleasures
or profits, whatsoever grace is received into the heart, it will not let it
rest, but makes the soul cast it up upon all occasions. Truth and soundness
is the preserver of grace received: an honest and sound heart is as a vessel
well closed, it will keep and hold the liquour of grace that is powered into it.
The course of a true Christian is permanent, and continues unto the end.

This truth or sincerity, is the girdle, whereby all other graces are tied
close unto us. So the Apostle in the description Ephesians. 6. 14.
of the spiritual armor, calls it the girdle of truth. And therefore here
also that is true of all men, which we say of children in the Proverb, Ungirt,
unblest. This girdle has these uses.

First, It does adorn us: for this was the use of the studded belt, which the
Soldiers did wear to hide the gaping of the joints of their armor, which
would have been unseemly: and nothing does more adorn a soul, beautify our
actions, or raise admiration in them, then sincerity; as our Savior commending
Nathaniel, gave this speech of him, Behold, a true Israelite in whom* Joh. 1.
47.
there is no guile.

Secondly, A girdle does tie other clothes about us, which otherwise the winds
would blow abroad, and would hang but loose upon us: so this girdle of truth
does contain and hold together all other graces, wherewith the soul is
arraied, and unless truth do keep them together, in time all of them will be
blown away with the wind of temptation. That grace which was not knit together
with honesty of heart, came to nothing in the end, as appears in the Parable.
The body, when the soul is once gone, may not long stay above ground, it must
needs be buried. The hypocrites graces are but the body of grace, they want the
soul and life, which is sincerity, and we cannot think they should long
endure. An unsound horse, that has some secret fault, may carry as good a show
as the soundest, and at first for a mile or two, trav^ll as freshly and
cheerfully as the best, but at length he tires, and shows what he is: so it is
with an unsound Christian, notwithstanding all his shows, fair beginnings, and
hopeful entrances, he continues not.

Thirdly, A girdle trussing up the loins moderately, does strengthen a man, a
girdle is put for strength and ornament, Isa. 23. 10. for in the loins is the
seat of strength and might, and with a girdle the loins are girded; whence are
these phrases, I will strengthen him with thy girdle, Isa. 22. 21. Justice
shall be the girdle of his loins, Isa. 11. 5. He girdeth their loins with a
girdle, Job 12. 18. and loses the girdle of the strong, Job 12. 21. She
girdeth up her loins with strength, Prove. 31. 17. And the exhortation so often
used. Gird up thy loins, Jer. 1. 17. Job. 38. 3. and 40. 7. 2 King. 4. 29. and
2 King 9* 1. So this grace adds great strength to the inner man, as we may
see in Job, who when God seemed, and men did fight against him, when heaven and
earth seemed to conspire against him, yet this did stick by him, Until I die,
I will never take away mine innocence from my self. Job 27. 5.


Fourthly, In the Eastern Countries, where they were accustomed to wear long
garments down to the ancles, they used to gird them close unto their body, when
they had any journey, combat Exodus 12. 11.
or labor in hand, least they should be an impediment unto them. So they were
commanded to eat the Passover with their loins girded, because they had a
journey to go, and Elias girded up 1 King. 18. 46.
his loins, and ran before Ahab. And so to have loins girt, is to be fitted
and prepared for any service, travel or conflict; Let Joh. 13. 4. Luke 17. 8.
Luke 12. 35, 37. 1 Pet. 1. 13. Act. 12. 8.
your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. Gird up the loins of
your mind, and be sober. Gird thy self and bind on thy sandales. Thus
Christians girded with truth, are in readiness for any spiritual duty, and to
encounter with whatsoever adversary power shall with-stand them in the course
of godliness. Peradventure at the first putting on, this garment may seem
somewhat straight* nothing easy to wear: but he that is accustomed to go
girded, shall find such ease in it, such comfort by it, that he can never be
well without it, never at ease, until it be put on. Truth of heart is blessed
of God with increase of grace. This is it which makes the least portion of
grace to thrive in the hands of Gods children. Their faithfulness in a little,
brings them to be Luke 19. 17.
owners of a great deal, and to be rulers over much. This brought such a
plentiful blessing upon the small beginnings of Nathaniel, to whom Christ,
because of his truth in the inward affections, promised an enlarged measure of
enlightening, and that he should see greater things. This brought such a
comfortable increase upon the dim knowledge of the Eunuch and Cornelius; they
worshipped Joh. 1. 47, 50.
God in truth of heart, according to the measure of understanding they had
received, and in them the promise was accomplished, To him that has shall be
given, and he shall have in abundance: they were led further into that great
mystery of godliness, an Evangelist being sent of God to the one, and both an
Angel and an Apostle to the other. A true hearted Christian is careful to
get, charie to keep, and wary to husband, what grace he has received, and
how should he not then increase from one measure to another? Not that a second
grace is given for the right use of the first, but that the condition of grace
is such, that one draws another, and for a first given a latter is freely
bestowed also, in which continuation of grace, the right use of grace
proceeding from it, is contained.

Sincerity is strengthened of God to be a means of comfort to a man's soul in
his greatest distresses. When Hezekiah was arrested with the sentence of death
by the mouth of the Prophet, here was his comfort, and that which imboldened
him to look death in the face with more courage; O Lord thou know, or
remember Isa. 38. 3. J^r. 12. 3.
now (for herein I dare appeal to thy Majesty) that I have walked before thee
in truth. He had done many worthy things in the abolishment of Idolatry, and in
the restitution of the true worship, but in none of these simply took he
content, but in the sincerity of his heart and affection in performing of them.
So Paul in the midst of all his sorrows, this is his rejoicing, not simply
that he had preached, that he had planted Churches, wrought miracles, converted
sinners, made Satan to fall down from Heaven like lightening: but that in
simplicity and godly sincerity he had his conversation in the world. 2 Cor. 1.
12.


This puts* a kind of heroical spirit, and Lyon-like boldness into the
children of God in the greatest trials. Hereupon Paul 1 Cor. 4. 3.
was resolute not to pass for man's judgment. Faith depends upon the mere
grace of God, and his free promise: but the truer any man's heart is unto God,
the more bold and confident is he of the Lords support and comfort, which alone
adds undaunted courage in all temptations.

The service of a sound Christian is very acceptable to God, be Jer. 5* 3. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. Joh. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 22. Ephesians. 6. 5, 8. Romans 12 8.
Psalm. 145. 18. Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
it in outward show never so mean and simple. Are not thine eyes (says
Jeremie) upon the truth. If servants be obedient to their Masters in
singleness of heart, they shall receive their reward of the Lord. A cup of
cold water given to a Prophet in singleness of heart, shall not be forgotten.
The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in truth; he will hear their
prayers, answer their desires, guard and protect their persons. Not the most
eloquent prayer, and best set forth in words; but the supplication that is
breathed from an honest and true heart finds best acceptance. Many actions
otherwise fervent enough, for want of this sincerity are but froth, and vanish
then when we stand most in need of comfort: but the meanest work performed in
truth of heart, shall not go unrewarded. As in the natural body, the case of
the sound finger is better then of the blindish eye: so in the family of God,
it is more comfort to be a faithful doore-keeper, then an unfaithful steward.

A faithful man shall abound in blessings, that is, he that deals Prove. 28.
20.
sincerely and truly with men, and is not willing to deceive any in word or
deed, carrying himself in all holy simplicity toward God, as he lives
honestly amongst his Neighbors, and that not in one thing, but in all, and is
therefore in the Original Text called a man of faithfulness; he shall abound
in blessings of all sorts, with plenty so far as is expedient, with good
estimation, with kind friends, with spiritual graces, etc.

The more sincerity, the more affinity with God: for truth is a near tie, and
has an uniting power in it. The true and sound Psalm, 73. 27, 28.
Christian is the Lords near neighbor: so much the nearer, as the wicked are
far off: for God will draw nigh to them, that draw nigh unto him in truth.
God is the God of truth, Psalm. 31. 5. Jam. 4. 7. Jer. 30. 21.
Christ is truth, Joh. 14. 6. the spirit is the spirit of truth, Joh. 14. 17.
Truth is one special branch of that Image of God according Ephesians. 23, 24. 2
Cor* 3. 18.
to which man was made. And the greater measure of truth in the inward parts,
the more are we (to speak with the Apostle) changed into the Image of God. And
the more we resemble God and have communion with him, the more is our affinity
with him. Satan ever did, and still opposes sincerity by persecutions,
opprobries, and reproaches, as of pride, hypocrisy, dissimulation, specially
when God afflicts his people, Job. 2. 6, 9. But the more Satan opposes truth
and simplicity, the more should we be in love with it: for Satan would not
load it with disgraces if it were not excellent. Satan labors to foist in the
leaven of hypocrisy in our daily course, that by little and little he might
pick the good seed of righteousness out of our hearts, but our care must be to
disappoint him. Here our resistance is to hold us to our own, and pray to God
to rebuke him.

And here to prevent mistaking we must distinguish the degrees of soundness
and simplicity, and the nature of it. In nature the soundnes of the godly is
true, but in degree weak and imperfect, and therefore now and then through
frailty and weakness in the performance of good duties they look more at
man then at God, and propound indirect means when they should eye his glory
only. But as we say of other sins, so of hypocrisy, it is either reigning, or
not. In the hearts of true Christians there may be hypocrisy, but not reigning
hypocrisy. David when he said, Blessed is he, in whose spirit there is no
guile, did take himself Psalm. 32 2.
t^rdie in this evil: and Bradford with others of those most holy Martyrs, do
much seek pardon of hypocrisy and carnal gospelling. But sin that reigns
not, must not discourage: and if we have an unfeigned purpose against it, if we
grieve for it, if we seek for strength against it, it reigns not.

The effect or evidence of a sound heart is, that being well informed in the
truth of God, he does heartily resign himself to be guided and directed by
the Lord, in all things. As Paul prays Phil. 1. 10.
in behalf of the Philippians, that they might approve things that are
excellent, that they might be sincere, and without offense till the day of
Christ. And it is noted of Ezra, that he prepared his heart to seek the Law of
the Lord, and to do it: and to teach in Israel, Statutes Ezra 7. 10.
and Judgments. And from this general spring diverse particulars.

First, Truth breeds an hatred of all false and corrupt opinions in Doctrine:
because sound affections require good judgment and true understanding, and if
the understanding that should guide and govern the inferior powers be
perverted with error, the heart must needs move out of order. Folly is joy to
him that is destitute Pro. 15 21.
of wisdom, but a man of understanding walks uprightly, or directs
himself strait in walking: He can never shoot straight, that takes his aim
contrary. The voice of a true heart sounds thus in David, I hate vain
thoughts, but thy Law do I love. I esteem Psalm. 119. 113, 128.
all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, but I hate every false way.

Secondly, It has in detestation all false and devised worship, which is
nothing but lying pomp and vanity. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and
the house of Israel with deceit. Truth Hos. 11. 12.
seek neerenes and acquaintance with God: but in devised worship no comfort or
profit is to be found: rather the heart is removed Math. 15. 9. Isa. 29. 14.
from God, when men draw nigh to him with their lips.

Thirdly, It works an universal hatred of all sin, that is, of secret as
well as open sins, of lesser sins as well as of greater evils, of such
sins as where unto we have special inticements by some particular content or
profit, which they seem to promise, as well as of those which afford neither
gain, credit, nor pleasure. A true heart has a costant purpose in no one
thing, willingly to sin against God, but rather to endeavor the uttermost in
every good way of Gods commandments. And as he stands resolved against all
sin in general, both simply considered, and in respect of all occurrences,
whereby he might be allured or compelled thereunto: so in special against the
sin to which he finds himself most inclined, or wherewith he has at any
time been overtaken. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice
wicked works with Psalm. 141. 4
men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

Fourthly, It is joined with a readiness of mind to acknowledge and lay open
every sin as soon as it is known to be sin; and a gladness to have the
conscience ransacked and ripped up, that whatsoever is sinful may be found
out. David spoke it out of experience, when he pronounced the man blessed, in
whose Psalm. 32. 2.
spirit there is no guile: Now this was a branch of that spiritual guile, that
he once thought to help himself in evil doing, by holding his tongue; as who
would say he would forget it, and pass it over: but he was never well, till he
was delivered of that false trick, and fell to the downright acknowledgement
of his sin; he never had comfort till he had confessed against himself his
wickedness. This he writes for a pattern, and gives his Psalm a title
accordingly; To give instruction: and this experience taught him to entreat the
Lord to pry into him, as fearing himself that he should deal somewhat Psalm.
139. 23; 24*
over-favourably with himself. Try me, O Lord, and know mine heart: prove me,
and know my thoughts, and consider if there be any way of wickedness in me:
and to profess himself not only willing to bear, but desirous to be
reprehended, if he should step awry. Let Psalm. 141. 5,
the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer
also shall be in their calamities, or, by how much he shall do that the more,
by how much they shall reprove me the more diligently, by so much I shall pray
the more fervently for them. When a man loves not those means which tend to
the discovery of his heart and life, and to the finding out of his secret
sins, or reprehensions whether public or private, or serious and earnest
confession of sin before God, there is great cause to suspect that all is not
sound within.

Fifthly, Truth deals not only against this or that branch of corruption,
which shoots out to our disgrace or trouble, but against the root it self.
As in Paul we see, the Law of evil which did dwell within him, was his
principal matter of conflict.

Sixthly, It zealously contendeth for the maintenance of Gods pure worship and
service. Judah rules with the Lord, and is faithful H^s. 11. 12.
with the holy One. Judah retains the pure worship of God, whose service is
perfect freedom, and the truest dominion: for he that serves the Lord purely,
has rule over Satan and his own unruly lusts.

Seventhly, In all service the true Christian strives to approve his heart unto
God, and to perform it as in his presence, to the Ephesians. 6. 19. 1 Cor. 14. 15.
Romans 6. 17. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
glory of his name. He prays with the Spirit, obeys from the heart, hears
with reverence, speaks as in the sight of God, and does all things with life
and power.

Eighthly, In all conditions or estates of life, in all dealings secret or
open, public or private, at home or abroad, he will carry himself as becomes
the Gospel, and study to be harmless, unblameable, and without rebuke before
God and man. Do all things without murmurings and disputings: That ye may be
blameless, Phil. 2. 15.
and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke. Thus a Christian servant will
show all diligence in his Masters business, as Ephesians. 6. 6, 7. Col. 3. 22, 23.
Tit. 2. 10. Dan. 6. 4.
well absent as present, froward or courteous; and all faithfulness in things
committed to his charge, even to the least pin, though he might do otherwise
with secrecy and security from men; and that willingly, of conscience, and not
for hope of credit or gain. And not so only, but he will reverence his Master,
and in heart be that unto him, which he seems to be in carriage, and that
behind his back which he is before his face. A Christian man will be simple,
plain, and just in all his dealings, inoffensive in matters of Religion,
loving and courteous in all his behavior, and what he would seem to be
toward others in their presence, that he is inwardly, and in their absence.

Ninthly, True grace is permanent, and sound Christians are constant in their
course, not shrinking in temptation, not starting aside like a broken bow. An
hypocrite is wavering in respect of occurrences, halting and divided in respect
of objects; in subjection to inordinate passions, powerless in the performance
of holy duties, wise to hide and cover sin, glorious in empty shows of
Religion, apt for advantage to swallow lesser sins without straining,
slippery in earthly dealings, aiming at wrong ends in the profession of the
truth, indulgent to his beloved and darling sins, desirous to seem
religious, though he much neglect the power of godliness. But the true
Christian is unlike him in all these respects: He is sound and constant, a
master of his affections, a bungler to color or guild over sin, desirous to
be good, and in every thing answerable to his profession, faithful in his
place, plain in his dealings, innocent and harmless, as becomes the child of
God; the same man at home and abroad, within and without, openly and in secret,
in thought and discourse. This is that truth and sincerity which the Lord
accepts, and the godly strive after, and obtain in some measure.

There be three words in the Original translated Right or (...) Jer. 18. 4.
(...) Targ. (...).
Upright. The first comes of a root that signifies to be right or prosper, or
to direct, Eccles. 11. 6. and 10. 10. and it is translated Uprightness,
Equity, Industry, and Profit: of the Septuagint Valor or Fortitude. Sym.
Swiftness or speed. Eccl. 2. 21. and 4. 4. and 5. 11. Esth. 8. 5. But it is
not to be referred to the act of the mind or heart, but to some external work
or deed, which is so cunningly polished and skilfully contrived, that nothing
can more be desired in it, or justly be thought wanting. The second (...)
word comes of a root that signifies before or in presence, as Prove. 4. 25.
Let thine eyelids look Sept. (...). Sym. (...). Aq. and Theod. (...).
straight before thee. Prove. 5. 21. For the ways of man are (...). Sym. (...).
before the eyes of the Lord. See Genesis 25. 21. And it is translated right,
equity and uprightness. Prove. 8. 9. They are right to them that find
knowledge. Sept. (...) or (...). Theod. (...). Sym. (...) or (...): al. interp.
(...) better (...). Amos 3. 10. They know not to do right. Sept. (...). Isai.
59. 14. Equity cannot enter. Sept. (...). Isai. 30. 10. Prophecy not unto us
right things. Isai. 26. 10. In the Land of uprightness he will deal unjustly.
LXX. (...). Isai. 57. 2. Each one walking in his uprightness, or before him. 2 Samuel 15. 3. Thy matters are good and right. LXX. (...). The third word comes of
a root (...).
that signifies to go strait, Prove. 15. 21. 1 Samuel 6. 12. Psalm. 5. 8. or to
direct, Prove. 3. 6. And this is the most usual and common: Thus God is said to
be upright: Thou most upright do weigh the path of the Just. Isai. 26. 7. To
show that the Lord is upright. Psalm. 92. 15. The word of the Lord is
uprightness. Eccl. 12. 10. Psalm. 33. 4. His Judgments are right, or strait.
Neh. 9. 13. Psalm. 119. 128, 137. God made man upright. Eccl. 7. 29 and they
that walk according to the word, though they have their infirmities, are said
to be 1 King. 22. 43.
upright. Psalm. 33. 1. Prove. 29. 10. It is diversely rendered by the Greek
Interpreters, most commonly right or upright. Psalm. 7. 11. (...). Sym. (...).
Dan. ^1. 6. (...).
and 19. 9. Isai. 40. 4. Mic. 2. 7. Prove. 11. 6. and 12. 6. Prove. 8. 9. Just.
Job 1. 1. Prove. 3. 32. Prove. 17. 20. Numb. 23. 10. Pure. Job 33. 3. Good, or
what does please. Deuteronomy. 12. 28. and 6. 18. and 13. 18. True, or unblameable,
Job 2. 3. and 1. 8 Job 8. 6. and 41. 7. and 17. 8. Holy, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He that
directs his way aright. Mic. 7. 2. Prove. 14. 11. and 15. 8. Prove. 2. 7.
Valiant or courageous, Prove. 15. 19. Holiness, Deuteronomy. 9. 5. Righteousness and
simplicity, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. and Truth, Isai. 45. 19. And every where true and
upright, or upright and perfect, and truth, uprightness, and integrity, Deuteronomy.
9. 5. 1 Samuel 12. 23. Job 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 33. 1. 1 Ki. 3. 6. are joined together
as in substance noting the same thing. So that uprightness cannot be taken
negatively for the want of unrighteousness only, but positively for truth, and
righteousness, or rather that which is equivalent to both. For the Greek
straight, Luke 3. 4, 5. the Syriac Interpreter uses a word that signifies
equal, polished, smoothed, made even or pure, coming of a root that is to
polish or make smooth, as Masius in Peculio and David de Pomis in his
Dictionary teach. And Ferrarius turns the word pure, sincere, plain, which
answers to that of the Prophet, Isai. 40. 4. In Luke 8. 15. for a good and
honest, it has the same word, as if it was a polished heart, made even and
smooth: or if you will, a sound heart, entire and well constituted, and set in
frame, as amongst the Arabicks, the root is to heal, or restore whole or
entire. Upright or strait is opposed to crooked and oblique: but to this
present purpose, That is upright which does answer to the rule of the divine
Law, concerning the love of God and our Neighbor. An upright man is he who by
faith working by love does study to conform himself to the Law in all duties
of holiness, sobriety, justice, or mercy. An upright man is he, who does not
writhe or bend himself, nor (as we say) serve the time or humors of men, but
God and his conscience, though nothing forbids him, who serves God and his
conscience, to serve the time, when it may be done without detriment to the
glory of God or to his conscience. A straight way is shortest betwixt the
points. Now the Word of God directs the shortest and next way to Heaven: and
the man that walks in that path, does walk uprightly. And here it may be
noted, that to do what is right 1 John 3. 22. Joh. 8 ^ 29. 1 These. 4. 1^ Romans
12. 1.
in the sight of the Lord, and what is pleasing in his sight, are for substance
one and the same, and so Exodus 15. 26. Deuteronomy. 6. 18. and 12. 25. and 13. 18. and
21. 9. 1 King. 9. 12. Numb. 23. 27. 1 King. 9. 12. 2 Chro. 14. 15.
translated by the Seventie. The Scriptures mention an uprightness of heart,
and uprightness of life and conversation. Uprightness of heart is an holy
conformity of heart and soul to the good will and pleasure of God. Thus we
read, God saves the upright in heart, Psalm. 7. 10. The ungodly shoot privily
at the upright in heart. Psalm. 11. 2. Shout for joy all ye that are upright in
heart. Psalm. 32. 11. O continue thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Psalm. 36. 10. All the upright in heart shall glory. Psalm. 64. 10. Do good, O
Lord, unto them that be good: and to them that are upright in their hearts.
Psalm. 125. 4. Good and upright is the Lord. Psalm. 25. 8. His will is the most
certain rule of equity and rectitude: and our hearts are then upright, when
they stand in an holy conformity to the good pleasure of God. This is sometimes
expressed by the phrase of preparing the heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. 2 Chronicles. 17. 6.
or lifting up the heart in the ways of God. And herein is implied, 1. An holy
disposition of mind, will and affections, bending themselves to the good
pleasure of God, approving, affecting, exercising readily whatsoever he
requires. I know also, my God, that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure
in uprightness. As for me in 2 Chr. 29. 17.
the uprightness of mine heart, I have willingly offered all these things. 2.
A godly fervency of heart, which makes that in choosing and embracing good
things, it is equally more remiss or fiery and strong, as the goodness of the
things be greater or less, of greater or less necessity and importance. Thus
an upright heart has respect to every Commandment, but his greatest care is
about the weighty matters of the Law, holiness and justice: and the more
excellent the duty, the more circumspect and forward is he in the performance
of it. The upright love thee, or they love thee in uprightness. Cant. 1. 4.
that is, with a strong and vehement love, which is without dissimulation or
guile. Therefore (says David) I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things
to be right, and I hate every false way. Psalm. 119. 128. 3. An upright mind in
all purposes and actions does aim directly at the right mark, and propose the
true end by just and approved means. A right end never has a crooked rule
leading unto it: and a right heart does neither look awry, nor go by a crooked
rule. Thus it is said of Ezra, that he had prepared his heart to seek the Law
of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel Statutes and judgments:
Ezra 7. 10. Act. 8. 21.
And on the contrary, when Simon Magus would have bought the gifts of the holy
Ghost with money, Peter rebukes him, saying, Thy heart is not right in the sight
of God.

Uprightness of life, is a conversation, way, or course of life agreeable to
the word of God in that calling or vocation, wherein God has placed us. Thus
it is said of David, That he walked psalm. 37. 14. 1 King. 3. 6. Prove. 14 2.
Pro. 29. 27. Isa. 26. 7.
with God in truth and uprightness of heart. And he that walks in his
uprightness, fears the Lord. He that is upright in the way, is an
abomination to the wicked. The way of the just is uprightness. He that
speaks uprightness shall dwell with the everlasting burning. This is
expressed by the phrase of going with a right foot. Gal. 2. 14. of ordering our
steps aright, Prove. 4. 26. and making even paths for our feet, Heb. 12. 13.
Uprightness is an universal and constant cleaving to the Lord,
notwithstanding all occurrences that might divert or turn us out of the way.
All the upright in heart shall follow it, or, shall follow Isa. 33. 14, 15.
him; that is, they shall cleave to the Lord, and go after him continually,
and never forsake him, although they endure many and great evils, for his names
sake. An upright heart is an heart fixed and established in respect of the
object, or maine business, Psalm. 94. 15. Psalm. 78. 37. Jam, ^. 6. 7.
opposite to a double, divided mind, wavering between two different objects,
unstable, inconstant, turned with every blast, resolving now this, anon that,
one thing to day, another to morrow, this in one company, that in another. And
the paths of uprightness are contrary to all crooked ways, which lead unto
death. Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are Pro. 21.
8. Prove. 2. 13, 15. Psalm. 25. 4, 5.
upright in their hearts. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways,
the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. We may take the
description of an upright man from the Psalmist in other words, He has clean
hands and a pure Psalm. 24. 4.
heart, and has not lift up his soul unto vanity. A pure heart is the
foundation of an holy life, and words and works, as it were the building settled
upon it.

Uprightness is chiefly commanded, most highly esteemed and principally
commended in the Saints. For this cause Israel was called Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 32.
15. and 33. 5, 26. Isa. 44. 2. because uprightness is the thing, which God
requires in every true Israelite. God that tries the hearts of all the sons
of men, takes pleasure in uprightness. The froward and unstable are
abomination to his highness; 1 Chro. 29. 17.
but such as are upright in their way are his delight. The offerings of an
upright heart are free and voluntary, which God graciously tendreth, and
lovingly accepts. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination Prove 15. 8.
Job 8. 6. Psalm. 25. 21.
to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is his delight. God will not cast
off the upright, nor leave his soul in adversity. If thou were pure and
upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous. God will make it known that he does regard the
upright, and though for a time they be in affliction, they shall not be
forsaken, or left desolate. Mark the Psalm. 37. 37.
end of the upright, for the end of that man is peace. The wicked may flourish
for a time like the Bay Tree, but suddenly they shall wither. The upright may
be kept under for a time, but he shall bud and blossom apace in his season,
and his prosperity shall endure. The upright shall dwell in the Land, and the
perfect shall Prove. 2. 21. Psalm. 37. 29. Prove. 14. 11.
remain in it. The righteous shall inherit the Land, and dwell therein for
ever. The Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. The word of the Lord does
always good to them that walk uprightly, Micha 2. 7. God does pronounce all
good to them that live according to his Commandments; instructions will sink
into such hearts, the promises cheer and revive them; by the doctrines they
are made wise, they increase in wisdom, they grow Psalm. 73. 1.
from one measure of grace and comfort to another. God is good to Israel, even
to them that be of an upright heart; and the word of God does speak mercy,
peace, quickening, and do good to the upright in heart. The integrity of the
upright shall (guide and) Prove. 11. 3.
preserve them; that is, shall procure good direction from the Lord, both for
his service, and for their own happiness, and make them tractable to follow
it. Contrary to this is the condition of the crooked and unstable, who are not
led by the word, but overruled by their lusts, and therefore misled by them to
their undoing. For thus stands the opposition: the integrity of the upright
shall guide them in the way, and so preserve them: but the frowardness of the
wicked will keep them from the way, and so destroy Isa. 40. 4. 1 Samuel 12. 13.
Psalm. 143. 10. ^
them. The path of the upright is even, strait, plain, lightsome, good, the
next and shortest cut to heaven that can be. I will teach you (says Samuel)
the good and the right way: And the Saints pray, Let thy good Spirit bring me
into the Land of uprightness, that is, an even and plain Land, where my feet
should not stumble. Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path Psalm
27. 11.
(a way of uprightness) that my foot tread not aside, that I do nothing
unjustly, to the dishonor of thy name, or offense of mine adversaries. God is
both the Sun and Shield of the upright* their buckler of defense and comfort in
this life, their crown and glory in the life to come. God saves the upright
in heart. He is Psalm. 7. 10. Prove. 2. 7. Psalm. 25. 21. Psalm. 125. 4. Psalm. 97.
11.
a Buckler to them that walk uprightly. They may pray with confidence, Let
integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I hope in thy word. Do good, O
Lord, to them that be good, to them that be upright in heart. Light is sown
for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Comfort is reserved and
laid up in store for them, though hidden for the present, as seed in the ground
which will spring and ripen. This life is the seed time of an upright man, the
harvest of his comfort shall be in heaven: nevertheless some portion of that
heavenly treasure the Lord does impart unto him on earth. Therefore the upright
are called upon Psalm. 36. ^0.
again and again to rejoice in the Lord, at all times, in all conditions, to
rejoice heartily before him. Shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart:
praise is comely for the upright: All the upright Psalm. 32. 11. Psalm. 33. 1.
Psalm. 64. 10. Psalm. 112. 4.
in heart shall glory. Unto the upright there arises light in darkness, scil.
God gracious, merciful and righteous is his light, joy and salvation, or it
arises, from God, merciful, gracious and righteous, as some interpret it. The
secret of the Lord is with the Prove. 3. 31.
upright; that is, his secret and hidden wisdom of attaining true happiness.
They are of the Lords privy Council, his intimate and familiar friends, whom
he will instruct in the way that they Psalm. 15. 2. Psalm. 140. 13. Isa. 33. 14,
15, 16.
should choose. They shall abide in the Mountain of his holiness, and dwell
in his presence for evermore. The upright shall dwell with the everlasting
burning, and not be consumed. The Lord will astonish them with fears, that
give themselves to all manner of sin and wickedness: but as for them that
love and follow uprightness, he communicates himself graciously and
familiarly unto them. He styles himself a consuming fire, least his Majesty
and power should be contemned: but whosoever draw nigh unto him with a true and
unfeigned desire to please him in all things, they shall feel by the effects,
that his presence is most sweet and aimiable. Psalm. 112. 2.
Neither does the blessing of God reach to the upright only, but to their
posterity. The generation of the upright shall be blessed. But as for the
crooked and perverse, it is not so with them: for their sins are uncovered, The
froward is an abomination to the Lord, their hope shall perish, they shall be
cut off from the earth, they shall be taken in their own naughtiness, and
their end shall be accursed.

The effects of uprightness are many, but specially these.

1. An heavenly disposition of heart, whereby we are affected to love all good,
and hate all evil truly according to the nature and degree thereof, and to
have respect universally, not equally to every Commandment. The high way of the
upright is to depart Prove. 16. 17.
from evil: that is, to depart from evil is the case-way of the upright, in
which they walk rightly, fitly, securely or in great safety. The uprightness
of David is thus described, that he did according 1 King. 9. 4.
to all that the Lord commanded him, and kept his Statutes and his Judgments:
that he did that which was right in the 1 King. 15. 5.
eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him
all the days of his life. Thus the uprightness of Zachary Luke 1. 6.
and Elizabeth, They walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. An honest heart mainly desires to please God in matters of justice
and judgment, the great and weighty matters of the Law; for God desires mercy
and not Hos. 6. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 22.
sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offerings: and in the
duties of his particular calling, because every tree must bear his own fruit,
and every man attend to his proper charge: and in such duties, as in respect of
time and place be of greater importance, because he must not be wanting to the
opportunity: but he takes care withal to be faithful in every circumstance,
pin, hoof and nail. These things ought ye to have done. The upright Mat. 23.
23, 2. ^
man's assurance and resolution is this, Then shall I not be confounded, when I
have respect to all thy commandments: I have refrained Psalm. 119. 6. verse. 101.
my feet from every evil way, that I may keep thy word. For they do nothing
with an upright, heart, that give themselves liberty to transgress any one
commandment. If a man shall keep Jam. 2. 10.
the whole Law, soil. in outward and external actions, and yet offend in one
point, willingly and of indulgence, so as by the Covenant of grace he shall be
held a transgreslour, he is guilty-of all. Of frailty and weakness a man may,
and the most holy does break every commandment, and is guilty of none, so as it
shall be imputed unto him: But he that habitually, willingly, on set purpose,
shall dispense with himself in the transgression of any one commandment, or
any branch thereof, he is a trespasser, he shall be accounted guilty.

2. To be upright is to stand, as it were in Gods presence, as one of the words
does signify, Isa. 57. 2. as was showed before, I 2 Cor. 12. 19. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
and 4. 2. and 7. 12. Psalm. 18. 22, 23. Psalm. 119. 16^.
have set the Lord always before me, Psalm. 16. 8. So David protests his
uprightness, for all his judgments were before me: and I did not put away his
Statutes from me. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity. And I have kept thy precepts, and thy testimonies: for all my ways
are before thee. Thus Job proves himself to be no hypocrite, as his friends
Job 13. 15, 16.
imagined; Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will prove mine
own waie^ before him. He also shall be my salvation. for an hypocrite shall
not come before him. And seeing he walks as under the eye, and in the sight
of the Almighty, therefore in some measure he is alike in all places and
companies, because he remembers well, that God is present in every place, and
does behold and discern all his actions, yea his secret imaginations.

3. The third effect of uprightness is hatred of all sin, of our bosom,
delightful, profitable sins, of secret sins, of the sins of our inclination,
custom, education, whatsoever, but more in our selves then in others: and love
of good, specially the best and chiefest good, in others, as in our selves.
Homebred sin is most hateful, because most hurtful to the soul, pernicious
to our State, dishonorable to God. And it is a good token of a plain and
downright heart, when a man is willing to see, ready to acknowledge, and can
with eagerness of affection set against his own sin, rather then against
the sins of other men. For the love of sin is abandoned, the heart is framed to
self-denial, which it has not by nature, but by grace: and sin will have no
pleasure to lodge in that heart* where it is thus pursued. But true goodness
is lovely in all men, because it proceeds from God, conformeth a man after the
image of God, and inableth to the obedience of his commandment: and whose heart
is right with God, he cannot but rejoice to see his name glorified by
whomsoever.

4. Delight in the most high at all times, in all conditions, prosperity and
adversity, evil report and good report, making God the stay of our souls,
when oppressing trouble lies heavy upon us, and walking before him in
humility, meekness and fear, when all things prosper according to our hearts
desire, and readily performing our vows which we made in the day of our
calamity: Job 27. 10. Job 3. 23. and 2. 3, 10.
This is a notable effect of uprightness. Thus Job confirms his
uprightness, in adversity he called upon God, and waited upon his aid: in
prosperity he remembered his change, eschewed evil, stood in awe of God, showed
mercy to the poor, fatherless and widow, comforted them that were in
distress: in both estates God was his delight and his portion. It is a double
and crooked heart that starts aside, and varieth in obedience according to
outward conditions, that goes forward or backward, on this side, and on that,
as occasion requires; that praiset^ mercy in his need, but commends sparing
and nearenesse* when he washes his paths in butter: The upright is resolved
of his way, and does break through all lets and bars whatsoever may be cast
before Prove. 21. 29.
him in his journey. A wicked man hardens his face: but as for the upright he
directs his way. As the ungodly man is obstinate in evil, so is the upright
constant in piety, and will not be removed from it. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes, always, even unto the end. Hold thou me up, and I Ps.
119. 112, 117
shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy Statutes continually.

5. Respect of Gods approbation more then the applause of men, resting well
contented that we are allowed of him, though disesteemed in the world, is a
good sign of an even and polished heart. A good heart regards not much, what
men think or 1 Cor. 4. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
say, so God be well pleased. I pass little to be judged of man's judgment,
yea I judge not my self. As we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the
Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God who tries our hearts.
Let the world fawn or frown, speak fair or revile, be quiet or persecute,
all is one, a faithful man will go forward in his good course, neither
starting aside, nor turning back. For the heart that is well directed, seeks
heaven and not earth; the favor of God, not the fair countenance of men; rest
in the world to come, not peace in this vale of misery: and thus minding his
^ome prepared in heaven, he goes on his race, not regarding how little his
service is esteemed by earthly men.

6. An honest heart is no less careful to return praise for graces and good
things received, then to beg supply of what is wanting. Isa. 33. 1.
This is the study of the upright (and it becomes them well) in which they
diligently apply themselves, to set forth the goodness, power, mercy, and rich
grace of God vouchsafed unto them.

7. To the upright man the hardest things are easy: because they are
industrious and cheerful in the works they take in hand, according to the
Lords appointment. The way of the slothful is an hedge of thorns: but the way
of the upright Pro. 15. 19.
is made plain.

8. The downright Christian is careful to shun all appearances, occasions,
and provocations unto sin, willing to suffer admonition and rebuke, and
constant in the use of all means, that he Job 31. 1. Psalm. 141 4, 5.
might grow in grace.

The means whereby truth and uprightness may be attained and strengthened are;

1. Constant and conscionable dependence upon the preaching of the word,
effectual receiving and sound feeding upon it. Desire 1 Pet. 2. 1.
the sincere milk of the word, says the Apostle. He calls the word sincere
milk, a milk without deceit: It is in it self truth, having the God of truth
for the Author, Christ Jesus the truth for Joh. 14. 6.
the witness, the Spirit of truth for the composer of it: and it works truth
in the hearts of them that hear and receive it kindly. It is mighty to the
purging out of that leaven of fraud, which is within us, and to the
transforming of us into the image of God, if it be kindly planted and soundly
rooted in the heart and conscience. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is
truth. This is Joh. 17. 17.
that which begets faith, and faith is that which purifieth the heart. How came
the Romans to that heartinesse and sincerity of obedience, which Paul commends
so much, was it not by that form Romans 6. 17.
of holy Doctrine which was delivered? Or as we read it sometimes, unto which
they were delivered: wherein the truth of God is compared unto a mould into
which they were cast, and by which they were transposed into a new form,
enabled to walk sincerely and without halting before the Lord. The mind must
be truly informed, or the heart can never move aright. But there is no means
to come to the knowledge of the truth, but by the word of God, which is the
word of truth, and Gospel of salvation. It is truly said, the heart can never
be sincere, till it be humbled and broken, and brought to abasement and denial
of it self: and what means has God ordained so effectual, as his word to
work this humiliation of spirit? Is not this the hammer which Jer. 23. 2^.
Act. 2. 37. 2 King. 22. 19.
breaks the stone? Is not this that which pricketh the heart, and makes it
to melt, and sometimes wringeth tears from the eyes of them that hear it?
Besides, what hope that ever any man's disease of a false heart should be cured,
until he be brought to the sight of it? Who seeks for health, till he know
himself to be diseased? And shall ever any man be brought to the understanding
of his defect in this, until he has been made to see it by the word? What
health is to the body, that truth and uprightnes is to the soul: now bodily
health arises from the seed, is preserved by sound and good diet: But the word
of truth is the wholesome food, whereby the soul is nourished. The word is a word
of uprightness or rectitude, and when it is well learned, and thoroughly
digested, safe lodged, and Jam. 1. 20.
close applied, it does season and regulate the heart and affections, and
change them into the nature of it. If we bind our crooked affections close to
the word of truth, they will become strait, agreeable unto the word, whereunto
they are bowed. And the same word truly embraced, does inflame the heart with a
fervent desire to walk with God in all duties of holiness and righteousness.

2. Thornie cares, vain pleasures, sinful delights must be stocked up and
dug out of the heart. Weeds will grow of themselves, if the roots be not
plucked up, good corn requires tillage and sowing both. Perverseness is
natural to man corrupt and sinful, and will increase of it self: but
uprightness will not prosper, if the fallow ground of the heart be not
ploughed, and the roots of worldliness and voluptuousness killed in them. If
the world be our treasure, our heart cannot be true and upright with God, for
where our treasure is, there will our hearts be.

3. A third means is to possess our hearts with this, and to have it ever in
our thoughts, that in all things, especially in matters of Religion, we have to
do with God, and are ever in his sight and presence. In our common daily
duties to labor thus to perform them with our heart, as in the sight of God,
to his glory, is a ready way to get this grace of truth deeply rooted. It is
the very maine ground of all hypocisie, that this one thing is not duly thought
on. Men forget him that sees in secret, whose eyes are as a flame of fire,
wherewith he pierces further then the outward face: and hereupon they are not
to imagine, that when they have carried the matter smoothly and fairly before
men, all is well. The world either applauds them, or accuses them not, and
hereupon they flatter themselves, as if nothing more were to be looked after.
Let us then remember this, if we would be true and sincere in our hearts; The
ways of man are before the eyes of Prove. 5 21.
the Lord, and he pondreth all his paths. This kept the Church and people of
God of old in their sincerity, and preserved them from dealing falsely
concerning his Covenant; they thought with themselves, If we do thus and thus,
shall not God search it out? Psalm. 44. 17, 21.
for he knows the secrets of the heart. And this consideration moved Paul to
faithfulness in his Ministry; We make not merchandise of the word, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, speak we in 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Christ. See what things go together, doing a matter in sincerity, and doing
it, as in the sight of God.

4. Society and fellowship with the faithful is a sign of uprightness, and a
means of continuance and increase therein. For he that sets his heart upon
heaven, will be careful to draw on and encourage his companion in the same
way. Coals laid together kindle each other, and preserve heat the longer: So
it is with the faithful linked together in holy communion.

5. It is good to call our selves to a frequent reckoning touching our
carriages, binding our selves to an examination of them. He that has a
servant, of whose fidelity he makes some doubt, and whom he desires, if it
might be, to reclaim, both for the good of the party, and for his own
particular also, that he may be useful to him, he will not let him run on too
long before he call him to an account; he considers that to be the next way to
make him careless and secure. If he expect ever and anon to be reckoned with,
it will cause him so much the more carefully to look unto his business. It is
so in this case. The word of God tells thee, that thou have with thee a
false, coosening, deceitful heart: an heart that will beguile thee to thine
utter ruin; it is ever ready to practice with Satan the professed enemy of
thy soul, to work mischief against thee: Would thou reform this heart,
that it might become useful and serviceable for thee, in the great and
important business of Salvation, be sure to call it often to account. It will
be good to reckon with it once a day, to see what has passed it, to examine
what thoughts have been framed in it, what purposes, what intents, what acts
have been done, as effects and fruits of these inward purposes: surely this
tying of thy self to such an often survey, and looking back upon thy heart,
will keep it in so much the more awe; and when it is once accustomed to the
sweetness which will be felt, when it can give account of care and of
obedience, and to the smart and punishment which follows the remembrance of
failing in holy duties, it cannot but be kept in so much the better tune.

And to find out the better the guile of our spirit, and crookedness of
affection, First consider what ignorance, vanity, folly, infidelity does still
remain in the mind, what stubbornness in the will, benummednesse in the
conscience, disorder in the affections: how apt we are to undervalue the true
treasure, loose our selves in base delights, abuse things lawful in excess:
how lavish and rash in our speeches, dull and dross in holy performances,
pettish and impatient if a little crossed, etc.

Secondly, Consider how careless we are of the spiritual action, in those
things we perform, as in prayer, hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments,
giving alms, etc. To the spiritual, performance of these and such like duties
is required a preparation and heavenly disposition of soul befitting such
actions, and the Majesty of God with whom we have to deal; as in confession
of sin is required grief, shame, humility: in supplication reverence,
devotion, spiritual emptiness, whereby the heart is taken off the creature,
and driven out of our selves. But who does not lightly pass over these duties?
which is no better then the wiping of the outside of the dish, not looking to
that within. Do we not rush upon prayer without premeditation, give our hearts
liberty to rove about, forgetting with whom we have to do? are we not
perfunctory in craving Gods blessing upon our meat at ordinary meals, and in
giving thanks when we are refreshed? etc.

Thirdly, Mark that in resistance of sin, we are more sorry, and deal more
against this or that branch of Corruption, which appears to our disgrace,
then against the body of death it self; and against that sin whereunto we
are not so much inclined, more then against others no less dangerous,
whereunto we are disposed.

Fourthly, Consider the course of our affections, and we shall see how unsound
we are toward God and our Brethren. If a thing touch our selves, our blood
will quickly be in our nails: If a man know this or that a miss by us, it is
very grievous, the shame of it much upbraids us: but things that offend God,
and which we know he sees amiss in us, we can let these pass nothing
affected. A sign our love to him is not so sound, our fear of him, and desire
of praise with him, not so unfeigned. We should be ashamed to be found often in
the same fault before men: but we commit and confess the same sins daily
before God, and are not confounded in our selves. If we speak but an hasty or
unadvised word in the presence of some grave and godly man, that might be to
our disgrace, our thoughts trouble us: but the offense against God is lightly
passed over. We are circumspect to avoid the breach of penal laws, not so
careful to watch against the committing of sin against God. We confess
sin before God, and seem to aggravate it: but being questioned by men, we
turn the fair side outward, and make the best of it.

Lastly, Let us observe how frequently our actions are corrupted. In leaving
sin many time we leave it not because we hate it as sin, but it has often
broaken out to our reproach; our friends persuade us to break it off, it will
be for our credit and advantage. We confess our own sins, not desiring to
give glory to God, and gain a testimony of a sound heart: but because worldly
wisdom does tell us, It is best to tell our own tale, or it were double folly
to make dainty of that all the world knows: It will not be for our credit to
lessen our fault, when it is fully known; we shall loose the estimation of
good men if we seek to hide, excuse, or make light of our offenses. Our
promises of amendment, when we have been overtaken with sin to our disgrace,
have not proceeded from due consideration, nor had due execution accordingly.
In the profession of religion we have often aimed at sinister ends, as praise of
men, gain, or the like, Thus in taking up good duties, as orders in our
family, we often look not so much at the conscience of Gods Commandment, as
at this, The eyes of men are upon us, all the world will cry shame, if such
things be neglected altogether. Our performance of private duties is far more
dull, superficial, and slight, then that which is done in the sight and
company of others. The presence of men does often restrain from many hasty
sinful speeches and unwarrantable actions, which we take liberty to speak and
do before the face of the most high, and are not ashamed. Our rebukes are
carnal, rather because our minds are crossed, then that God is dishonored.
Our obedience is partial, this we do, another thing no less material we
pass over without regard: and we mean well many times, and are fervent in a
good thing, not merely for sinister respects, and yet not only, nor resolutely
for Gods Commandment, but more for other considerations then that: And
therefore in such cases and trials, we are found to be others, if we examine
it, then we would be. We bear with faults in him that is serviceable to our
humor, against another not so pleasing in our eye, we are hot and fiery.
Sometimes we undertake to deal for some that speak to us, but do it without
any hearty well-wishing to him, sometimes not sticking to say to our friend, I
must speak to you for fashion, but do as you please. We visit sick ones, but
not stirring up the bowels of mercy, we speak a great many phrases of course,
our conscience telling us it is otherwise. We make a semblance of reverence,
but how far it is from the heart this may testify, that we can (absent from
the parties) use their names proverbially, break jests on them, admit sinister
suspicions. We can speak fair to men's faces, when war is in the heart: and
when we hate the person, take on as if we sought the disgrace of his sin
only. So in fruits of love, we can do this party good sometimes, but it is to
keep another under, who else would sprout forth so far, that his shade would
dim our lights: as likewise I will do for such an one, they know good
behavior, they will do their homage, such an one will thank me for it, I am
sure it will not be given clean away: He is able to do me a good turn
again, etc. In works of mercy we are not discreet, free, compassionate,
forward: we seldom consider the necessities of others, stand a loofe, if any
man will step before us in the work, pretend ignorance, and are glad to hang
the burden upon other men's shoulders, that be less able to bear it.

Sixthly, After we have discovered and found out the crookedness and
unsoundnesse of our heart and life, we must take up our selves for halting,
bewail it with shame and sorrow, stir up our selves to more uprightness and
sincerity, and fly unto God by hearty prayer to be established and confirmed.
Though there may be some relics of hypocrisy in a good man, yet the nature
of halting is, it will go quite out of the way if it be not healed. And make
straight steps unto your feet, least that which is halting be turned Heb. 12.
13.
out of the way. Ah, the frowardness of my heart, how crooked have my ways
been in the sight of the Lord? I have regarded vanity, doted upon transitory
pleasures and profits, undervalued the true treasure. The streams of mine
affections have been driven with full sail to that which is little worth; but
ebb to what they should covet above measure. My whole soul, all that is
within me, should have looked continually upon God, and my conversation
directed toward him: but my thoughts, desires, affections, words and actions
have looked ordinarily, very often, another way. How far am I from that truth
which God requires in the inward parts? what a mass of wicked fraud and deceit
is heaped and piled up within me? what rottenness does lodge still in my
breast? what am I but a shop of lies and vanities? Easier it is a great deal
to know the number of my hairs, then the running motions of my heart and
affections. Oh, the blind corners, the secret turnings and windings, the close
lurking holes that are therein: upon examination I have found a world of
falsehood in my soul, more then ever I suspected or imagined. My cogitations are
vain, if not wicked and ungodly, mine affections unsound, mine aims indirect,
my course of life palpably gross in dissimulation before God, and toward men.
If the members of my body were crooked and deformed; my mouth, face, eyes
drawn awry or squint; if one part did swell, another wither and pine away; I
should esteem it an heavy cross. But the distemper of the soul is much more
dangerous, as the safety of the soul is more precious then of the body. If in
a journey I chance to strike out of the way, or fetch compass about, when I
might have gone a shorter cut, how am I grieved at my ignorance, that I knew
not, or negligence, that I enquired not the right way in time? But in the
course of Christianity I have turned aside, and stepped out of the right path
to my great loss and prejudice. Did I stand convicted before men for some
notorious coozener or deceiver, I could not but take it grievously: but many
times I have played fast and loose in the presence of the all-seeing God,
pretending his service, when I have done mine own will; offering him the body,
when the soul has been let loose after vanity. I have too long wandered and
gone astray like a l^st sheep, but now I will keep the testimonies of my God:
For the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is light, and reproves of
instruction are the way of life. The Commandments lead directly to that life,
which deserves the name of life, eternal life. The Traveller takes the next
way to his Journeyes end: No wise man will willingly step one foot out of the
way to Heaven. If our limbs be crooked, we omit nothing that Art or Exercise
can do to set them strait: and shall not I take care to rectify my soul, and
bring it into right order? Deceit and falsehood is the Image of Satan, who abode
not in the truth, most unmeet to be borne by him that is by adoption the son
of God. The charge of God is, Be ye holy, for I am holy; be ye perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect: and hereby may we assure our hearts that we are the
children of God, if we be true, as he is true. Truth is the Image of God
stamped upon their hearts whom the Lord has called to be his peculiar people.
What soundness is to the body, that is sincerity to the soul: a grace of
singular excellency, and excellent use, pleasing to God, and profitable to man.
Wise men delight in sound and faithful friends: the Lord takes pleasure in
them that be true hearted to his glory. A sound body is fit for labor: a true
heart is ready prepared for any service that God requires. The way is not
tedious to men, they halt not in it, but through weakness and imperfection: O
my soul, the way of life would be most pleasant and delightful, crosses easy
to be borne, the comforts of grace most sweet and admirable, were it not that
corrupt humors causing distempers, did still breed in thee. Earthly desires,
vain delights, unruly lusts are great impediments to the quick and easy
dispatch of the Christian Pilgrimage. Sincerity is the girdle of the mind to
tr^ffe up these, strengthen our loins, and tie the heart to the work
commanded. We buy girdles for the body, and if costly ones we keep them
charily: I will seek to Heaven for this girdle of grace, for it is woven there,
no shop can serve me with it but that only. O Lord, thou that delightest in the
simple and true hearted that cleave unfainedly unto thy testimonies, create in
me a true heart and sincere spirit, that without guile* I may stick unto thy
testimonies, and do what is acceptable in thy sight. Naturally I am full of
falsehood and guile, oh thou that a^t the God of truth, who at the first did
create me after thine Image* make me every day more and more like unto thy self
in true holiness and righteousness. Then shall I be true indeed, when Christ
the giver of truth dwells in my heart: Lord strengthen my faith, that being
knit unto Christ the way, the truth, and the life more and more, I may partake
of his fullness, grace for grace.

CHAP. I. Of the New Testament or Covenant, and how God has revealed himself
therein.
IN Scriptures New is put for admirable, unusual, not before In ^mnibus
linguis pene id novum dicitur, quod aliis succedit: u^ n^vus rex, novu^
maritus. Exodus ^. 8. Sept. (...). Aq. and Theod. (...). Act. 7. 18.
heard of; as Jer. 31. 22. The Lord has created a new thing in the earth. Isai
42. 9. Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare. Isai. 48. 6. I have showed thee new things. And for necessary, noble,
illustrious, excellent to admiration or astonishment; as new doctrine, Mark 1.
27. is wonderful, excellent doctrine; a new Commandment, Joh. 13. 34. that
is, a necessary and excellent Commandment; new wine, Matthew. 26. 29. that is,
wine, which by reason of its excellency is had in admiration. And so we read,
a new Name, Rev. 2. 17. Isai. 62. 2. and my new name, Follio est ips^ facit
nova carmina Virg. Eccl. (i.) magna and miranda. Serd.
Rev. 3. 12. and a new song, Psalm. 33. 1. (which by some is interpreted an
excellent song) and a new work, or a new thing, Isai. 43. 19. Behold, I will
do a new thing. The Apostle John says, I write no new Commandment unto you,
1 John 2: 7. but that hinders not the former interpretation of the word new;
because it is usual with that Apostle, to use the same word in diverse manners.
That is said to be new also, which is another or diverse from that which was
before Christ came into the world, or which was granted to no former age of the
world, but to these last times only: as 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature: old things are passed away, behold all things are made
new. And so a new song, is a song, wherein the name of God is celebrated for
some new and admirable benefit of deliverance by the coming of Christ; as Isa.
42. 10. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the
earth. Psalm. 96. 1. O sing unto the Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord all the
earth. Rev. 5. 9. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book. Rev. 14. 3. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and
before the four beasts. Though now and then that is called a new song, wherein
the name of God is celebrated for some new benefit of deliverance at what time
soever vouchsafed; as Psalm. 40. 3. And he has put a new song in my mouth, even
praise to our God. Again, that is new, which is perpetual, shall never wax
old, or vanish away; Heb. 8. 13. In that he says, A new Covenant, he has made
the first old, Now that which decays, and waxes old is ready to vanish away.
And in this sense may that of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 8. well be understood,
Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him, and in
you.

In the Covenant of grace God promises to put a new spirit into his people.
Ezekiel. 11. 19. not new for the matter, not for the inward form or kind, but the
frame and fashion: a new spirit Ezekiel. 18. 31.
renewed in qualities, not changed in substance. And so the faithful are said
to put on the new man, which after God is created in holiness and
righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. And in Christ neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, Ephesians. 2. 15.
but a new creature, Gal 6. 15. that is, a new man refined, reformed, and
renewed by God in Christ Jesus. And it may be, the renewed soul is called the
new man, or new creature, because it is noble, beautiful, fresh and vigorous,
never to wither or decay with age. And whatsoever we must understand by the new
heavens and the new earth promised, Isai. 65. 17. and 66. 22. Revel. 21. 1. the
title new seems to import the admirable excellency and continuance thereof,
never to alter or decay, but to remain before the Lord.

In all these respects the Covenant of Grace is fitly called the new Covenant
or Testament, Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8. 2 Cor. 3. 6. for it is diverse from that
which God made with the Fathers before Christ, most necessary and excellent,
never to wax old, or to decay. By it a new light of the doctrine of the Gospel
shined to the world, it had new worship, new adoration, a new form of the
Church, new witnesses, new tables, new Sacraments and Ordinances, and these
never to be abrogated or disanulled, never to wax old. Heb. 8. 13. and it was
established after a new manner, by the blood of the Mediator. It is called a
Covenant of peace, an everlas^ing Covenant, which shall not be removed: the
Covenant of my peace, Ezekiel* 36 27. and 34. 25. Isai. 54. 10. and 55. 3. Heb.
13. 20. Isai. 61. 8. It is called a Covenant and a Testament. A Covenant in
respect of the manner of agreement; a Testament in respect of the manner of
confirming. A Covenant in respect of Heb. 9. 16.
God; a Testament in respect of Christ, who being appointed of the Father Lord
and Prince, with full possession of all things necessary to Salvation, died as
Testatour, and confirmed by his death the testamentary promise before made, of
obtaining the eternal inheritance by the remission of sins. John the Baptist
by the light of preaching was greater then the Prophets, that had gone before
him: but properly he was not a Minister of the new Testament, as it differed
from the old: wherefore a middle place is rightly assigned to him, being the
forerunner of Christ to prepare Matthew. 11. 11.
the way before him. From the birth of Christ, the things foretold in the old
Testament pertaining to the constitution of the new, began to be fulfilled; and
that first by his coming in the flesh, afterward by his administration, and
then by his death: by whose death the old Testament was abolished, and the new
did succeed in the room thereof. The old Testament was abolished by the death
of Christ in right, but not in act. For before the promulgation of that
innovation by the sound of the Gospel, they amongst the Jews that did believe
in Christ were true believers, though they were zealous for the Law: but after
the doctrine Act. ^0. 21.
of grace was sufficiently published, they that obstinately did cleave to the
shadows and Ceremonies of the Law, did reject the promise and Covenant in
Christ. So that properly the Heb. 13. 10.
beginning of the new Covenant is to be fetched from that time, wherein Christ
has fulfilled all things, which were shadowed of him in the Law, or foretold
in the Prophets, that is, after that Christ was corporally ascended into
Heaven, and had sent down the holy Spirit in the visible shape of fiery
tongues upon his Apostles, Act. 2. 3, 4.
at the solemn feast of Pentecost; For the sum of the Gospel or new
Testament is this, that the Ceremonial Law is ceased, and the use of the Law
(whereby we were kept in bondage until faith was revealed) abolished: and that
Christ being already crucified, dead, buried, and received into Heaven,
remission of sins in his blood is clearly, plainly and openly propounded,
offered and given to all them that by true and lively faith do believe that he
is Christ the Lord and Savior, and that the Spirit of Adoption is sent into
their hearts, who by firm affiance and confidence do rest in the Redeemer,
that being taught of God they stand not in need of the legal pedagogie.
Surely, that doctrine concerning faith in Christ, cannot strictly be called the
Gospel, which did take place, the Mosaicall worship as yet in force, and that
by the approbation of Christ, those things not being fullfilled as yet, which
were preached in the Gospel. For the Gospel is a message of good tidings or
things past, which affect the heart with singular joy and cheerfulness. And
as the old Covenant was not promulgated without great pomp upon Mount Sinai,
the people of Israel hearing and beholding, and swearing unto it, Exodus 19. 18.
and 20. so it was meet that the New Testament, should be published on a solemn
set day, in the assembly almost of all Nati^ns, with great splendor and glory,
as it was on the feast day of Pentecost. And before that time the doctrine
concerning faith was of that sort, that men were rather called to the future
Kingdom of God, then commanded to rest in the present state of things. John
the Baptist put over his hearers to* Christ, Joh. 1. 26, 27. Luke* 3. 16. Mark
1. 7, 8. Matthew. 3. 11, 12. Christ invites men to the Kingdom of Heaven, that
is, the Evangelicall Government of the Church, as future at hand, but not yet
present. Matthew. 4. 17. Mark 1. 15. Nay, after he was risen from the dead,
although he profess openly and plainly to his Disciples, that all power was
given unto him in Heaven and earth, and he command them to preach the Gospel
to every creature, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. yet he gives them a charge to tarry at
Jerusalem, to wait for the accomplishment of the promise concerning the
solemn sending of the holy Ghost, and to be endued with power from above, Luk*
24. 49. as if they were designed before, but then to be inaugurated, and by
extraordinary gifts, many hearing and beholding, openly to be approved. The
days immediately following the death and resurrection of Christ, were the
days of the Churches widowhood, wherein she sat (for a while) destiture and
comfortless, and barren, having neither power to bear, nor to bring forth
children. But within ten days after Christ, the Lord, the Bridegroom of the
Church, had ascended from earth to Heaven in glory, the holy Ghost came down
upon the Apostles in visible shape, in token that Christ's Church was now
betrothed unto him, and had received strength to conceive and bring forth, and
breasts replenished with plenty of Milk to nourish and feed her children. This
was as the Solemnization of the Marriage, and then did the barren begin to
rejoice, that she should be the mother of many children. From this time
properly the New Testament took its beginning.

The nature of this Testament stands principally in three things. 1. In the
kind of Doctrine, plain, full, and merely Evangelicall. 2. In freedom from
the curse of the Law, and freedom from Legal Rites. 3. In the amplitude and
enlargement of the new Church, throughout all Nations of the world.

It may be described, the free Covenant which God of his rich grace in Jesus
Christ incarnate, crucified, dead, buried, raised up to life, and ascended into
Heaven has made and plainly revealed unto the world of Jew and Gentile,
promising to be their God and Father by right of Redemption, and Christ to be
their Savior; to pardon their sin, heal their nature, adopt them to be his
Sons, protect them from all evil that may hurt, furnish them with all
needful good things spiritual and temporal, and crown them with everlasting
glory in the world to come, if they repent of their iniquities, believe in
Christ and through or by Christ in him, and walk before him in sincere,
constant and conscionable obedience: which he does inwardly sease by the
witness of the holy Spirit, who is the earnest of their inheritance, in the
hearts of the faithful; and ratify and confirm by outward seals universal,
plain, easy, and perpetual.

The Author of this Covenant is God in Jesus Christ: for none can make these
promises but God, none can make them good but his Highness. Therefore the Lord
does evermore challenge this unto himself, that he is the maker of the
Covenant: And as it is Jer. 31. 1, 31, 32, 33.
called our Covenant in respect of the conditions required, Zech. 9. 11. So it
is called the Lords Covenant, because he has made, and will establish it. If
ye can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, etc. Then
may also my Covenant be broken Jer. 33. 20, 21.
with David my servant. Christ also as Mediator is both the foundation and
Author of this Covenant, as he is appointed of the Father Lord and King,
advanced at the right hand of God to give repentance and remission of sins
unto Israel, and as Testatour Heb. 9. 16.
he has confirmed the Covenant by his death. But of this in the next Chapters.

God is both the Author of this Covenant, and one party confederate. Fathers,
we know, seldom frame Indentures, thereby to bind themselves what they will
do for their children, if they will be obedient, but by right of Fatherhood
they challenge of them their best service: Lords and great personages seldom
indent with their free servants what preferment they shall expect after some
term of service and attendance, but if they look for reward, they must stand
at their courtesy. But our Lord and Master, to whom we owe our selves by right
of Creation, who might take advantage against us for former disobedience, is
content to undertake and indent with us, and by Indenture to bind himself to
bestow great things and incomprehensible upon us, if we will accept his
kindness and bind our selves unto him in willing and sincere obedience.

If you demand a reason of this dealing, none can be given, but the mere grace
and rich mercy and love of God. Thus says the Ezekiel. 36. 22.
Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy
Names sake. I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into
the bond of the Covenant, etc. And ye shall know Ezekiel. 20. 37.
that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the Land of Israel, etc. And
there ye shall remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein 42. 43.
you have been defiled, and ye shall loathe your selves in your own sight, for
all your evils that you have committed. And ye shall know that I am the Lord,
when I have wrought with you for my Names sake, not according to your wicked
ways, nor according to your corrupt doings. Man can do nothing of himself to
procure his spiritual good. In spiritual things it fares with him much what
as with a child newborn into the world, which being naked can neither provide
clothes, nor being provided and laid by him, can put them on: for man
destitute of all spiritual goodness, can neither move to help himself,
until it be freely bestowed, nor manage and wield it well, when it is of grace
vouchsafed, without direction and assistance from God. And there is as little
worth or dignity in man to move God to promise him help, as there is ability in
man to procure help. There is nothing in man to move God to show mercy, but
only misery, which might be an occasion, but can be no cause, either why mercy
is promised, or salvation granted. If man had not fallen from grace and state
of Innocence, God had never sent his Son to redeem him, nor showed mercy
reaching to the pardon and covering of his iniquity: If he had not lost
himself, Christ had never come to find and restore him; if he had not wounded
himself, he had not been healed and repaired of grace. Man then is a subject on
whom God bestows grace, and in whom he works it; and his m^sery an occasion
that the Lord took of manifesting his mercy in succouring and lifting him up
out of that distress: but the free grace and love of God is the sole cause of
what the Lord has promised in this new Covenant, and does give according to
promise.

And though the old and new Covenant be of the same nature, and from the same
fountain, yet the new Covenant is preferred above the old, as far as
Sunne-light before Torch light, in this, that God who makes the Covenant has
more fully manifested the riches of his grace and superaboundant love in Jesus
Christ, the brightness of his glory and engraven form of his person, to the
federates of the new Testament. In the old Covenant the Lord had made it
known, that he was merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in
goodness: But in the new Covenant he does most familiarly reveal himself to
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, and in him the Father of the
faithful: which most sweet and pleasant name does breathe out unspeakable love
and tenderness.

Again, though the ancient federates had some knowledge of Gods Attributes, as
an introduction to the Covenant of Grace, yet they never knew that
transcendency of Gods love, which is brought to light in the new, mentioned in
these and such like passages of Scripture: Behold, what manner of love the
Father has 1 John ^. 1.
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever Joh. 3. 16.
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. He spared Romans
8. 3^.
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him
freely give us all things. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto
the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, 1 Timothy ^. 4, 5.
and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. They that seek
to stretch this speech of the Apostle to the furthest, do yet confess it is
spoken of the times of the Gospel: and that appears evidently by the reason
of the Apostle, confirming that saying, that God will that all men be saved,
from this, that God is the God of all men by Covenant, and Christ the Mediator
of all men in Covenant, and by the Gospel, the Word of truth, the saving truth
of God was brought unto all in Covenant. Besides, in the old Testament the
Doctrine of the Trinity of persons in the unity of the God head was more
obscurely taught: but in the new Testament we are clearly and most comfortably
assured, that the Father, Son, and holy Ghost do sweetly conspire to perfect
the Salvation of the Faithful, and confirm unto them the promises of the
Covenant; There be three that bear record in 1 John 5. 7.
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. Go
ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them into the Matthew. ^8. 19.
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. If in the mouth
of two or three witnesses every word must stand: why should a Christian
question or doubt of the promises of mercy made in the Covenant, assured unto
him by the Father, Son and holy Ghost. God the Father promises, that in his
only begotten Son, he will be a merciful Father to all Believers, that he
will give him to them for a Redeemer, accept his satisfaction for them, give
them his Spirit, and bestow upon them righteousness and salvation. The Son
does promise, that he will be Redeemer of the faithful, by doctrine, merit,
and efficacy; that he will deliver them from the power of Satan, bring them
into perpetual favor with God, wash them from all the filthiness of their
sins, and be unto them, as he is made of the Father, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. The holy Ghost does promise, that being redeemed
by the blood of Christ, by the presence of his grace, he will cleanse them from
all inherent sin, and repair the Image of God in them: lead them into all
truth and holiness, enable them to cry, Abba Father, seal them for the Lords,
and abide with them by his grace and comfort as an earnest of the inheritance,
until the redemption of the purchased possession.

This Covenant was stricken with all Nations, or the world in opposition to the
Jewish Nation: for now the promise made Gal. 3. 8.
to Abraham was fulfilled, In thee shall all Nations of the earth be blessed:
now the prophecies touching the calling of the Gentiles, Isai. 44. 6
and bringing them to the Sheepfold of Christ, were accomplished: now the
Apostles were sent forth to preach the Gospel to Matthew. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 13.
Romans 1. 16. Col. 1. 6, 23. Act 10. 45.
every creature: and God gave such a blessing unto the Word, that by their
preaching a great part of the habitable world was converted unto the faith. Now
upon the Gentiles was powered out also the gift of the holy Ghost, Christ having
broken down the partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, and abolished in his
flesh the enmity, even the Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.
law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of
twain, one new man, so making peace.

The Covenant of promise was first made with Adam and his posterity; not with
him as the common parent of all mankind, and so with every man that should come
of his loins howsoever in all generations: but with Adam as a believer, and
his posterity until by wilful departure from the faith they should
discovenant themselves and those that did proceed from them. In like manner it
was made with the Patriarchs, with Noah, and his posterity: then with Abraham
and his family; afterward with one selected Nation: but under the Gospel all
Nations are brought into the bond of the Covenant. All nations, I say, but not
every one in every nation, nor every nation in all periods of that time. For
many nations have lived, we know, for a long time in infidelity, without the
Gospel, without God in the world, aliens from the Commonwealth of Is^ael, and
strangers from the Covenant of Grace. And we find the Apostles to make a
manifest 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17.
difference betwixt the people of God and unbelievers, so that all in their
days were not admitted into Covenant, though the Gospel was preached unto
them. For they that be in Covenant are in phrase of Scripture the people of
God, that is, such with whom God has contracted Covenant, and who in like
manner have sworn unto the words of the Covenant, God stipulating, and they
accepting the condition. God as an absolute Sovereign has right and authority
over all men: but in a certain and peculiar reason they are called his people,
who receive his Commandment, and acknowledge him to be their Lord and Savior.
And these be of two sorts; for God does make his Covenant with some externally,
calling them by his Word, and sealing them by his Sacraments, and they by
profession of faith and receiving of the Sacraments oblige themselves to the
condition required: and thus all members of the visible Church be in Covenant.
With others God does make his Covenant effectually, writing his Law in their
hearts by his holy Spirit, and they freely and from the heart give up
themselves unto the Lord, in all things to be ruled and guided by him. And thus
God has contracted Covenant with the faithful only. The first sort are the
people of Romans 2. 28.
God outwardly or openly, having all things external and pertaining to the
outward administration. The second are the people of God inward or in secret,
whom certainly and distinctly the Lord only knows. Experience has confirmed
it, that in the days of the Gospel, the Church of Christ has sometimes been
shut up within narrower bounds and limits, sometimes it has spread it self
over the face of the earth more gloriously, and so much was plentifully
foretold in the Scriptures, that such as lived in the times of that great
apostasy and falling from the faith, might not be offended at it. What the
state of Gods Church shall be in these latter days, time will manifest more
certainly then we can yet define: but some Divines are of opinion that the
bounds thereof shall extend further, and the glory thereof be greater then ever
heretofore. And this is not improbable: for when the Apoc. 11. 15.
seventh Angel sounded, there were great voices in heaven, saying, The
Kingdoms of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever; which accords with that of
Daniel, Behold, one like the Son of man, came with the Dan. 7. 13, 14.
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him: And there was given unto him dominion and glory, and a Kingdom,
that all people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

CHAP. II. Christ the Mediator of the New Testament for whom he died and rose
again.
CHrist Jesus incarnate is the Mediator of the new Testament, a real
Mediator, a fit middle person betwixt God and man: a Mediator and Testatour
both, who has confirmed the Testament with his blood. But seeing the Covenant
is made in Christ, and Christ died in some sort for them that be under the
Covenant, it will not be out of place first to show for whom Christ died and
rose again, and then how Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, and what
is the exaltation and Prerogative of the new above the old Covenant in that
respect.

Touching the first there be two main opinions of Divines. The first sort hold,
that he died for all and every man with a purpose to save. But in the
explication of their Tenent they add. Corvin in Mol. cap. 28. Sect. 1. and 4.
and 20.
1. That Christ died for all men considered in the comman lapse or fall, but
not as obstinate, impenitent, or unbelievers. Christ died not, say they, for
Cain and Judas, as such, or as they should perish, nor for Abell and Peter as
faithful, in respect of the impetration of Salvation: but without difference
for them considered Resp. ad Epist. Minist. Walak. page 51. Armin. Worst. part.
Secunda necess. Resp. Synod* declar. sent. remonst. circa Art. Sect. de morte
Christi. Thomson. diatr. cap. 4. Corvin. in Mol. cap. 27. Sect. 4. and cap. 12.
Sect. 25, 26, 27.
in the common state and condition of the fall and sin. 2. That Christ died for
all men in respect of the impetration of Salvation, but the application thereof
is proper to believers. 3. That Christ died not to bring all or any man
actually to Salvation, and make them partakers of righteousness and life; but
to purchase salvabilitie and reconciliation so far, as that God might and
would, salvajustitia, deal with them upon terms of a better Covenant, which
might well stand allthough it should be applied to no man, no man should be
reconciled or saved by Christ, God should have no Church on earth, or Saint be
crowned with glory in heaven. 4. That Christ has purchased salvabilitie for
all men, but faith and regeneration he has merited for none: because God is
bound to give that which Christ has merited of him, although it be not desired
or craved. Exam. Censur. Cap. 8. page 95. and Cap. 7. page 87 and Respons. ad
specul. 11. 107. Other po^itions they hold, which ^ang not together, nor agree
Exam. Cens.
with that which has been mentioned; as that God neither would, nor could by
right condemn any man for the sin of Adam, and that Original sin so
called, is properly neither sin, nor punishment: And then if Christ died for
mankind in the common lapse, he died for them that never had sinned, nor
deserved punishment. Again they teach that all Infants, whether of believing
Corvin. in Mol. cap. ^8. Sect. 13, 14.
or Infidel parents, dying without actual sins committed in their own
person, are restord into the favor of God, regenerated and saved: and that
because God has taken all mankind into the grace of reconciliation, and entered
into a Covenant of grace Arm. Resp. ad ad Art. 13, 14.
with Adam and all his posterity. But then Christ died for all mankind in
respect of impetration and application both: and by his death has actually
reconciled all mankind unto God, merited actual regeneration for them, and
purchased Salvation, if after they be possessors of these spiritual blessings,
they do not fall from them and shake them off by impenitency and infidelity.
For Adam and Eve excepted, mankind cannot be considered in the Armin in Perk.
page 4.
common lapse, but as infants only. Further they affirm, that Infants have
refused grace in their parents, grandfathers, ancestors, by which act they have
deserved to be forsaken of God: which how it can stand with their general
position, or that last mentioned, I cannot conceive. Lastly, they teach, that
Christ died for the impenitent and unbelievers: for thus they reason, If Christ
died for all whom he came to save, and came to save unbelievers, as his words
are, I came not to judge, but to save, then he died for unbelievers. How they
accord these things, I cannot find; but if we take things as they lay them
down, it will plainly follow, that Christ died for all mankind in respect of
impetration only, and that he died for them in respect of impetration and
application both; that he has not actually reconciled them unto God, and that
he has purchased actual reconciliation; that he died not for the impenitent
or unbelievers in respect of impetration, and that in respect of impetration
only, he died only for such. And all this can hardly be reconciled with that
they have in their Script. Synod. declar. sent. Rem. circa Art. 2 Gratia haec
impetrata est peccat^ribus quatenus in communi lapsus and peccati statu
alijsque peccatis, excepta sola impenitentia, considerantur, etc. Sicut
fidelibus, quatalibus, fructus impetratae gratiae proprie obtingit, ita
infidelibus and rebellibus, qua talibus, gratia impetrata non est, etc. and
page 312.

The second sort of Divines distinguish the sufficiency and efficiency of
Christ's death. In respect of the worth and greatness of the price he died for
all men: because it was sufficient for the redemption of every man in the
world, if they did repent and believe: and God might without impeachment of
justice have offered Salvation to every man in the world upon that condition if
it had been his pleasure. In the efficiency, as every man, or any man has
fruit by the death of Christ, so Christ died for him. But this is not of one
kind: some fruit is common to every man: for as Christ is Lord of all things in
heaven and earth, even the earthly blessings which infidels enjoy, may be
termed fruits of Christ's death. Others proper to the members of the visible
Church and common to them, as to be called by the word, enjoy the Ordinances of
grace, live under the Covenant, partake of some graces that come from Christ,
which through their fault be not saving: and in this sense Christ died for all
that be under the Covenant. But other fruits of Christ's death according to the
will of God and intention of Christ as Mediator, be peculiar to the sheep of
Christ, his brethren, them that be given unto him of the Father, as faith
unfeigned, regeneration, pardon of sin, adoption, etc. and so they hold,
Christ died efficiently for his people only in this sense, namely, so as to
bring them effectually to faith, grace and glory.

Now let us come to examine what the Scriptures teach in this particular. The
Apostle writes expressly, that by the grace of Heb. 2. 9.
God Christ tasted of death for all men or distributively for every man. Some
refer this to the sufficiency of Christ's death: but all men, cannot be
referred to mankind considered in the common mass or lapse: for the words
must be understood of the death of Christ as it was suffered in time, and not
as it was decreed of God, and of men considered as at that time. But at what
time Christ suffered, mankind could not be considered as in the transgression
of our first Parents. The Jews were of opinion, that Christ the Messiah was
promised a Savior to them only. How, to impetrate Salvation? No, but to be
applied as in Covenant. Now to beat down their pride, the Apostle says,
Christ tasted of death for all, sc. both Jew and Gentile, who stood in relation
by virtue of the Covenant, as the Jews did. So that the Apostle speaks of the
application of Christ's death, which is not absolutely common to all and every
man in the world: and by every man is meant, every man who hears, receives,
and is partaker of the fruit and benefit of Christ's death offered in the word
of reconciliation: every man who is under the new Covenant, as it is propounded
of God in the Gospel and accepted of them. But every man under the new
Covenant, as he is under the Covenant, is partaker of the fruit and benefit of
Christ's death. That the passage is to be understood of them that apply and
possess the fruit of his death, is manifest by diverse reasons from the verses
precedent and subsequent. The world to come, verse 5. may well be that all, or
every man for whom Christ tasted death: but that world to come is that happy
age, which the Prophets did foretell should begin at the coming of Christ,
whose accomplishment or fulfilling we expect as yet. Beza an not. in Heb. 2. 5.
Corvin. in Mal. cap. 29. 1. Heb. 2. 10, 11. 13 Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 16.
They for whom Christ died are in the same Chapter described to be one, that
is, of the same nature and spiritual condition with Christ, to be his
brethren, such as trust in God, the children of God given unto Jesus Christ,
the generation or posterity of Christ, as the Prophet speaks, whom Christ
took by the hand and lifted up from their fall, the seed of Abraham. But these
things agree to them only that possess the fruits and benefits of Christ, for
whom he died by way of application. If the maintainers of universal redemption
consider their own grounds, it will be hard to fit this Text to their purpose:
or rather from them the former exposition may be confirmed. For either by all
men, they must understand mankind in the common lapse, as fallen in Adam, and
then Christ by his death has restored them into the favor of God, they stand
actually reconciled, they be regenerated, and if they die before by actual
sin committed in their own person they fall from that estate, are
undoubtedly saved: or they must understand all men considered as obstinate,
impenitent, rebellious, unbelievers. And then Christ died for all, and every
man as obstinate, impenitent and unbelievers: which I cannot find that any of
them has or dare affirm: or by all men they must understand all believers,
who apply and possess the benefits of Christ's death, which is that we affirm.
They say (how truly I dispute not) his dominion over all men, that they are
bound to obey him, and live unto him, is grounded upon his dying for every one.
But if that be granted, is it not necessary that his death should be applied to
every one in some sort, at least made known unto them in the word of life? For
men are bound to obey and live unto Christ, as they will grant, not because he
has impetrated righteousness and salvabilitie, but because he has entered
into Covenant with them, made known unto them the way of life, imparted unto
them his blessings, and they have accepted of the condition, and received him
to be their Savior.

And these words, By the grace of God, I should think, import more to them,
then that velleity or common mercy, or general affection of doing good, which
Armin. and Corvin, make natural, and (as they teach) God bears toward them
that he hates, Corvin. in Molin. cap. 29. Sect. 2. which was the cause why he
gave Christ to die for all men: even that free grace and love, whereby he
quickens them that were dead in trespasses, and saves them that believe,
Ephesians. 2. 5. As for the particle All or every one, examples are usual in
Scripture where it is used with fit limitation, though neither all precisely,
nor the most part be signified, and that confessed by all sides. But what need
parallel places to prove it may be, when the circumstances of the text show it
must be limited, and they that most press universal redemption are enforced
to acknowledge a limitation in this matter.

It is objected, that the holy Ghost speaks generally in the beginning of the
Chapter, What is man? But how to frame any Heb. 2. 6.
reason from those words to disprove the former limitation I see not. For this
word man designs the nature of man in general, but with relation to the
person of Christ, and is spoken of the nature of man, as to be united to the
person of Christ, and alleged by the Apostle to prove, that the world to
come, is put in subjection unto him as man. And if it be extended further then
to Christ as man, it must be restrained unto the faithful, to whom that which
follows may be applied by communication and fellowship with Christ.

Again, it is objected, that Christ's dominion over all is grounded on his
death: but if that be granted, it is not necessary his death should be simply
for all men. For the Apostle speaks of Heb. 2. 6, 7. Phil. 2. 9. Joh. 3. 35.
Mat. 11. 27.
Christ's dominion, not only over all men, but over all things, the Angels
themselves not excepted: but it was not requisite, Christ should die for all
things, even for the Angels, as they themselves confess. His power extends
it self unto all creatures, to whom he can command obedience at his pleasure,
and unless they perform it, inflict punishment. For he is made Lord of the
world, and all power is given unto him in heaven and earth. Christ has
Sovereignty over all things, and does rule over all men, the faithful to life,
the unfaithful to death, Corvin. in Molin. cap. 12. 26. This dominion of
Christ stands well with reason, is consonant to the Scripture, but was not
purchased by his death simply for them.

Lastly, It will be said, the Apostle threatens punishment for not receiving
or retaining Christ, and exhorts to care of it, which argues general
purchase, or else such exhortations and threatenings would be without force.
Touching the thing it self, it is freely acknowledged that the sufficiency of
Christ's death and greatness of the price was such, that God might salva
justitia, not only invite all mankind to come unto Christ, but also bring them
unto faith and salvation by him, if it had seemed good unto him in his infinite
wisdom: and the efficiencie of it so great, that God does seriously invite
many that live in the visible Church to come unto Christ and bestow many
spiritual gifts and graces upon them, by their own fault unavaleable, to whom
he does not give grace to repent and believe unfainedly. But exhortations and
threatenings argue not that general purchase in question. For the obstinate and
rebellious, they whose eyes are closed and hearts hardened, least seeing they
should see, or hearing they should hear, and be converted; even they are
exhorted to repent, and threatened for their impenitencie: but I have not found,
that the purchase was made absolutely for all such as such. For some
rebellious, I can believe that Christ has purchased not salvabilitie alone,
but faith, regeneration, pardon and salvation, because it is written of Christ,
That he is ascended on high, and has led Psalm. 68. 18. Atque etiam rebels,
captiv^^ duxisti, ut habitent eum, I^h Deo.
captivity captive, and has received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them: or as Piscator renders it, thou
have led captive the rebellious, that they might dwell with the Lord God. But
the maintainers of universal redemption have not undertaken as yet to prove
general purchase for all and every obstinate, rebellious and treacherous
revolter from the Lord. In this place the objection is more vain: for the
Apostle might well speak of the application and possession of the fruits of
Christ's death, when he exhorts them that had heard and received the word of
truth, to retain and keep that which they had heard. Exhortations and
threatenings both are useful to them who have not received the truth: for God
is pleased by such means to work what he does exhort men unto: and to them who
have received the truth, and do possess the benefits of Christ's death, that
they might continue and persevere. And may we not argue more probably, that
seeing they are exhorted to take heed to the things they had heard, therefore
salvation had been preached unto them, and in some sort received by them. God
so Joh. 3. 16, 17.
loved the world (as we read in the Evangelist) that he gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world: but that
the world through him Joh. 1 ^. 47.
might be saved. And, I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
Here the motive from which the gift of Christ is derived is The particle Who,
is not ever distributive of the subject to which it is attributed. See Rev^l.
2. 25 26. 2 Cor. 5. 15.
common love. The word World cannot be taken for the elect only: for then it
will be as if it had bin said, God so loved the elect, that he gave his only
Son, that whosoever of them believed in him should not perish. The world that
Christ came to save, was that world into which he came; and that comprehended
both believers and unbelievers: and in the same place, it is divided into them
that shall be saved, and them that shall be damned: and there should be no
force of reasoning in the latter place, if the world did not comprehend
unbelievers under it. Thus these passages are urged for universal redemption.
But the principal texts speak plainly Isa. 54. 5. De^^ totius terrae
vocabitur. Vt 1 John 2. 2. Joh. 4. 42 Rupert, Tuit. in Joh. Mundum ^ane quem
dilexit Deus, humanum genus accipim^^, id est, vivos and mortuos; mortuos,
scil. qui venturum in fide expect averint: vivos, qui in illum, sive ex
Iudaeis, five ex Gentibus, credituri erant.
of the days of grace, when God sent his Son into the world, and when
according to the prophesies and promises made before, the Gentiles were to be
called to the faith, added to the Church, and received into Covenant. And the
world is taken communiter and indefinite, for the world, as it is opposed to
the Jewish Nation alone, not universaliter pro singulis, for every man in the
world of what time or age soever, or of this time in special. The sense then
is, In the fullness of time, God manifested so great love unto the world of Jew
and Gentile, not of the Jew alone, That he gave his only begotten Son, and in
the Ministry of the Gospel, seriously invited them to believe, and entered
into Covenant to bestow life and happiness upon condition of their unfeigned
faith on Jesus Christ. As God loved Israel, whom he chose to be his peculiar
people under the old Testament: so in the times of grace he extended his love
to the world of Jew and Gentile. And as amongst the Jews God manifested so much
love to the body of that Nation, as to enter into Covenant with them, and
vouchsafe unto them the means of grace, but unto some he showed more special
love, so as to call them effectually, and make them heirs of salvation: In
like manner in the last times or days of the new Testament God manifested so
much love to the world, as it is opposed to the Jewish Nation, as that in the
ministry of the Gospel he entreated them to be reconciled, and entered into a
Covenant of peace with them: but unto some he bare and manifested more peculiar
love, in that he called them effectually, and made them heirs of life.
Nevertheless, when these Texts be expounded of the days of grace, or times of
the new Testament, we must not conceive, that all men now called Gentiles, were
in former ages of the Church utterly cast off, and shut out of Covenant, or
that the gift of Christ to Jew and Gentile is so restrained to the days of
grace, as that he was not given to the faithful, whether Jew or Gentile, in
all ages: but that the transcendent love of God in giving his Son to die, and
in him receiving the world of Jew and Gentile into the new Covenant is peculiar
(specially after the distinction of Jew and Gentile) to the times of the
Gospel. This might easily be confirmed, both for the substance of matter, and
the sense of these passages, out of their writings that be the stiffest
maintainers of the point in hand. See Vorst. Parasc. cap. 4. and 7. Corv. in
Mol. cap. 31. 33. Exam. censur. cap. 8. Vorst. de Deo not. ad disput. 1. Now
then let us compare their position, and those texts together, and see whether
they consent or dissent one from another.

First, The love wherewith God so loved man fallen, as to give his Son to die
(I speak according to their opinion) is common to all men; an incompleate will
and affection, whereby God loved them as men; or a volition and intention of
being reconciled. But the love mentioned in this text is a love special to
some ages and some men, not common to every man in all ages. It was a special
love, whereby the Lord loved the Jews as his peculiar treasure, above all
Nations of the earth, in the time of the Law, Deuteronomy. 7 6. and 10. 14. and 26. 6.
and 32. 8. 2 Samuel 7. 23. 1 King. 8. 53. Psalm. 33. 12. and 100. 3. and 143. 5.
And it is a special love, not common to all ages, much less to every man in
every age, whereby the Lord has loved the world of the Gentiles, in the days
of the Gospel, to take them for his people. And this love is true love, though
many pervert the grace of God to their own destruction.

Secondly, The world for which Christ died was mankind considered as fallen in
Adam; for unbelief follows the death of Christ, cannot be precedent to it.
But here the world comprehends unbeleevers and impenitent in respect of their
present state: and not such only as may fall into unbelief and impenitencie*
even such impenitent and obstinate, as the Scripture says, could not believe,
Joh. 12. 39.

Thirdly, The world for which Christ died, (as they teach) does comprehend
every particular man, of what estate or condition soever, in what age of the
world soever. But the world in the text does not comprehend all men of all
ages, nor every man of any age yet passed, but the world as it is set against
the Jewish Nation only; not comprehending every particular man of the Jews or
Gentiles, but so many, and so considered, as they give reason of that
opposition. Look in what respects God is said to have chosen the Jews to be
his peculiar people in the time of the Law, but now in times of the Gospel to
love the world in opposition to that peculiar favor at that time manifested to
them alone, in that sense is the world of Jew and Gentile to be understood, and
so many comprehended under it.

Fourthly, They say, Christ died for the world in respect of impetration or
acquisition of righteousness, not of the application of his death. But this
world which God so loved, was called by the Gospel, and did enter into
Covenant with God, and God with them: The world which Christ came to save was a
world in Covenant, and whereunto he preached peace: and so the death of Christ
was applied unto them by the word and Sacraments, and received by them in
respect of faith temporary and profession. For when God enters into Covenant
with a people, and they accept the conditions, and give up their names unto
God, they do in a sort apply the death of Christ unto themselves; and possess
some fruits and benefits thereof. And therefore, either these passages must be
interpreted of Gods giving Christ to die for the world in a special manner, or
from them it may undeniably be concluded, that he died not for all mankind.
For that which in special love was given in peculiar manner to the world of
Jew and Gentile in the times of the new Testament, that is not the effect of
common love, given to all and every man in all ages; but God of his special
love to the world of Jew and Gentile in the days of the new Testament gave
Christ to die for them: therefore of common love he did not give him to die for
all mankind of every age and condition. And seeing God loved some, and but
some, according to the true sense of these places, so as to give Christ to die,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc. Yea some considered for
the present in the state of impenitency, unbelief and obstinacy, and (it may
be) given up unto a reprobate sense, Deuteronomy. 9. 9. and 32 28.
whereas he cast off many Nations in former ages, much more particular persons,
who never proceeded so far, continued so long Josh. 24. 2. Psalm. 100 3. Isa.
43. 8. and 65. 1. Ezekiel. 16 3.
in these sins as this world had done, must we not of necessity acknowledge
some free election or choice according to the good pleasure of God? Certainly,
it cannot be concluded hence, that Christ did equally lay down his life for all
men without exception, to purchase for them actual reconciliation on Gods
part. It is here objected, that this world does comprehend many impenitent
Synod de^ens. sent Remonst. circ. Art. 2 page 301.
and unbelievers, that shall not be saved, and if Christ died for one that
shall not be saved, it follows a pari, that he died for all. And it is true,
as many be externally in Covenant, and have all out ward things common with the
faithful, who be not true members of Jesus Christ: so also this world opposed
to the Jewish Nation, called of God, and admitted into Covenant, does
comprehend many, which in deed and truth be not lively members of Jesus Christ.
In like manner many, indeed wicked men and ungodly, living in the visible
Church, and under the external Covenant, are called the chosen of God, the
people of God, Saints by calling, and so Christ died for them, efficiently, and
by way of application, as they be within the Covenant made in Christ, and do
partake of those fruits and benefits of his death, which of themselves tend to
salvation, but are perverted of them to destruction through their own default.
But others comprehended under the world, be faithful indeed, living members of
Jesus Christ, sealed by the Spirit, and for these Christ died efficiently in a
peculiar manner, scil. to bring them to life and happiness, as already they
are called savingly and effectually to faith and repentance.

The argument a pari is of no weight, manifestly confuted both by Scripture and
experience it self. For to many that perish is the word of Salvation sent,
they receive it, profess it, rejoice in it, live under the Ordinances of
grace, be partakers of sundry graces of the Spirit: all which be special
fruits of Christ's death, special to some, not common to all men: and in which
respects Christ is said to die for them. But to affirm the same things of
every particular man in the world, is to offend against common sense. If Christ
had died for one wicked man that perished, because he had been wicked, or for
that reason, there had been some truth in the argument: but some fruits of
Christ's death are imparted to some although they be wicked, not because they
are wicked, or for that reason. Besides, it is one thing to say, Christ died
for some that perish, as they partake the fruits of his death in themselves
belonging to Salvation, which is granted, another to say, Christ died for all
men, considered as fallen according to the will of God, and intention of Christ
as Mediator, with full purpose to purchase for them actual reconciliation on
Gods part, which is, that they contend for. So that this objection will be of
no force, until it can be proved, that impretation is application, they be in
Covenant, who be not, nor never were in Covenant; they have the Gospel, who
never heard of the Gospel; they have received the promise of Salvation, who
are rejected and cast off of God, as aliens from the Covenant; Christ is
amongst them, who never had possible means imaginable to come to the knowledge
of the truth; and they are enlightened, and have tasted of the good word of God,
and of the powers of the life to come, who all their life long have lived in
ignorance and infidelity, and not heard that there is a Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15.


We thus judge (says Paul) that if one died for all, then were all dead. And
that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Here the Apostle
says expressly, Christ died for all simply meant, in respect of the
impetration of a new Covenant, and salvation according to that Covenant: common
misery is concluded from this, that Christ died for all men: sc. that all were
dead: which is universally true of every man. And upon this ground he exhorts
men to live unto Christ, scil. that Christ died for all men. Some learned
Divines not partial refer See Estium in 2 Cor. 5. 14. page 586.
this to the greatness of the price and dignity of Christ's death, which was
sufficient for the redemption of mankind, if they did repent and believe: but
the Apostle rather speaks of Christ's death for all in respect of application,
event, or effect: for all not simply, but for all to whom the fruit and benefit
of Christ's death is offered in the Gospel, and received by faith. Thus
Vorstius* Vorst. in 2 Cor. 5. 14 loc. com. Illud quoque hic obiter. notandum.
Christ died, and was raised up for all men in general, if we consider the
amplitude of divine grace offered in Christ: but in respect of the event or
effect both are done for all the elect and believers only. And in this latter
sense that phrase is used of the Apostle in this place. And this the
circumstances of the text will plainly enforce. For he speaks of the death of
Christ, not as it was purposed and decreed of God, but as it was actually
suffered by Christ, when the far greatest part of the world, was for present
state drowned in Infidelity and Idolatry, wherein they had continued a long
time, being rejected and cast off of God. The end of Christ's death and
resurrection there named by the Apostle, shows it is to be meant of the fruit
and application, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to him which died for them, that is, that by force of that
communion which they have with him their head, being dead unto sin, they
should live unto righteousness. But that can agree unto none, who are not
partakers of the fruits of Christ; none are fitted by grace to live unto
Christ, but they that have put on Christ by faith. That All for whom Christ
died, is that world, which God in Christ has reconciled unto himself, not
imputing their sins, ver. 19. whereby is meant the world of Jew and Gentile, of
which we have spoken before in the forecited places, which must have the same
meaning; and cannot be affirmed of the world universally according to that
present state wherein it stood, when Christ suffered.

How then does the Apostle conclude common misery from this, If one died for
all, then were all dead? It may well be understood, of death unto the world and
sin, and not of death in sin, as if he had said, if Christ died for all,
then all that are his, are dead to sin and to the world. The words and scope
of the Apostle do both agree well to this interpretation. It has been
alleged, that the words speak of a death passed, not present, as our
translation shows, and so could not be understood of death unto sin. But
Vorstius upon that very word notes, that he understands Vorst. in 2 Cor. 5.
15. Schol.
all Christians in which the efficacy of Christ's death shows forth it self,
as they also by the example of Christ are dead to sin and the flesh. Confer
Romans 6. 2, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 1. Some foolishly understand this of the guilt of
death, that the sense should be, because Christ is dead for all men, hence it
is truly gathered, that all men are guilty of death; which is refuted in the
verse following. This is Vorstius his censure of that interpretation. As for
the words, seeing they speak of the death of Christ applied in the time past,
it was requisite these that entreat of the death of sin in them that be
Christ's, should be put in the time past also. And so the words do more
confirm, then weaken the interpretation.

It is further objected, that it will not agree with the argument of the
Apostle, who by Christ's death for all, could not prove all to be dead to sin,
nor so much as all the Elect, or all at Corinth. And the drift of the place is
to prove, not that all men simply are dead to sin, for that is notoriously
false, and was neither taught, nor confirmed by any Penman of holy Writ; nor
that all the Elect, or all at Corinth are dead to sin; for he speaks to the
Church or faithful in Corinth, not to the place, or inhabitants universally:
but that the faithful, who had believed in Christ, as himself and the
converted Corinthians had done, and did for the present, were dead to sin,
which he strongly confirms from the communion they have with Christ in his
death and resurrection, that is, that Christ died for them in effect and event,
that the virtue and efficacy of his death did show forth it self in them.

If the other Interpretation be admitted, the consequence is good thus, Christ
died for all believers, therefore all men by nature are dead in sin: for the
state of believers before conversion is the same with the others: and if they
by the merit, power and efficacy of Christ's death be delivered from the guilt
and dominion of sin, who so is not set free by the death of Christ from the
power of sin, must needs be dead therein. Arguments not much unlike we have, 1
Cor. 15. 22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. In the
first part all simply, in the latter all with limitation, scil. that be in
Christ must be understood. See Gal. 3. 22.
And Romans 5. 18. and 11. 32. But of that there is no need to make many words,
because the former interpretation is most natural. The 15. verse they say,
need not be restrained, because all are bound to live unto Christ. Whether all
men be simply bound to live unto Christ, because he simply died for them,
though his death had never been signified unto them, I will leave to another
place: But the discourse of the Apostle is of them, for whom Christ died, and
who believe in him, and in whom the efficacy of Christ's death does exercise it
self. They that are dead with Christ should live unto God.

They object moreover, that reconciliation is predicated of the verse. 19.
whole world, which is reconciled thus far through Christ, that God will not
deal with man as he might have done, to cast him away utterly without hope, so
as he has the Angels that sinned, but he will accept of him upon terms
fitting, according to a new Corvin. in Mol. cap. 28.. 35.
Covenant. In which sense a Father is reconciled to his Son, a Master to his
Servant, when he is content upon repentance, submission and amendment to
receive him into favor. Upon this Text they would build a twofold
reconciliation, one general (as some express it) another special; one not an
actual taking away of sins, not actual remission of sins, not Justification,
not actual redemption of these or these, but an impetration of remission,
Justification, and redemption, whereby God may, his justice not hindering, remit
sins to men transgressors, which does imply another member, to wit,
reconciliation, justification and redemption actual. Arm. in Perkin.. 25. page
76. or a reconcileablenesse, whereby men might be delivered from the captivity
of sin, or the necessity of thraldom and reconciliation, whereby they are
delivered from captivity. Voss. Hist. Pelagian. lib. 7. part. 1. these. 3.
Others call it an actual reconciliation on Gods part, and an actual
reconciliation whereby it comes to pass, that all sinners do actually please
God. Exam. Censur. cap. 8. page 59. Vorst. in 2 Cor. 5. 15. and 1 John 2. 2.
Christ sufficiently and efficiently does expiate the sins of all, and reconcile
the world to God, quantum in ipso est, that is, as much as pertaines to the
execution of his office laid upon him by his heavenly Father. What distinction
they make of reconciliation, and actual reconciliation, or reconcileablenesse
and actual reconciliation, the same may be made of redemption, remission of
sins, justification, and adoption, regeneration and sanctification, so that we
may distinguish of them also, that there is an actual redemption and
redemption, actual remission of sins and remission, actual justification and
justification, actual sanctification and sanctification. The term actual
remission or reconciliation being set against reconciliation, as the distinct
member, does require, that reconciliation potentiall be understood, which may
be called reconcileablenesse. And then Christ has not obtained of the Father
by his death, that he should remit sins, but that he has power to remit them:
he has not obtained redemption, but a possibility of redemption, or the
redemption purchased is a potentiall remission of sins: he has not merited
sanctification, but a right that he may sanctify or sanctifiablenesse: he has
obtained also that God might pardon sin, as well as that man might be pardoned
or reconciled; and notwithstanding any redemption that Christ has purchased,
every man might perish, and be condemned for ever. But if reconciliation
potentiall or a possibility of remission only be purchased by the death of
Christ, how is this made actual by application? If it be actual and
effectual, why is it not applied and given to every man? will not God give to
every man, that which Christ has merited and purchased for every man? The
merit of reconciliation by Christ, and the application thereof must be
distinguished: but for whomsoever eternal redemption is purchased, for them he
has obtained grace and glory, and upon them he will actually confer that
grace and mercy, sanctifying them to be a peculiar people to himself. Heb. 9.
12. Matthew. 1. 21. Joh. 4. 14. Application is as necessary an effect of
redemption or reconciliation purchased, as burning is of fire; and there can be
no redemption, but of necessity it must bring application, both in respect of
Gods justice, and Christ's sacrifice* Dan. 9. 24. Heb. 10. 10, 14. Therefore
there is but one reconciliation, and that actual and effectual, though it may
be universally proposed in the Gospel: and that particular actual
reconciliation is none other but that very same, which God meritorie and
impetratorie has proposed by the death of Christ. As for the present Text
alleged, reconciliation is not predicated of the whole world, taking the
world for every man in the world, nor reconciliation put for
reconcileablenesse. For it is manifest the Apostle speaks of the world as it
was to be considered in the times when Christ suffered, or after, when in
respect of present state the far greater part were impenitent, if not
obdurate sinners, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, without God in the
world: and I desire to see that Text of Scripture, where God is said to
reconcile unto himself the whole world of impenitent and obdurate sinners, as
such; or where we shall find, that all such Ephesians. 2. 12. Romans 3. 8, 17. Gal 3.
26. Ephesians. 2. 3, 4.
be brought under a new Covenant. It is also as plain, that he speaks of the
surrogation of the Gentiles in the place of the Jews, and is to be understood
of the world opposed to the Jewish Nation. That world concerning whom the Lord
had spoken before to Abraham, saying, In thy seed shall all the Nations of Genesis
12. 3. and 18. 18. Psalm. 2. 8. and 22. 27, 28. Isai. 11. 9, 10. Psalm. 72. 11.
the earth be blessed: That world, which the Prophets foretold should be added
to the Church, and given to the Messiah; This world, I say, which God has
promised to bless, and add to the Kingdom of the Messiah, he has reconciled
unto himself, to wit, as they are blessed in Abraham's seed, actually and
effectually.

This is the Privilege of the New Testament, that God was Synod. ubi supra.
Illi hoc loco per vocem Mundi, intelligantur, ad quos sermo reconciliationis
pertinet.
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, as is most apparent in the
words next following, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation,
and by the sentence it self; God was in Christ. But what is proper to the times
of the New Testament cannot be attributed to every man in the world, even those
that sat in darkness and the shadow of death, before the light did shine upon
them. The reconciliation here mentioned is actual, effectual, particular
reconciliation, purchased by Christ, published by the Apostles to the world of
Jew and Gentiles, and received Meritum Christi subordinatur gratiae dilectionis
generali, ex ea enim fluit ordinatio hujus medii, etc. non enim ut vellet
nostri misereri fecit Christus, sed ut salva justitia nostri misereri posset.
Stegma. page 54. Romans 5. 9, 10.
by them in the Covenant of grace. For it is explained by the non-imputation,
or remission of sins, (at least as one part or branch of reconciliation)
which is a transient act, conferred in time, and infers a change of state
and condition in the party justified or reconciled, and of other
reconciliation betwixt God and man the Scripture speaks not. And it is to be
observed, that the Apostle says not, Christ has purchased that God is
reconcilable, or actually reconciled on his part, as if before he were
irreconcilable: but God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
where the world is the subject or matter of reconciliation, which is changed in
respect of state or condition, now received into actual favor, whereas
heretofore it lay under wrath. In another place the Apostle puts reconciliation
by the death of the Son of God, and justification by Christ's blood for the
same: where justification cannot be taken for possibility of justification, but
for actual justification by faith in the blood of Christ, wherewith Salvation
is joined, whereby we are acquitted from the guilt and punishment of sin: and
so the justified or reconciled are opposed to sinners, ungodly and enemies. In
respect of verse. 6, 8.
our antecedent state, we were enemies, when In Scriptura, ut saepe res
dicitur, quod paulo ante fuit, ut coeci vident, surdi a^diunt, claudi ambulant,
Matthew. 11. 5. esurientes, qui prius misere victitabant in solo sterili, ^sal.
107. 36. Joh. 9. 17. leprosus, qui jam mundus est, Matthew. 26 6. Virgo, quae jam
nupta. Matthew. 10. 35. baculus, qui est serpens, Exodus 7. 11. publicanus, qui
est Christi discipulus. Matthew. 10. 3. and discipulum Christi, qui eum reliquit.
Joh. 6. 66 Sic contra saepe in sacris literis res describitur, qualis ^utura
est, non qualis nunc est. Ephesians. 5. 20. Ita Christi oves dicuntur, qui tunc
adhuc erant lupi. Joh. 10. 16. Dei filii, qui tum a^huc erant filii diaboli.
Joh. 11. 52. Tarn. exercit. l. 2. Job. 3. 2. 561.
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: but by reconciliation we are
received into grace, and of enemies made friends and sons. In these passages we
cannot find reconciliation put for reconcileablenesse, nor predicated of all
the world, nor all the enemies of God, nor in any other Scripture. For though
all were enemies before reconciliation, yet all enemies are not reconciled, but
they that be converted to the faith. Thus we are taught in the word of truth,
to distinguish the state of the Gentiles living in their infidelity without
God, from the state of the Gentiles reconciled. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, etc. And that
he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the
enmity thereby. Ephesians. 2. 13, 16. And you that were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in your minds, by wicked works, yet now are reconciled. Col. 1. 21.
Now, scil. the Messiah being exhibited, they are reconciled, and their sins
pardoned, the promise of mercy pertaining to them, as well as to the Jews,
when formerly abalienati a foedere promissionum, they were not reconciled. And
when in the precedent verse he says, that it pleased the Father by him, (scil.
Christ) to reconcile all things unto himself, whether they be things in
heaven, or things in earth; he speaks of actual reconciliation, not
reconcileablenesse, and all things must be limited, as that signification of
the word, and scope of the place does necessarily require. The sentence is
diversely interpreted, some think it not absurd to extend it simply to all
things without exception, but especially to reasonable creatures, Angels and
men. Others think it must necessarily be restrained to creatures of a certain
kind, and interpret it of Angels and men reconciled one to another, who were
formerly separated by man's disobedience. Others restrain it to the faithful
in heaven and earth, and expound it of Vorst. in Col. 1. 20. Sch and Ephesians. 1. 10.
the Church and men in Covenant, who are received into favor and reconciled by
the death of Christ laid hold on by faith. But to interpret it simply of all
men penitent, impenitent, believers, infidels, obstinate, separated from God by
their evil works, is directly contrary to the Text, and has scarce a second
Author. No man is to be excluded from seeking the benefit of reconciliation:
but from the benefit it self the Apostle excludes them that be not in Covenant,
and in the state of grace, to whom only this spiritual blessing does pertain.
And in the same manner this and the like words are to be limited in other
places. Ephesians. 1. 10. Romans 11. 32. And this they must not deny, if they would be
at one with themselves: for they say all men are under a new Covenant, and
received into favor, and that pardon of sin is promised unto all that shall
continue in that Covenant, and not transgress against it. Arm. respon. ad Art.
13, 14. so that to consummate happiness there is need of continuance only in
the state, which evermore has effectual communication conjoined. And
restitution into the state of grace, and actual reconciliation, if they be not
one thing, they be inseparable. And this does take away the objection which
they raise from the words following, And has committed verse. 19, 20,
unto us the word of reconciliation. Now therefore we beseech you, we pray you
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. For not to say, the Apostle speaks
to the Corinthians at that time believers, and in the state of persons
reconciled: has not God committed the word of reconciliation to the Ministers,
who are to beseech mankind actually restored into grace, and admitted into the
new Covenant, to be reconciled? The word of reconciliation is of use, both to
them that be not restored into grace, that they might be called, and to them
that be reconciled, that they might continue and be builded forward.

That passage of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the
propitiation for our sin: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world, is like to the former, as all men confess, and has the same
answer. For as Christ is our Advocate by office to plead our cause, and defend
us against the accusation of all our enemies, so is he our propitiation: But
Christ is not the Advocate of every man simply, but of his people. And as he is
the propitiation of the believing Jews, so he is of the whole world: 1 John 4.
10.
but he is the propitiation of the believing Jews, in that God is propitious
unto them in Christ, and not propitiable or reconcilable only. He is their
propitiation through faith in his blood. Romans 3. 25. by whom their sins are
covered, not coverable, and Cyril. in Ioh. ^. 11. cap. 19. Aug. tract. 87. in.
Job. Author de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 1. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. Estius in 1
Io^. 2. 2.
expiated and done away, not expiable only. Therefore the Apostle speaks of
the application of Christ's death, and by the whole world, mankind in common
considered as under the fall cannot be understood, but the whole world of the
Gentiles now called to the faith, and admitted into Covenant. Thus Vorstius
himself, though in his common places upon this Chapter, he would understand
these words, as if Christ sufficiently and efficiently quantum in se was the
propitiation for the sins of all mankind: yet in his paraphrase, he gives
this sense of the Text; Where fore let Vorst in 1 John 2. 2.
him consider, that the Lord Jesus is the propitiation for our sins, as who
has purchased full remission of them all for us: And not only for us, who at
this time embrace his doctrine, but for all men of the whole world, as many as
by faith receive or appehend the blessing of the Gospel offered unto them. In
this sense the world is taken, as they themselves confess, Romans 11. 12, 15.
Their fall is Scrip. Syn. page 307, 308. See Chemnit. Har. Evang. cap. 8. Quod
gaudium erit omni populo.
the riches of the world, and their casting off the reconciliation of the
world, that is, of the Gentiles converted to the faith, which did make a great
part of the world, and before conversion were worldly and profane men. The
rejection of the Jews was an occasion, by which the Gentiles, hitherto without
that gracious communication, was made rich, and being converted to the faith,
did return into favor with God. And the same argument they bring out of the
former Text to confute the distinction of Christ's death effectually for some,
sufficiently for all, because then the adversative particle, does loose his
emphasis, if the Apostles words be thus understood, Christ died effectually for
us, and not only so, but sufficiently for the sins of the whole world, does
confirm the other interpretation; for the adversative should loose it weight,
if the sentence be thus resolved, Christ is our propitiation by faith, in whom
God is actually reconciled, and not only so, but he is reconcilable to the
whole world that lies not in infidelity.

The maintainers of universal redemption think it may strongly be proved by
this reason, All men are bound to believe in Christ: but Christ died for all
men, that are bound to believe in him; which some propound in this form; Every
man is bound to believe, that Christ died for him: but whatsoever a man is
bound to believe that is true: therefore he died for every man. But if by
believing in Christ they understand nothing but bare assenting to this
proposition, that Christ died for all men, and for me as a man, for the
impetration of righteousness quantum in se, or to purchase the grace of the
Father and pardon of sins, no man is bound to believe it, because it is not
revealed in Scripture, much less made known to every man in the world by
means sufficient. Every man called, whether he hearken to God calling or not
is bound to believe that Christ is offered unto him as a Savior, so as if he
believe he shall be saved: but that Christ died for him in particular for the
impetration of righteousness, and for every particular man in the world, that
he is not bound to believe, because it is not found in Scripture, nor can he
believe it, according to their grounds that urge this argument, neither can
such persuasion be the ground of justifying faith. I say every man in the world
good or bad cannot believe it, as they teach: For either they be considered as
in the common Mass, as all Infants, and then they be actually restored into
grace; or as impenitent and unbeleevers, fallen from the Covenant themselves,
(or as Arminius adds, in their parents) and then Christ died not for them as
such. If they be admitted into Covenant, and continue therein, Script. Rem.
advers. coll. Hag. art. 2.
Christ died for them in respect of application: if they be fallen from that
state by impenitency, obstinacy, rebellion, Christ died not for them as such:
If they be cast off, and not so much as outwardly called, how can they believe
that Christ died for them, specially, when by transgression they have departed
from that Covenant, and fallen from that state unto which (they say) they were
admitted. Neither can this persuasion be the ground of faith justifying, for
many ungodly men are persuaded that Christ died for all mankind, that neither
will, nor can, nor ought as such, to believe in Christ, or rest upon him for
Salvation: and many believe it not, that believe truly in Christ, and know they
believe and that they ought to believe. If by believing in Christ be meant
faith justifying, the proposition may be granted with two limitations. First,
that under this term they be not comprehended, who never heard of Christ, or
had possible, at least probable means to come to the knowledge of Christ, or
were admitted into Covenant. So Vorstius seems to limitit, unless (says he)
Christ had died for all that are called, in vain should they all be commanded
to believe in him. The Authors of the Synod. cap de Election. A Law not given,
or when it cannot be understood, See Synod. de. fens. sent. page 33^. Non
repugnat, etc
does not bind: Whosoever is bound to believe in Christ, must have the rule of
new life, which is the Covenant; which was purchased by the blood of the
Mediator, as they dispute. And then he which is not in Covenant, nor ever had
the rule of new life, how should he be bound to believe in Christ? The second
caution is, that he that goes on in an evil way, and makes a pastime of
sin, is not called immediately to believe in Christ, nor has received grace
sufficient as such a man, to rest upon him for Salvation. Before they will or
can come unto Christ, it must be otherwise with them, they must be prepared of
God, who draws men to Christ, but first (as they say) draws them to mind
their souls seriously. A wicked man living within the pale of the Church is
bound to believe, as to repent and cease from his evil way; for the neglect of
one duty does not exempt a man Synodal. ubi Supr. arg. 30. Arm. priv. disp. de
fide.
from another: but so long as he goes on in an evil course, he cannot lay
hold on the promises of mercy, nor embrace Christ as his only Savior. The
hungry, thirsty and burdened, not they which wallow in iniquity are invited to
come unto Christ, that they might be eased and refreshed. They are called to
believe in Christ for pardon, not that they are already the children of God,
and restored into favor. A thirsty and weary man as such, can no more believe
that he is the child of God, then a wounded man as wounded can that he is
cured; or the man stung with the fiery Serpent, that he was healed, before he
looked up to the brazen Serpent. Thirst is opposed to water, and weatinesse to
refreshing. A man must believe before he can be in the state of grace, and know
he does believe, before he can believe that he is the child of God, neither of
which can be affirmed of the weary as simply such. Thus then I grant all men
are bound to believe in Christ: but thence it will not follow, that Christ died
for all men equally, to purchase for them actual reconciliation on Gods part,
and with full and complete will and purpose quantum in se to save them: but
only that Christ died for them as an all-sufficient and efficient Savior, so
that in the Covenant of grace salvation might be and is tendered unto them upon
condition of true repentance and faith unfeigned. For they to whom the Gospel
is preached, and by whom it is professed, are bound to believe what is offered
in the Gospel, as it is offered there in, viz. if they hunger and thirst, deny
themselves, and be weary of their sins. But it is one thing to deny our
works, and rely upon the free mercy of God in Christ, another to believe that
Christ died for our redemption in particular. Whosoever is bound to believe
has Christ as an allsufficient and efficient Savior, in and through whom
Salvation might be obtained, and undoubtedly shall be obtained by him, if he
renounce his own works, and fly to the sole mercy of God in Christ, as the
object of faith, in order of nature before either the act of faith, or
proposal of the commandment to believe: He has also the rule of new life,
and is admitted into the Covenant according to the external administration,
wherein Christ is offered as a sufficient and efficient Mediator, so that
pardon of sin, adoption and eternal happiness shall redound to all and every
one by his death, if they do believe: and as a Mediator by merit and saving
efficacy to reconcile them actually unto God that be in Covenant effectually.

The word of truth is the foundation of faith, in nature before it, true as it
is promised, not made true by faith: but that faith cannot be given to the
promise, unless the thing promised be truly existent, and made good before
faith, is strange in Divinity. One thing is true, because it is promised:
another, because it is foretold, another, because it is simply declared. Those
things which are true as related, those things have been whether we believe
them or not: and those things which are foretold as true, those in like manner
shall come to pass, whether we believe, or believe not. But those things which
are true as promised, it is not necessary that they be, unless we believe. For
the narration and Arm. pri^. disp. these. 43.
prediction is absolute, but the promise conditional, requiring faith in the
hearer. There is this mutual respect betwixt the promise and stipulation, that
the promise is as an argument which God uses, that he might obtain of man
what he requires, and the performance of the thing required is a condition
without which man cannot obtain the promise of God. But leaving further
dispute of this matter, faith in Christ and the commandment to believe in him
has a subject word true in it self, not made true by faith, whereupon it is
builded, as true, firm and certain, as any ground of faith in Christ can be
desired or conceived. There is one act of faith, whereby we believe that sins
are pardonable: this is builded upon this ground, that Christ is an
all-sufficient and efficient Savior, in whose name Salvation is freely
offered, by faith to be received. There is another act of faith, whereby we
rest upon Christ for salvation: this is grounded upon these and Mat. 11. 28.
Isa. 55. 1.
such like promises, Come unto me all y^ that labor, and be heavy laden, and
I will refresh you. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Let
him that is a thirst, come unto me and drink. There is a third, whereby we
believe that our sins are already pardoned: and this is grounded upon these and
such like. He that believes shall be saved.

It is objected, if Christ died not for all men, then a man may doubt, whether
he should believe or no? But that scruple is not removed by the contrary
persuasion, that Christ died for all mankind in the common lapse: for so Christ
died for many men, that neither can nor ought as such to believe: and he that
questioneth whether he should believe, does it in respect of former
transgressions, abuse of grace, neglect of the means, and conscience of his
own unworthiness, in which case it affords small comfort, and less
resolution to inform him that Christ died for all men as sinners, but not as
impenitent or unbelievers. But the direct way and course to comfort the
distressed and doubting soul in that perplexity, is to inform him that his
sins are pardonable, because in Christ forgiveness is offered unto him; that
he is particularly called being hungry, thirsty burdened, finding himself
destitute both of grace and comfort, to come unto Christ for them both: and
being graciously invited, he is without further dispute or delay to cast his
soul upon the promises of mercy and come unto Christ, that he might be
refreshed. But they are in vain commanded to believe, if Christ died not for
them, because they cannot believe. Is it then in vain, that the obstinate and
rebellious are commanded and invited to believe, who as such cannot believe?
Was it in vain, that God commanded Pharaoh to let Israel go? that our Savior
would have gathered Jerusalem, when the things concerning her peace, were hid
from her eyes? Might not men argue by the same reason, that it was in vain for
God to entreat and persuade them to believe, when he did foreknow that by
such invitation they would not be allured to come unto him? And if they cannot
believe; it is not through the unreasonablenesse or absurdity of the thing
commanded, which does excuse, nor impotency of weakness, as if they would
believe, but cannot, which is to be pitied; but impotency of wilfulness and
prave affection, the more unable to believe, the more wilful to refuse, which
is inexcusable. And though I cannot say, God has given to every man to believe
if he will: Yet sure, God is not wanting to any man in that which either in
justice or promise he is bound to give: and did men deny themselves, nourish
the motions of Gods Spirit, and earnestly desire to believe, without question
they should find the Lord gracious. If men believe it is of grace, not only
that whereby they are enabled to believe, but whereby they are discerned from
other men: if they believe not, it is of themselves, of their own pravity; and
they be not further from believing, then from desire to believe.

It is objected further, that Christ as he died to impetrate remission of sins
for me in particular, is the object of justifying faith. The mercy of God
reaching to the pardon of sin in and through Jesus Christ is the object of
faith justifying, as it is proffered unto us in the word of life: but it is one
thing to believe that mercy is to be had through the death of Christ, and that
it is offered unto us in the Gospel, and we called to embrace it, another to
believe that Christ according to the complete and full will of God, has laid
down his life for us in particular to purchase for us both grace and glory.
Proportionable to the persuasion a man has of Gods willingness to be
merciful, is his persuasion of the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction: and
proportionable to his persuasion that God is merciful to him in the pardon of
his sin, is his persuasion that Christ died for him in particular. Justifying
faith is not without an apprehension of mercy in Christ to be obtained, but
implies not an apprehension of mercy reaching to the pardon of sin already
obtained. It is not without an application of recumbency, reliance, or
embracing, which presupposes the offer o^ mercy, in and through Jesus Christ
to be received, but the application of particular persuasion, that Christ died
for me in particular, as well as for any other, or has purchased for me grace
and glory, is Corvin. in Mol. cap. 29. Sect. 24.
not required in justifying faith. Some have affirmed, that faith whereby I
believe that Christ died for me, is the foundation of faith whereby I believe
in Christ: but I should desire better proof than their bare word for it, seeing
the Scripture makes the merciful offer of salvation in Christ to the burdened,
hungry and thirsty, the ground of this affiance, and that persuasion (according
to their positions) may be in good and bad, them that never shall be justified,
neither will, nor can rest upon Christ for salvation. To believe that Christ is
an all-sufficient Savior, and that salvation is offered to me in his name, is
less then to believe in Christ for remission of sins; and in order of nature
goes before it. But to believe that according to the purpose of God Christ is
my Redeemer, who has purchased for me in particular grace and remission of
sins and eternal redemption, and has actually reconciled me unto God, this is
the consequent of resting upon Christ for salvation, and cannot be believed
according to the Scripture, unless a man do first believe in Christ: and
according as men rest upon Christ superficially or soundly with a sovereign
and well-rooted affiance, so they believe the other. For when we read in
Scripture, that Christ tasted of death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. died for all,
2 Cor. 5. 15. is the reconciliation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.
2. shed his blood for many, Mat. 26. 28. gave his life for the ransom of many,
Mat. 20. 28. Mar. 10. 45. purchased the Church by his blood, Act. 20. 28.
Ephesians. 5. 25. gave himself for us all, Tit. 2. 14. Rom 8 32. for his people,
Mat. 1. 21. for his sheep, Joh. 10. 15. for them that were given unto him of
the Father, Joh. 17 9, 19. In these and such like passages, by All, the World,
Many and Us are meant men in Covenant, partakers of the benefits of Christ,
redeemed from all iniquity, and purified unto him as a peculiar people,
delivered from this present evil world, Gal. 1. 4. that they might live unto
God, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Peter Act. 3. 26.
says to the Jews that crucified Christ, Unto you first, God having raised up
his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from
your sins. But he spoke to them who were in Covenant, the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant; and as they were in Covenant, so God raised up
Christ for them, which cannot be referred to the impetration of righteousness,
but the application of Christ's death in some sort. Otherwise, if it be
observed, that the Apostle speaks of the Jews according to the present state,
when Christ was incarnate, or actually raised from the dead, I think the
greatest Patrons of universal redemption will not affirm, that Christ died
for every man good and bad, believer or Infidel, obstinate and rebellious, to
purchase for them actual reconciliation on Gods part, according to that state
wherein they stood, when Christ came into the world, or was raised from the
dead.

Once again, it is objected, that if this proposition, Christ died for all men
be not the ground of particular affiance, it can have no ground at all, neither
promise of mercy absolute nor conditional, general nor special. But already
it has been showed, that bare assent or belief that Christ died for all men
cannot be the ground, much less the only ground of justifying faith, and it
may further be made evident by these reasons.

First, That is the foundation of faith, whereupon particular affiance leans
or is immediately grounded. But no man's particular affiance on Christ for
salvation, can be grounded on his general belief, that Christ died for all
men: because this notwithstanding it may be, he is not allowed, he cannot rest
upon Christ for salvation.

Again, That is the ground of faith, which does fully and satisfyingly answer
to this question, why do you, and how know you that you are allowed to rest
upon Christ for salvation? But the bare belief of this proposition, that
Christ died for all men, to save, etc. is not a satisfying and full answer to
this Question.

Again, This categoricall proposition, Christ died for all men, shows what
is done, whether men believe or not, but does not warrant every man as such to
rest upon Christ, nor promise upon condition of faith, what cannot be obtained
without belief in Christ. The ground of particular affiance is some word or
promise made to man not yet believing, whereby he is assured that as such he is
allowed to believe, and that believing he shall receive the free forgiveness
of his offenses; which promise is in order of nature before faith, tendered to
him that believes not, holding forth free remission upon condition of faith,
and is made good to him that believes. What some speak of a conditional
promise made to believers, I cannot comprehend: for if the person must be a
believer, before the promise be offered unto him, then faith must hang in the
air, and not be built upon the word, neither can faith be the condition
required in the promise, but somewhat else; for a conditional promise, the
condition being fulfilled, is conditional no longer, but absolute; the
condition being performed, the thing promised is applied and possessed, and not
barely promised upon condition.

What has been answered to former passages of Scripture, does open the true
meaning of another, much urged in this matter. God our Savior will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6.
knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus: who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time. But All in this place does not signify universally
every man, in every age and condition: but All opposed to the Jews only, all
indefinitely, and that in the times of the new Testament, of which the Apostle
speaks. For those All whom God wills to be saved, he wills that they come
to the knowledge of the truth, scil. the saving truth of God, he vouchsafes
the Gospel unto them, and word of reconciliation. But the word of
reconciliation was not vouchsafed to every Nation under heaven in every age,
much less to every man; Nor to all Nations in any age, specially since the
distinction of Jew and Gentile, before the times of the Gospel.

It will be replied, that God was ready to have communicated the Gospel unto
them, if they had used well what they had received: but abusing what he had
given, it was just to withold further means from them. But this answer will
in no sort fit this place, because the Lords willing that all men be saved, and
the actual 1 Timothy 2. 7.
communication of the Gospel unto all men are plainly conjoined, and so is
Christ's actual giving of himself a ransom for all, both in this and other
passages of Scripture. Besides, it is most evident those All, which in this
place are meant, are such as 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20
had fearfully abused the common grace received, and withheld the truth of God
in unrighteousness, and for which many of them were given up unto a reprobate
sense. Of these the Apostle speaking of the times of grace, says, God wills
that they should come to the knowledge of the truth, not that he wills to
vouchsafe the Gospel unto them, if they should use the common graces well,
(for they had fearfully abused them already) but actually to vouchsafe the
word of reconciliation notwithstanding such their abuse.

Those all whom God wills to be saved, are they that have ver. 5.
God to be their God, and Christ to be their Mediator: but all men in every
age have not God for their God. Is he the God of Romans 3. 29.
the Jews only? Is he not of the Gentiles also? Yes, of the Gentiles also? But
of the world of Jew and Gentile he is the God, in times of the new Testament,
and not of the old. The place is much like that of the same Apostle, for God
has concluded them all Romans 11. 32.
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, that is, not upon the Jews
alone, but all believers, both Jews and Gentiles, because there is neither Jew
nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female; but in Christ Jesus they are all
one. This was meant of the days of salvation, and the acceptable year which
was fore-prophesied, 2 Cor. 6. 2. and began from the ascension of Christ to
receive general execution, Act. 13. 46, 47. when according to promise all
should be taught of God, Joh. 6. 45. and Christ would draw all men unto him,
Joh. 12. 32. Thus Arminius himself, the place Arm. in Perk.
entreats of the amplitude of grace exhibited in Christ under the new
Testament: and concludes his answer thus, that throughout all ages God has
willed that all men severally should come to the knowledge of the truth, and be
saved, as they are comprehended in the Covenant of God, but not as they are
fallen from it in themselves or their parents.

It is objected, That God wills that all they should be saved, for whom we
are to pray. But we must pray for all men. But the Apostles argument is
otherwise, that we must pray for all men, because God wills that all should
be saved, that is, Gods will it is, that the Gentiles should be called, and
added unto the Church, the Gospel should be preached amongst all Nations:
therefore now pray ye for all men, specially for Kings, because by the good
affection of Kings to Gods Church, the Church of God is like to prosper far
better then by the conversion of mean persons. But it no way follows, that
God wills their salvation, because we pray for their salvation. The child
prays for the Fathers health and recovery, when God wills he shall die. If
God should leave us to our own desires, peradventure we should desire, not
only that all that now live, but that all that ever lived might have been
converted and saved: yea, that the Angels that fell might have been kept from
sin, or having sinned might have been brought to repentance and saved. To
desire that every one that now lives might be saved, with submission to the
will of God, is no incongruity. But we cannot infer thereupon, that it is the
will of God to save every man now living in the world, or to grant them means
sufficient to come to the knowledge of the truth. Neither will it follow, that
we must pray for every man in the world, in every age, known and unknown unto
us, such as we never heard of by relation, because we must pray for All men:
for then all must comprehend even those that sin sins unto death amongst the
rest, unless we believe that there are no such sinners in the world: and he
had need be of a strong faith, and have some extraordinary revelation that
believes that.

Then are we to pray for all and every Infidel, obstinate, rebellious person,
even the whole Kingdom of Antichrist, that they might come to the knowledge of
the truth: but he must be a man of strong faith that can believe that God will
give his Gospel to every of these in particular, that they might come to the
saving knowledge of the truth.

The distinction of antecedent and consequent will, has no place in this
matter, because such are to be understood as have most egregiously abused the
common grace of God received. Moreover, we shall never find in Scripture, that
the faithful ever made such prayers: but as God has signified his will and
pleasure concerning the calling and gathering of his people, Jews or Gentiles,
so they have prayed, as we may pray for the fullness of the Gentiles, and
calling of the Jews, wherein we do not exclude any, though Act. 5. 31. and 11.
18.
we know God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and gives the grace of
repentance, and to repent also, to whom he please, the habitual grace serving
for the one, and the actual and effectual motion of Gods Spirit being
requisite to the other.

Some plead further, The means to this end, that men may have part in Christ,
are unlimited, the word written, Joh. 20. 31. and preached, Act. 3. 24, 25, 26,
27. yea, a command to preach to every creature, Mark 16. 15. which Paul
understood, and therefore warned every man, and taught every man, Col. 1. 18.
to repent, Act. 17. 30. and to believe, Romans 1. 5. But if all this be granted,
nothing will follow which is not freely granted. For as on the one side no man
will affirm that Christ died to this end, namely to procure forgiveness of
sin and Salvation to all and every one, whether they believe or no; so on the
other side, none will deny, but that he died to this end, that salvation and
remission of sins should redound to all and every one, in case they should
believe and repent. For this depends upon the sufficiency of that price, which
Christ paid to God his Father for the redemption of the world. No man denies,
but God made a Covenant with Adam fallen and his posterity, as now with the
faithful and their seed: that all mankind had continued in this Covenant, if
they had not discovenanted themselves and their posterity; that no man is
deprived of the benefits of Christ's death, but through his own sin and
corruption: that God is not the cause efficient or deficient of any man's
infidelity, but man himself: That men are seriously invited to repent in the
Ministry of the Word, and that the promise of Salvation is faithful and true,
so that he that believes shall never perish. These things be not questioned,
nor whether some effects or benefits of Christ's death be common to all men, but
whether he died equally for all men, to purchase actual reconciliation for
them on Gods part, and set all Infants in the actual state of salvation, but
to procure faith and belief for no man, so that he had obtained the full,
immediate end of his death, though no man had ever believed on him, or been
saved by him. But that which is assumed in this argument is apparently false,
as it is applied. The Covenant of grace is revealed to some, no man being shut
forth by name, but if he repent and believe he shall be saved: but many
thousands never heard of, never had probable means to come to the knowledge of
the Covenant. The commandment to preach the Gospel to every creature, was
given to the Apostles in the days of grace, upon the publication of which
Covenant, they which formerly served dumb idols, were bound to repent and
believe: but that commandment was peculiar to the Apostles, not given till
after the resurrection of Christ, after such commandment the Apostles were
enjoined to tarry for a time in Jerusalem, nor could they possibly disperse
themselves in a moment into every part of the world, nor the world take notice
of any such commandment given unto them, or of the doctrine revealed by them.
Before that time the Lord suffered the Gentiles for a long time to walk in the
vanity of their minds, without the light of his truth: and since that time
diverse nations have been cast off, left to themselves, as aliens from the
Covenant, and deprived of all means to come to the knowledge of God in Christ.
And if there were any force in this reason, The means of grace be unlimited,
and command given to preach to every creature, therefore Christ died for all
men: This must be of greater weight, The means of grace be not vouchsafed unto
all and every man: therefore Christ died not for all and every man. For if
means necessary to Salvation be not propounded, if they be not, nor ever were
called to the faith by the ordinary and only effectual means ordained of God
to bring men thereunto, we speak of our selves, and not according to
Scripture, if we affirm, God gave Christ to die for their redemption.

Amongst many effects of Christ's death reckoned up in this argument, this is
the most general, and all the rest depend upon it: and if the means be not
vouchsafed to all, none of the rest can be common to every one. It is a
received principle amongst them, that as God loved the world, and Christ gave
himself a ransom for all men, or is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world so God willed that the Gospel concerning Christ should be
published to all men in the world. Corvin. in Mol. cap. 31. sect. 33. If then
the Gospel be not published, or God willed not that the Gospel should be
published to all and every man in the world, Christ died not for all and every
man. Adam and Noah having received the Covenant, were bound to teach their
children, and so successively in all ages: Psalm. 78. which had it been
observed, none had failed to have the same published unto him. If this be
applied to the present purpose, they must teach only, that Christ died for all
and every man, if they that be in Covenant, shall carefully observe the charge
and commandment of God. And by the same reason they may conclude, that God
gave his Son to die, and that with plenary purpose, that no man should ever
sin by ignorance, infirmity, impenitency, unbelief, or any particular
transgression: that God purposed to give to every man the plentiful and
effectual means of grace, and that every man should actually apply the death
of Christ. For if every man successively had obeyed the commandment given to
Adam, and fulfilled that charge, the doctrine of salvation had been published
to every man, every man had been borne and lived in Covenant, every man had
actually applied the death of Christ unto himself, every man had enjoyed all
the Ordinances of God: yea, there had been no impenitent person, I might add,
properly no sinner but Adam and Eve. Then they could not say, Christ came to
save the world, under which infidels must be comprehended, or that he prayed
for his persecutours and unbeleevers, nor that he came to save his people from
their sins: for if this charge had been obeyed, there had been no Infidel,
nor persecutour, nor sinner amongst his people, but only our first Parents. And
by the same evasion, they may hold that Christ died for all and every man, when
he died for no man living, or that ever lived, but Adam only. But this is
nothing to prove, that since many Nations have neglected their charge, and
being fallen from God have received from him a Bill of divorce, a commandment
has been given notwithstanding unto his servants in all ages, to publish the
doctrine of salvation unto every creature amongst all Nations.

Adam and Noah were in Covenant, is there the same reason of them and their
posterity continuing in the faith, that there is of them that be strangers to
the Covenant, shut up in darkness, and never heard the sound of the Gospel
for many generations together?

It seems sufficient to Princes (say they) to publish their Laws in some
places, at some times, though they concern all, are for their good, and take
hold of them, if they be not observed, leaving it to Parents to teach their
children, and every one to enquire for his own good.

In this comparison there be diverse things unlike, diverse that cannot befitted
to the purpose, unless it be in a sense contrary. For they say, Laws once
sufficiently published bind and stand in force, though unknown, or scarcely
possible to be known by some particular men now living in some remote parts of
the dominions: And the plain direct reddition is, That God having made a
Covenant of grace with Adam and his posterity, all and every man is bound to
believe in Christ, and walk in obedience, though he be ignorant of his duty,
never received ability to do it, never had means possible to come to the
knowledge of Christ: yea, though he be cast off, and left to the hardness of
his heart. God has commanded Parents to teach their children. Who doubts of
that? But the question is, whether God has vouchsafed sufficient means of
grace to every man, which is not hereby proved, because God, when he gave his
Covenant, enjoined Parents to teach their children. We grant the Lord is
wanting in nothing, which either he promised, or in his eternal wisdom and
justice saw meet to be done, and that such as be deprived of the means of grace
be justly deprived. But we say, as experience confirms, that sufficient
means of grace has not been afforded to every man living since the fall of
Adam.

In the comparison there be many things unlike. For commonwealth are one body
politic, in which it is held sufficient to publish Laws in some known
places, and at some times, granting space and means that all may learn them
if they will. But we speak of such as never were so much as in the outward
society of the Church, nor adjoining to them; that never heard of the Covenant
of grace, they, nor many of their Ancestors, nor of a people or society
professing the true Religion. So that whereas the reason is of the means of
supernatural knowledge vouchsafed to them that never heard of the Covenant, or
lived nigh unto them that enjoyed the word of reconciliation, the com^arison is
of men in Covenant, who cannot want possibl^ means ^o know the main and
fundamental points of the Covenant. Old Laws, they say, not in use, yet in
force, scarce possible to be known, do bind: But the question is, of many
doctrines in use, which must necessarily be known, or a man cannot be in the
number of the faitfull so much as in external society.

There is not a prohibition to preach or write to any, (say they) unless it
was to punish some special sin, as when Christ says, Cast not pearls
before swine; or some others were to be served first, as Christ said to the
woman of Canaan, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel;
and Paul, Act. 13. It was needful that the Gospel should be first preached
unto you: And it was thus when the Spirit forbade Paul to go into one place,
and commanded him to go into another. We might ask unto which of the two
cases they will refer that of our Savior, Into the way of the Samaritanes
enter ye not. Matthew. 10. 5. and, Tarry ye at Jerusalem, until ye be endued
with power from on High. Luke 24. 49. during which time, and before the
Apostles could disperse themselves, many millions might depart this life, who
never enjoyed means sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of God in
Christ. And if God have charged his servants, not to cast pearls before swine,
and prohibited them for a time to preach the Word of the Kingdom to some
people, and in some places, because it is his pleasure to serve others first,
why should we not likewise think, that God in justice has deprived many
nations and people of all possible means, whereby they should come to the
knowledge of the truth? Let us see how well this fitteth the matter in hand,
The means of grace be unlimited, but in two cases there was a prohibition to
write, and what is this, but in plain terms to confess, that the means of
grace in all ages and times, in respect of all places and persons have not been
unlimited? Besides, when no man must take this office of preaching upon him,
but he that is called thereunto of God, and no man can show that he has been
called to preach the Gospel to every creature, why may not this be called a
prohibition?

The last refuge is, That any man might have had the Word, using that little
well that God gave. How should he have had it? By ordinary means, or
extraordinary revelation. Some are bold to affirm, he should have had it after
an extraordinary manner. Others speak of I know not what possibility by
traffic, and the like: both sorts utter strange things, and it is reason we
should require better proofs then bare affirmations. To him that has shall be
given, is a proverbiall speech, whereby our Savior signifies, that they who
be enlightened by the Gospel, and use well the supernatural gifts they have
received, shall be enriched with an happy increase. And that the contemners of
the Gospel and grace bestowed upon them, shall have that taken from them which
they seemed to have. But that men unregenerate can of themselves use their
natural gifts in an acceptable manner, or that God will bestow supernatural,
upon them that use their natural gifts minus male, as Arminius speaks, is
neither found in the Text, nor confirmed from any circumstance of it. Twice we
find the passage used, Matthew. 13. 12. and 25. 29. In the first it is manifest,
our Savior speaks of them that enjoyed the Gospel: In the second, of those
that used their Talent, whereby gifts not natural, but supernatural are
meant: because the Lord does freely bestow eternal life immediately upon them
that use their Talent well, which they will not say, he does upon them who use
their natural gifts minus male. In both places our Savior shows, how God
deals with his, giving them a taste of his goodness, whereby they thirst
after the augmentation of his grace the more earnestly, when he does not affect
the hearts of all men in that manner. And if natural gifts (which they call
common grace) be understood, then for the abuse of this light or grace, God
does not only withold from men the supernatural means of grace, but takes
from them their natural gifts which they had: For so the Text runs, And
from him that has not, even that which he had, or seemed to have, shall be
taken away. And then I would demand, whether Christ died for them that so
abused their natural gifts as such, or no? If he did, then he died for many,
to whom he vouchsafes not means sufficient to bring them to salvation, or
faith in him. If he died not for them, then he died not for the far greatest
part of the world, in all ages, in respect of the present state wherein they
stand as men. And here is to be considered, that in Scripture you shall not
find, that God gave Christ to die for any nation, people, or world to whom he
sent not the word of reconciliation; nor is any people or nation cast off, and
rejected for their impiety, left without the means of grace, given over to the
vanity of their minds, without God in the world, ever said to be redeemed by
the blood of Christ, or reconciled unto God.

In many places we read that Christ died for them that shall, or may perish,
for reprobates and cast-awaies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. There shall be false teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, Romans 14. 15.
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8. 11. And through
thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ died, Heb. 10. 29.
Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace. From which passages they argue thus, He that died for the
elect and reprobate, for them that perish and perish not, he died for all men.
But Christ died for the elect and reprobate, for them that perish and perish
not. The Proposition they take for granted, but it is apparently captious. For
he that died for all the elect, and all the reprobate, for all that shall be
saved, and all that perish, died for all men: but to die for the elect and some
reprobate, is not to die for all men, but for some only. And if they mean it
in the first sense, the passages of Scripture will not prove what they affirm;
if in the second, it falls short of the question. But suppose they argue thus,
some denied the Lord that bought them, and thereby brought upon themselves
swift destruction: therefore Christ did not buy the elect only, to save them:
If they dispute thus, they conclude not the question in hand, they put more in
the conclusion then is in the antecedent, and if they cannot show, that there
is the same reason of all reprobates, they must confess it makes much against
them: for the thing to be proved is, that Christ died equally for all and every
man; and it is one thing to die for the reprobate in some sense, and to die for
them with an intention and purpose to save them: and if Christ died for some
and but some that perish in a manner not common to all and every man, it is
manifest, he died not equally for all men.

Let us consider the Texts themselves, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Some denied the Lord that
bought them. How? in respect of the impetration of righteousness, or in
respect of the application of it? Let the Text speak for it self. These false
teachers lived in the Church, enjoyed the Ordinances of God, professed the
faith, had known the way of truth, and escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 2. 20. they
had turned from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, and it had happened
unto them according to the true Proverb, The dog is turned unto his own vomit
again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. Therefore the
death of Christ was applied unto them, and they were partakers of the fruits
and benefits thereof by some kind of faith. They that most urge this place, do
thus interpret it. Thus the Authors of the Synodal. def. Sent. Remonst. circ.
Art. 2. page 358. It is most evidently and invincibly manifest, that those
false teachers, of whom Peter speaks, were truly bought of the Lord Jesus
Christ, by the knowledge of whom they had escaped the pollutions of the world:
or if thou had rather, that God the Father by the blood of his only begotten
Son had truly bought them, and by his Spirit truly regenerated them. Vorstius
in like manner upon this place: first, he Vorst. in 2 Pet. 2. 1. Schol.
says it is indifferent whether thou refer this word bought to Christ, or to
God the Father. For both God the Father is said every where to have redeemed
us, and Christ to have bought or redeemed us to God: and then he sends us to
these places. Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ephesians. 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. More plainly in
loc. com. following, It is demanded, says he, how the Lord may be said to have
bought them, who deny him. For this seems contrary to those places of
Scripture, in which it is affirmed, that the faithful alone, of whom the
Catholic Church of Christ consists, be redeemed by Christ, Act. 20. 28. Ephesians.
5. 23. and that the faithful do always remain in the Church. 1 John 2. 19.
Some answer (says he) that those who fall away, were never truly redeemed, nor
did ever truly believe. Therefore they think these places and such like are to
be taken not according to the truth of the thing; but according to the
apearance or opinion: to wit because these Apostates profess the faith for a
time, and so feeme both to themselves, and to others judging in charity, to be
true believers, when in deed they are nothing less. But it seems more simple,
if we say, that some who after fall away, for a time do truly believe: which
Christ does therefore call Temporaries, Math. 13. 21. And then concludes, to
take away the show of repugnancy, which seems to be betwixt this and the
former places. We must hold, that Christ in act and very deed is the redeemer
of the faithful, as long as they be such: although in power, yea and in will
he be the Savior of the whole world. To let pass other things which pertain
not to this question, it is plain the Apostle speaks of them for whom Christ
died in act, event or application, in which sense they confess he died not for
all men, but the faithful only as such. And as these false teachers were
called into the Covenant, accepted the condition, believed in Christ, for a
time rejoiced in him, and brought forth some fruit, so we confess they were
bought by the blood of Christ, because all these were fruits of Christ's death,
whereof they were made partakers. As in the Parable, the Lord is said to remit
to his servant a thousand Talents, when he desired him, sc. inchoately or upon
condition, which Math. 18. 25.
was not confirmed, because he did not forgive his fellow servant: so the false
Prophets are bought by the blood of Christ, sc. in a sort, as they believed in
Christ, but not sincerely and unfainedly. We Heb. 6. 5, 6, 7.
read of some Apostates, that they had been enlightened, and tasted of the
heavenly gift, and been partakers of the holy Spirit, who afterward did revolt
from the faith. To these men, their sins were remitted in a sort in this
world, and in a sort they were bought by the blood of Christ, but inchoately
only, and as they tasted the word of life. Had they eaten the word of life,
that is, had they soundly and truly believed in Christ, they had received
perfect and consummate remission of sins, both in this world 2 Pet. 2. 22. Vt
generalis, vox acquirere, pro emere, Act. 7. 16. cum Genesis 25. 10. sic
specialis, emere pro acquirere vicissim usurpatur. Apo. 3. 18. 2 Samuel 7. 23.
Psalm. 26. 11.
and in the world to come; they had been perfectly redeemed and reconciled unto
God: but because they did not eat, tasted only, they received not perfect
remission, they were not perfectly redeemed. To this taste answers the Sow
that is washed, and returns again to the wallowing in the mire: washed and
so redeemed, washed with remission of sins, and so redeemed from sin,
inchoately: but because she returns to the filth of sin, that remission is
confirmed, neither in the hour of death, nor at the day of Judgment. The
false Prophets were bought as they believed. Had they believed effectually with
a sovereign, wellrooted Luke 21. 28. Romans 8. 23. Heb. 11. 35. Empti dincuntar.
h^e. ut alibi l^quitur scriptura. Exodus 15. 16. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. acqui siti,
uenepe, quod illos Deu^ in familiam suam adsci^erit. See Kimedont. de Redemp.
hu^. genesis cap. 9. page 206.
affiance, they had been bought saving-effectually: as they believed
superficially, so they were bought in act and event, but not unto Salvation.
The purchase of redemption goes before faith, is not made by faith, but
applied only: but it is most assured, if men believe unfainedly, they are
redeemed effectually, if they believe not, they are not redeemed: for them that
be cast off as aliens, we do not read that redemption was purchased. This
interpretation will not seem new, nor strained to them that shall weigh the
circumstances of the Text, not to them that urge it, when they shall consider
it is their own. It agrees well with the scope of the Apostle, which is to
show the fearful condition of such false teachers, because they in life
denied the Lord that had called them into Covenant, which they had accepted,
whom they had embraced by faith, by whom they were delivered from the
pollutions of the world, in whom if they had believed unfainedly, without
question, they should have been saved: and whom wilfully, not of frailty, they
had denied. And is not this a good argument to prove, that by their wilful
departure they had brought upon themselves swift damnation. If they were never
the nearer heaven by ought Christ had done, the fault was their own: for life
was truly promised unto them, whereof they deprived themselves, not because
they could not do otherwise, but because they would not receive it, or having
received it in part, they voluntarily fell off. What though God never purposed
to make them actual partakers of the saving benefits of Christ's death? By his
commandment he bound them to believe, by promise he assured them of Salvation
if they did believe, he bestowed upon them many spiritual gifts the fruits of
Christ's death; and if they fell away, God was no cause efficient or deficient
of their revolt: And does not all this conclude their sin to be out of
measure sinful in denying the Lord that bought them.

The other places Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. receive the same answer; for they
speak of weak brethren for whom Christ died, who were believers, or as
believers, for whom Christ died in respect of application. And then this
argument does not hang handsomely together, Christ died for believers in respect
of application, therefore he died for all men to impetrate righteousness. If
they reason thus, he died for some in respect of application that may perish;
therefore he died for all men in respect of impetration, it hangs but loosely:
for they themselves will say, Christ died for the faithful only in respect of
application, and not for all men, whatsoever we are to think of the condition
of the faithful, whether they shall stand, or may perish. Amongst themselves,
some that maintain general redemption by the death of Christ, do yet hold,
that no lively member of Jesus Christ, can perish, or fall away. And I can
hardly see how their positions will hang together, if they do not grant, that
though some believers may fall and perish, yet others cannot: But as concerning
the weak brethren, such as be true believers, it is possible they should be
grievously shaken by offenses and temptations, yea destroyed, as far as lies
in the authors of scandal and temptation, and their own frailty: but in
respect of the decree and unchangeable love of God and the intercession of
Jesus Christ, they shall not utterly perish, but if they be tempted, they shall
be supported, or if they fall, God will raise them up again. The Apostles
exhortation then is forcible, that they should not offend their weak brother,
for this was as much as lies in them to destroy him for whom Christ died.
Perditio est ^orbi ac vul^u neris, non mortis. Vorst in Romans 14. 15.
Thus Vorstius paraphraseth the text, offend not him with thy meat, I pray
thee, and as much as in thee is destroy him, for whom Christ died. And in his
loc. com. upon that Chapter, although the elect cannot perish, the unchangeable
decree of God withstanding, yet it is not said in vain, that they perish by
our fault, who when they have entered into the way of salvation, being offended
with our actions begin to turn from the same. And in loc. com. upon the other
place; although Christ will suffer none of his to perish, yet indeed they are
said to drive weak Christians into destruction, who do rashly offend them,
because to wit offenses of themselves do tend to their destruction, to whom
they are objected.

Lastly, It is objected, that the Covenant in Christ is general, Joh. 3* 16.
and 6. 30. without respect of others.

As the Covenant is general, so is the fruit and application of Christ's death,
in and through whom the Covenant is made, that is, proffered of God, and
accepted of man. As all and every man is called into Covenant, lives under the
Ordinances of grace, is partaker of the fruits of the Spirit, and applies the
death of Christ, so Christ died and rose again for him. But this manner of
Christ's death pertains to the event, act or application, which they confess
is not common to all men, and is manifest in this, that God entered not into
Covenant with every Nation at all times, neither under the Law, nor in times of
the Gospel, scil. Act and
with the Nations he passed by, and which as the Scripture says were without
God. God expressly declared himself in the time wherein the distinction of
Jew and Gentile took place, that he would accept of strangers, as well as any,
if they should love and fear his name, Isa. 56. 7. But the Covenant at that
time was not made with all Nations, as it was with the Jews, not made known
unto all the Gentiles, they did not enjoy means sufficient to come to the
knowledge of the truth; That the promises of mercy did at all times belong to
them that fulfilled the condition, is needless to be proved: but that the
Covenant was made with every man, or that means sufficient or grace to receive
the promises was granted to every man, at all times, in all ages if they would,
is that which no Scripture testifies. And that passage of the Prophet, which
promises the acceptance of the stranger, if he repent and turn unto the Lord,
is manifestly spoken of the times of the new Testament, when the partition wall
was broken down, as the verses following do convince. In the days of grace
the Covenant was more general, then in former times it had been: but God has
not erected his Tabernacle, nor walked amongst all Nations, in every age of
these last times, as experience teaches. How then is the Covenant general,
respecting every man? Peradventure they mean no more but this, that every man
that will be saved, must be saved by it, and whosoever does believe, be he bond
or free, Jew or Gentile, male or female, rich or poor, he shall be saved,
though the Covenant was never made with most Nations of the world, nor accepted
by them, nor they had means to come to the knowledge of it, much less grace to
perform the conditions: and then to grant the Covenant is general will avail
them nothing. There is no force in this argument, the Covenant of grace is made
with some, none being exluded, if they repent and believe, therefore Christ
died for every man, rather we may strongly Romans 1. 16. Col. 1. 23. Act. 17. 30.
Tit. 2. 14. Luke 24. 47.
argue, Christ died not for every man, because God is not the God of all by
Covenant. But the invitation is general, scil. in the days of grace and to
them that hear it, and the promise universal to every believer: we add, the
invitation is serious, showing what God is well pleased with, and does approve
in us, scil. that which he persuades with arguments in themselves forcible to
move and incite, and what he will perform, if we make good the condition. We
add, that the party invited is passively capable of the invitation, that no
man of what state or condition soever is hindered or kept back from coming to
Christ by any cause efficient or deficient out of man himself, which does
either constrain or necessitate his not coming: and he that refuses to come,
refuses not through inability, as unable, though unwilling and desirous to
embrace it, but willingly preferring some base inferior good before it. But
this argues only the sufficiency of Christ's death, that all men should be
saved, if they did believe, and the efficiency thereof, that the members of the
visible Church should be invited seriously, and those that be effectually
called should inherit the promise.

It will be said, to what purpose are they called and invited, if they be as
unable to come, as a dead man is to arise and walk. True it is, every man is
of himself unable by nature to come unto Christ, and God does enable whom he
please: but this inability is not from any impossibility that is without man
himself, either in respect of the thing commanded, or any external cause, or
brute necessity and disposition, but from his voluntary perverseness, which
is most blameworthy. The comparison may be admitted, if rightly interpreted,
otherwise it is captious: for sin is the death of the soul not physical,
but moral: Man by sin locseth not the faculty of understanding, and willing,
but of understanding and willing aright, as in duty he is bound, the object
being propounded and revealed with fit and convenient light. It is not
therefore all one to invite a sinner to forsake the error of his way, and call
upon a dead man to arise out of the grave. The Lord who does whatsoever he will
in heaven above, and in earth beneath, in his deep and unsearchable counsel
never absolutely intended to make every man actually and effectually partakers
of the benefit promised, for if he had so purposed it, it should have taken
effect: nevertheless, the invitation is serious, showing what we ought to do,
and God does approve and desire on our parts: and the purpose of God to give
faith to whom he please, and not to all men, is no cause of any man's unbelief,
either efficient or deficient, For that man believes, this he owes unto God,
and that not simply alone, but comparatively in respect of others, who believe
not: but that man refuses the promises of mercy, this is of himself, not of
simple or natural infirmity, which might procure pity, but of his own
perverseness, and love to some inferior good, different from the good
proposed, or contrary to it, and averseness from the circumstances and
conditions of the object proposed.

They ask, what sign does God show of desire or approvall that men should
believe, when he gives them not power so to do. This that he commands,
entreats, persuades them to repent and believe, waits with long-suffering
and patience for their amendment, promises mercy if they will return,
convinces them of their wilfulness, and though he change not their hearts by
the effectual work of his Spirit, is wanting to them in nothing, which in
justice or promise he is bound to give, specially when their impenitency is not
from lack of grace, but from perverseness. If this satisfy them not, let them
answer themselves, how God does will the repentance of them that be cast off,
and left to the hardness of their hearts? How he does will, desire and approve
the conversion of such as he has blinded and hardened for their sins, even
when they are so blinded and hardened; as of Genesis 4. 7. 1 John 3. 12. Mat. 13.
15.
Caine, who was of the wicked one, and slew his brother, because God had
respect unto his sacrifice, and of the Jews, whose eyes were closed, and hearts
hardened, that they should not convert.

How is it imaginable, say they, that impossible should be the object of Gods
desire or approvall? The answer is given already, impossible in it self, or in
respect of the unreasonablenesse of the thing commanded, is not the object of
Gods desire, approvall or commandment: but an impossible thing to us in respect
of ou^ perverseness, may be and is the object of Gods commandment, and so of
his approvall and desire, as he does will and desire what he does command. Does
not God exact of the Gentiles given up to the vanity of their minds, that they
should seek him in the way, wherein he will be found, if they would be saved,
when they have not means sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of the
truth, nor grace to believe? Does not the Lord command, approve, and desire the
conversion of many obstinate, impenitent persons living in the Church, who have
and do abuse the means of grace, whom for their former and present contempt
he does Isa. 6. 9.
blind and harden, whose condemnation is aggravated by this, that they have,
and do live under great and good teaching? Does not the Law exact perfection
of them who are under the Law, when it is impossible by reason of the infirmity
of the flesh? Is not the rebellion of the flesh repugnant to the Law of God,
from which it is impossibe to be freed in this life? In the Covenant of grace,
perfection of faith and obedience is commanded, otherwise imperfection should
not be a sin: but that is impossible to man, whilst he carries about this
body of sin. And if impossible be not the object of Gods will in this sense, he
that by custom in evil has contracted an habit, that he cannot but sin,
should not offend, and he that is carried with most violence of mind unto
evil, should be least evil.

They demand further, how could God approve that such should repent and
believe, as do not these things from him, and by the power of his grace, who
therefore might glory, as he would have no creature to do? 1 Cor. 1. 30. And
it is a most sure thing, God would have no creature to glory in himself, and
most true, that faith will not, cannot glory in any thing, but in the Lord, and
therefore we acknowledge that God of his grace has chosen some men to faith
and holiness, as in justice he purposed to leave and forsake others for their
sin. For if God decreed not to give men faith and repentance, he is not the
author of them. For God does nothing in time, but what he decreed to do
before all time. To exclude boasting it suffices not to say, that God gives
grace, whereby we might believe, if we will, specially if we use our natural
gifts well: for that makes ability to believe only to be of God, and that in
part procured by our selves, but faith and repentance to be from the free use
of our own will, whereby we are distinguished from others which believe not,
to whom God wished as well, and who received as much grace from God, perhaps
more. See Groven. dissert. de elect. and fid. praevis. But leaving that matter
for the time, to the objection the answer is plain, that as God commands
wicked men to repent and believe, so he testifies what he does desire and
approve, but withholding the internal and effectual working of his Spirit,
they will not repent through their perverseness. As it is a duty which God
requires, so it is approved, but without his grace it cannot be performed. It
is a certain truth, if the wicked do repent unfainedly, they shall be
accepted, but repentance is the gift of God, which without his grace cannot be
wrought. As God commands repentance, so he does approve it, but he approves
not that men should glory in themselves, because if they return as he
commands, it is by his grace. God testified to Cain what he approved, Genesis 4 7.
when Cain had not grace at that time to do what God required: nor did the Lord
approve, that he should glory in himself, as if he could repent by his own
power.

It may be asked, to what end does God invite and persuade wicked men to repent
and believe, if he give them not grace to believe if they will. The latter part
of that question must be explained, for if this be the meaning, that many men
through their own default be left of God without grace sufficient to bring them
to life eternal, it is that experience it self confirms, in many Infidels
who have departed this life, before they had means to come to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ. And if God may deny to some both means and grace sufficient to
bring them to life eternal, he may justly withold the graces of his Spirit
from them that be called and invited in the Ministry of the word, when grace
is freely given, and both the one and other be deprived through their own
default. But if the meaning of that latter clause be, that though wicked men
should seek and truly desire grace, yet God does violently withold it from
them, then it is most false, and implies a contradiction, as if men without the
grace of God, could truly desire grace. Now the end of this invitation may be
considered according to the means and invitation it self, and the will Duplex
animi despositio ad fidem and poenitentiam: una fine qua non: scil. ut audia^us
Ev^ngelium: formali^ altera.
of God exacting of man what is good and acceptable, and what in duty he owes
unto God: and in this respect the salvation of the party invited is the end of
the invitation: or it may be considered according to the will of God, whereby
he does not only ordain and approve means to such an end, but will so bring
to pass that the effect shall follow: or hereby he not only commands them to
believe, and others to further their salvation, but wills effectually to
bring them to salvation and draw them unto him by the powerful operation of
his Spirit, so he does not will the salvation of all that be called. As men are
called to repent that they might live, and God does in calling them a vow it is
his desire, they would repent that they might live, so the end of the
invitation is life and salvation. This is manifest, in that the Lord does
earnestly again and again call upon impenitent and obstinate sinners to
repent and believe, protesting that he desires not their death, but rather that
they should repent and live, when yet in his just and dreadful judgment he
hardens their hearts for their perverseness and rebellion, that they cannot
repent. But in respect of the good pleasure of God not to give them grace to
repent and believe, which of his rich mercy he gives to others, who have abused
what they received no less, perhaps more then they, the end is to manifest his
justice in them, for the contempt of his grace. For what God does command,
entreat, persuade and promise, that he does will as he does command, in ^reat,
persuade and promise it. But as God does justly deny that grace to one, which
of his free love he vouchsafes unto another, so he wills to manifest his
justice in the one sort, and the riches of his grace in the other.

Lastly, Some object, that they that are invited must either have Christ, he
not dying for them, or miss of Christ though they repented, whereof the former
would argue mutability, that Christ should die for men, and not die for them,
and the latter would be a breach of promise. A conceit not much unlike, drove
Socinus to deny the prescience of God, because whencesoever this prescience
comes, it is altogether certain, and from that is necessarily gathered an
antecedent necessity of all things which are done. Socin. Praelect. cap. 8. And
in the same form and manner a man may reason from the prescience of God, if
God approve the repentance and faith of them, whom he does certainly foreknow
to have no portion or benefit by the death of Christ, then either if they
repent they shall have no benefit, which is contrary to his promise, or if they
have benefit, then is God deceived, neither of which can be admitted without
blasphemy.

And the answer to both these cavils is one, that certain it is Christ died
for them that believe, and whosoever believes in him truly and unfainedly,
shall have benefit by his death: but we need not, we cannot say, Christ died
for them for whom he died not, or that God is changeable: For it is as sure and
true, that they will not repent and believe for whom Christ died not. The
connection is good, if the reprobate do repent and believe unfainedly they
shall be partakers of the benefits of Christ's death: but the simple
Propositions are both false; the reprobates do repent, and they are partakers
of the saving benefits of Christ's death. Carnal reasonings have brought forth
strange monsters in Divinity, and in this particular not a few: It is good for
us to acknowledge the wisdom, justice, goodness, mercy and truth of God in
all his ways, though we cannot wade into the depth of his counsels. If men
give themselves leave to reason thus against the protestations of the Lord, why
does he entreat and persuade them to return? why does he complain that they
will not come unto him? if he give them not grace to come if they will, if he
do not enable them: Might they not plead as well against the foreknowledge of
God in the same manner, if God certainly foreknow that men will not return
upon such invitation, why does he entreat again and again, sending his
Prophets early, and calling upon them, when by the refusal of such mercy, they
aggravate their sin, and increase their judgment. Sure amongst men such a
course would be accounted idle, unless it was done for a further end. One
answer will suffice to both Objections: but when shall we make an end, if we
give way to our ignorant and blind imaginations.

Now let us come to the second opinion, which is that Christ died, and by his
death satisfied the justice of God for all that have believed, do believe, or
shall believe; that they, and they only are partakers of the saving benefits of
Christ's death. The death and redemption of Christ they deny not to be
sufficient for the salvation See Malder antisynod. p. 23, 24 Tapper. in schol.
Lovan. Art. 6. Fr. Son. l. 3. demonst. Relig. Christ. cap. 19. Heb. 13. 20.
Zach. 9. 11. Mat. 26. 26. and 20. 28. Mar. 14. 24. Isa. 53. 12. Luke 22. 20,
Heb. 9. 28.
of all men: nor that it is effectual in many particulars, to some that
believe not sincerely: but that, if the will of God, or the event be considered
in respect of saving benefits, it was peculiar to the faithful. For Christ the
Mediator of the Covenant of grace, died for them only that be comprehended in
the Covenant of grace. His blood is the blood of the everlasting Covenant, of
the Covenant that God of his grace has stricken with his Church, and was shed
for them that have been, are and shall be called into that Covenant. This is my
blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for remission of sins: For
many both Jews and Gentiles, of which the Church was to be gathered. Luke has
it, which is shed for you; and so it was shed for them, and for many of the
same spiritual estate and condition with them, for many under the same
Covenant. The word many is used for all sometime, Romans 5. 15, 16, 19. but here
it is used rather to distinguish them that be in Covenant, from them that be
cast off, and them to whom remission of sins purchased by the blood of Christ
Heb. 2. 10, 13.
is sealed in the Sacrament, from them to whom it is applied. The remission of
sin here spoken of, is not put for remissiblenesse, but actual remission
granted and received, for remission in act and application, whereof all are not
partakers. If all be taken for the common sort and poor of the people (which
yet may be questioned, and cannot be proved by any passage of Scripture, or
show of reason) and our Savior used that phrase to testify his abundant love
and humility, in that he shed his blood for the poor and inferior ranks of
men in this world, it makes nothing against the former interpretation. For not
many mighty, not many noble, but the poor and base of this world are called
and admitted into 1 Cor. 1. 21.
Covenant. But the faithful only be effectually in Covenant: they that be in
Covenant according to the outward administration, do profess the faith, and
in some degree are conformable in respect of conversation: they that be truly
and effectually in Covenant, do soundly and unfainedly believe. When the
Scripture speaks of them that be out of Covenant, it says they are not known
of God, neither do they know God, that is, they are not regarded of God,
neither Isai. 55. 5. Exodus 4. 10. Exodus 5. 1. Jer. 10. 20. Isai. 63. 8. Hos 1.
10. Tit. 2 14. Col 1. 21. Gal. 4. 26. Romans 4. 16.
do they regard him: when of them that live in Covenant, it styles them the
people of God, sons or children of God, the sons of the living God, a
peculiar people, reconciled unto God, justified unto life; the daughters of
Zion and of Jerusalem, who have the Jerusalem that is above for their
spiritual mother, the seed of Abraham, who is the Father of us all; And as
Jerusalem which is above is the mother of us all, so is Christ said to die for
us all, and God to have mercy upon all. Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all. Romans 11. 32. God has concluded them
all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. Romans 5. 18. By the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, that is, of all them which pertain to the posterity of Christ by
spiritual regeneration. It may well be, that all to whom Paul wrote that
Epistle, did not unfainedly believe, but as they professed the Doctrine of
Salvation, and in some measure walked according to the policy of the new
Jerusalem, and as they enjoyed the Ordinances of grace, whereby Christ was
applied, so the Apostle speaks of them as Saints and beloved and faithful.
And in the same sense in other places, they are reckoned amongst the faithful,
beloved and elect, who believe for a time, and profess the doctrine of
Salvation, and parta^ke the seals of the Covenant, though afterward they fall
away: and as they are called believers, converts, disciples, members of Christ,
temples and sons of God; as they are said to be justified, sanctified, and
redeemed, so is Christ to have died for them, as he is applied in the
Ordinances of grace, and they partake of the benefits of his death. But as for
them that be not in Covenant, we shall never read that their sins are
pardoned, Act. 10. 43. Joh. 5. 24. Joh. 15. 2. Act. 15. 9. Romans 5. 1. Romans 9.
25, 26. Col. 1. 21. Joh. 3. 36. 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16, 17.
that they are delivered from death, purged from their sins, reconciled unto
God, received into favor: nay, the contrary is plainly affirmed of them, that
they are not the people of God, that they have no communion with Christ, that
they are enemies in their minds by wicked works, alienated from God, that the
wrath of God abides on them, that they are without God in the world; which is
never said of them for whom Christ died. The Scripture speaks expressly,
that Christ died for his Church, his sheep, his children, his people, the
people or children of God, those that are given unto him of the Father, his
brethren. As the Father knows me, even so know I the Father, and I lay down
my life for my sheep. Joh. 10. 15. Take heed unto your selves, and to all the
flock, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.
Act. 20. 28. Christ is the head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the
body. Ephesians. 5. 23. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. ver. 25.
He shall save his people from their sins. Matthew. 1. 21. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people. Tit. 2. 14. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that
he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Joh. 17. 2. He
prophesied that Jesus should die for that Nation; and not for that Nation only,
but also that he should gather together in one, the children of God that were
scattered abroad. Joh. 11. 51, 52. For both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified are all one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, saying, I will declare thy Name to my brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12. The
Church and people of God in themselves considered were sinners, ungodly,
enemies, alienated from God, and Christ died for them, not that he found them
friends or brethren, or children, but that Romans 5. 6, 10.
he might make them such, as by the participation of the benefits of his death
they are made such indeed. The faithful are the seed or children of Christ,
which he has brought forth with pain and travel. Isai. 53. 10, 11. The
inheritance of Christ, which he has purchased by his death, given unto him of
the Father, that they might be redeemed from death, and possessed of him for
their Salvation. Psalm. 2. 8. as the Psalmist elsewhere expounds it, All the
ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord: and all Psalm. 22. 27.
Psalm. 72. 11. and 86. 9.
the kinreds of the Nations shall worship before thee. And if Christ died thus
for his people, seed, inheritance, sheep, and Church, he died not equally for
all and every man: for then in his death he considered none to be made his
sheep or brethren before others, nor did he purchase grace that one should be
made the child of God rather then another. For though grace be distributed, in
different degrees, yet that being so common to them that believe and them that
believe not, that sometimes the greater measure is given to them that reject
and cast it off, it cannot be the cause why one man differs from another.

Many things are answered to this argument; As first, that it is Synodal. circ.
Art. 2. pa^ 3 17. Vorst. amica collat. cum Piscat. s^ct. 26. Gal. 2. 20.
not said Christ died for his sheep, or brethren only, and that his dying for
them does not exclude others; as Paul says, Christ died for him, applying the
death of Christ to himself, but not excluding others. But the instance is not
like; for these words ( for me) are not disjunctive to distinguish Paul from
the rest of the faithful, but from unbeleevers, or them that were not in the
same state or kind. This is a privilege common to Paul with all believers,
that Christ died for him: in respect of them then it is not disjunctive, but in
respect of them who be not partners in that prerogative, it is disjunctive.
Therefore the example does rather prove the speech to be restrictive, then
otherwise: for as these words of Paul, Who loved me, and gave himself for me,
distinguish Paul from the company of unbeleevers, and so are exclusive: in like
manner are these words of our Savior, I lay down my life for my sheep,
restrictive and exclusive. In those Texts there is no exclusive particle
expressed, but the proposition for sense is restrictive. For when difference or
distinction is contained in some term, the Proposition is for sense exclusive,
no less then if it was expressly noted. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
him shall thou Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
serve, and to him shall thou cleave: here is no restriction or exclusion
expressed, but in sense it is exclusive, Call upon me in the time of Psalm. 50.
15.
trouble, and I will hear thee: only is not added, and yet for the sense the
words are exclusive. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed;
though no exclusion be expressed, the Apostle is Gal. 3. 16.
bold to interpret it, as if it had been said, In thy seed alone. Whom he
foreknew, them he predestined: this proposition is not Romans 8. 29, 30.
expressly exclusive, is it not then exclusive in sense? When David says, The
Lord is my God, he excludes not the faithful from the same preeminence: but
when the Lord says to his people, I am the Lord thy God, he excludes them that
be not in Covenant. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness: Genesis 15. 6.
here is not restriction added, but the proposition is exclusive. Whosoever
believes in Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting Joh. 3. 16.
life: does not this proposition exclude works from being a cause of Salvation,
because only is not added? Some answer, that these passages be exclusive,
because the Apostle expressly shuts forth works from the act of Justification,
Romans 3. 28. whereas they rather teach, that faith does comprehend repentance,
conversion and new obedience, and that works are not excluded from the act of
Justification, but only works done by the power of nature: But leaving that,
the proposition is for the matter exclusive, and that the Apostle shows from
the thing it self, proving hereby that Abraham, after he had followed the Lord
a long time, and yielded obedience to his commandments, was justified by faith
without the works of the Law. The words therefore may be exclusive though only
be not added: and that they be restrictive is plain by the thing signified: for
what is it for Christ to lay down his life for his sheep, or to purchase his
Church by his blood, but to bruise the serpents head, to redeem them from all
iniquity, and purify them to be a peculiar people to himself, ^o save his
people from their sins, to deliver them from the fear of hell and death, and
to bless all Nations of the earth, according to the promise made to Abraham.

This needs no further confirmation then the next answer, which they make, that
the words be exclusive not in respect of the thing it self, but of the modus:
which others express thus, that Christ died for his sheep in respect of the
application and event. For if it be exclusive in the modus, exclusive it is as
well, though only be not added, as if it was. And the question is not of the
sufficiency of Christ's death for all men, in respect of the magnitude and
excellency of the price: nor of the efficiency of his death in some degrees,
for such as shall not inherit the crown of glory: but of the modus, whether he
died sufficienter and efficienter quantum in se, for all and every man. That
this Modus is excluded, will appear in that we shall never read that Christ
died for any but for his sheep, his Church, his brethren, his people, or them
that be considered as such in respect of present profession, external
administration, and application of his benefits. Unto you is borne this day in
the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Luke 2. 11. Luke 1. 68, 69,
70.
Lord. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed
his people, and has raised up an borne of Salvation in the house of his
servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets* which have been
since the world began: That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the
hands of all that hate us. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of Luke 2. 30, 31, 32.
all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people
Israel. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Heb. 2.
17.
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the s^nnes of the people. Thou
art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for Rev. 5. 9.
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. And generally in every place, they,
for whom Christ is said to die, are called his elect, his sheep, his people,
his brethren, not barely called into Covenant, but received upon their
acceptance thereof. The several passages alleged to prove the universality
of Christ's death, have been examined already, and found to speak directly to
this purpose. But amongst them that be called into, and accept of the Covenant,
some be elected simply, others in comparison, some be the sheep and brethren of
Christ in truth and sincerity, others in profession and external
administration, or in some respect only. And as we must distinguish of the
elect and sheep of Christ, so of his dying for them. For he died for all his
elect, as they apply and be partakers of the benefits of his death: he died
saving-effectually, scil to bring them to grace and glory; according to the
election of grace, for his simply elect and people in truth, that is, for them
upon whom Salvation should be conferred, and to whom it should be soundly
applied. So the Prophet tells us, Christ died, that indeed and most
certainly Isa. 53. 10.
he might see his seed, and bring many brethren unto God. And if Christ died
not for his sheep for this particular end, that by his special grace, and
that which is given to none others, they Romans 9. 18. Job, 10. 15.
might enjoy the fruit of his death, we must confess, that Christ in this
saying does give no particular comfort to his sheep, and in that whole
Chapter: which is absurd. And though sheep and believers materially be the
same, formally in this place they be not: for when Christ says to the
Pharisees, Ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep. Joh. 10. 16. If to be
a believer and the sheep of Christ do signify the same thing, he should say,
ye believe not, and that which follows, My sheep hear my voice, and follow
me, Joh. 10. 27. should be the same as if it had been said, the believers
believe. So that sheep and believers are reciprocal, but formally they are
not made sheep by faith, but by election.

Moreover the acquisition of righteousness by the death of Christ, and the
application thereof, are things to be distinguished, but so inseperably
conjoined, that for whomsoever it is acquired, to them it is applied. By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities, Isa. 5^. 11. He bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors, Isa. 33. 12. By his stripes are we healed, Isa, 53. 5. Who
was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification,
Romans 4 25. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift, came upon
all men unto justification of life, Romans 5. 18. Who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, Romans 8. 34. I am come
that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly, Joh.
10. 10. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4. 9. By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 10. For by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, verse. 14. The passages of
Scripture are plentiful, which testify application to be the end of Christ's
death; for he died to establish and ratify the everlasting Covenant of grace,
Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. to abolish him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil, Heb. 2. 14, 15. conquer death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. destroy and kill sin,
Romans 6. 10. sanctify his people through the truth, Joh. 17. 19. give life unto
the world, Joh. 6. 33. redeem us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. and
from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. obtain eternal redemption, Heb. 9. 12. that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that he might
deliver us from this present evil world, Gal. 1. 4. that being dead unto
sin, and alive unto God, Romans 6. 4, 5, 6. we might not live to our selves,
but unto him which died for us, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. and that we
might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 5. And it is absurd to reason it
self, that Christ by the decree of God should purchase that for men which is
not given unto them; that he should acquire what they obtain not: that by
divine imputation Christ should die for every man, when the merits of Christ be
not communicated unto them: that the promised seed should be given to Abraham,
no blessing or multiplication following. If Christ have purchased a new
Covenant, faith, redemption, reconciliation for every man, without question
they are or shall be delivered from the condemnation and dominion of sin; the
Spirit is given or shall be given to abide with them; they ar^ or shall be
renewed after the Image of God. If Christ be a King, he has a Kingdom,
subjects and territories, wherein he does exercise his regal power. He is a
King not only in personal right, or to punish enemies; but a King to feed and
rule a people. God has given his Son the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession, and shall men withold it? Shall God give men unto Christ, and
shall they detain themselves from him? If Christ came to destroy the works of
the devil, (that is sin, as the Apostle shows, 1 John 3. 8. Joh. 8. 41,
44.) and to deliver men from the fear of death and the devil, shall we not
think, that Satan is cast down, and death abolished? Christ is a Savior as
in merit so in efficacy, else should his purchase be in vain, the end of his
coming into the world be uncertain, his purpose in laying down his life be
frustrate, and Christ should merit by the appointment of God, what God does not
give: therefore* the impetration of righteousness must not be plucked from the
application, nor does the giving of benefits purchased by the death of Christ
depend upon the pleasure of men any more then the acquisition does. Betwixt the
purchase and application of Christ's death, faith comes between: but that faith
is merited by the death of Christ, and for Christ vouchsafed to them, for whom
he died, Tit. 3. 6. Ephesians. 1. 3. Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 6. 23.

Some have answered, that all men are the sheep of Christ, as the dispersed,
torn, and devoured of evil pastors and beasts of the field, and the seduced
and destroyed are acknowledged to be sheep, Jer. 23. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 34. 5, 6. But
the Prophets speak only of the people of the Jews, which at that time was
distinct from the Gentiles, as the flock and inheritance of the Lord: so that
hence nothing can be gathered, but that they, who live in Christ's Church and
fold, are his people and sheep of his pasture.

Again, the Scripture speaks of the sheep of Christ, two ways, according to
vocation or according to election. According to vocation they are sheep, who
externally pertain to the number of Gods people and the Church: according to
election, Jer. 23. 3. Romans 9. 27. Ezekiel. 34. 5, 6.
many sheep are without, many wolves within, and many sheep within, many wolves
without. Although there be a distinction betwixt the merit of Christ by his
obedience even to death, and his intercession, yet one of them cannot be
separated from the other: for he makes intercession for them to his Father for
whom he has merited reconciliation by his death, and we cannot think he
should lay down his life for them, for whom he would not pray. If we look
unto the signification of the words, Mediator and Intercessor note the same
thing: and if Christ have put himself betwixt the wrath of God and man to
obtain reconciliation by making satisfaction to offended justice, can it be
thought, he will not request, that for the virtue of his sacrifice they for
whom he has satisfied, might be accepted of the Father. If we look to these
two functions of Mediation, suffering death and making intercession, they are
conjoined in Scripture. It is Christ that Romans 8. 34.
died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also makes intercession for us. If any man sin we have 1 John 2. 1, 2.
an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our our sins. Christ is our Advocate, if he be our
propitiation, if we will receive the testimony of the Apostle and not separate
things that God has conjoined. Incredible it is, that Christ out of his
incredible love should vouchsafe to lay down his life for them as well as
others, for whom, the time of his passion being at hand, he would not power out
a prayer. How these two be conjoined in the intention of our Savior, sc. to
pray Joh. 17. 19.
for men and to offer himself a Sacrifice for them, may appear by the words
of our Savior himself, for these I sanctify my self, that is, for these am
I prepared to offer my self, that they might be sanctified by the truth; for
these, that is, them for whom he prayed. And if Christ had intended to offer up
himself an holy and propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of all and every
man, he would rather have prayed his Father to accept his sacrifice for all
men, then profess that he prayed not for all men. For whom Christ has offered
up himself a Sacrifice to put away sin, for them does he appear before God
in heaven: and if he does appear before Heb. 9. 24.
God for them, he does also make request for them But Christ prayed not for all
men, professes that he prayed not for the world. Joh. 17. 9.
He prayed for believers and them that should believe hereafter, and testified
that he would not pray for the rest. And it must be observed, that he prays
for them that believe and shall believe, as they were Gods, and of God given to
Christ, which formally is not the same with believers, though it be materially.
Joh. 6. 37, 39.


They answer to this argument, that there is a twofold intercession of Christ,
one general for all men that they might believe. The other special for
believers, that they might be gl^ified*

If you ask the ground of this distinction, they say, Christ upon the Cross
prayed for his persecutours and them that put him to death, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do. But if we search the Scripture we shall find
no passage that says, Christ Luke 23. 34.
prayed for every man that he might believe, nor is probable. For if he ask
faith for all men, then absolutely or conditionally: not absolutely; for then
all men should obtain faith, because Christ was absolutely heard in whatsoever
he absolutely prayed for. If upon condition, does he then pray to his Father,
that they might not resist the first grace offered, or that they might believe,
if they do not resist the first grace? But if absolutely he pray that they
might not resist, then they do not resist grace: if conditionally, that they
might believe, if they do not resist, then he prays that they might believe
if they believe: for not to resist the first grace is to obey it, that is, to
believe. Besides, if Christ pray for all men that they might believe, then also
that they might enjoy the Gospel; which is the means of faith: and that
either absolutely, and they should enjoy the Gospel, which we know they do
no^* or upon condition, as the right use of their natural gifts, or the piety
of their progenitors, or the like: And then these conditions our Savior does
pray for absolutely or upon condition, or not at all: If absolutely, then all
men should use their natural gifts well, because he is always heard in that
which he does ask absolutely: if not at all, then it is not of grace that men
use their natural gifts well, or some grace is given to men without the
intercession of Christ. And when the Gospel is vouchsafed to some that abuse
their natural gifts, to others not, did our Savior pray that some should have
the Gospel absolutely, some conditionally? or is the Gospel granted to some
for the intercession of Christ, to others without it, although he make
intercession equally for all men? And if the Gospel be vouchsafed to some that
abuse their natural gifts, why does not God give the grace of faith also
without that condition, under which only Christ asked faith for them. Moreover*
if Christ pray for all men that they may believe, he asks this for the virtue
and merit of his passion, or not. If not, then faith should not be given for
the merit of Christ: if he ask for the merit of his passion, then he asks it
without any condition; for Christ d^ed absolutely and without condition for all
men, as they teach, and what Christ has merited for all men, that God gives
absolutely to every man. Christ upon the cross prayed for them that crucified
him, Luke ^3. 34. But that might be of private duty as man, who subjected
himself to the Law of God, which requires that we forgive our enemies, and
pray for them that persecute us; not of the proper office of a Mediator, who
was to intercede for his people by suffering death and making request. It
behoved Christ, as he subjected himself to the Law, to fulfill all
righteousness, and so to pray for his enemies, but that was not out of his
proper office as Mediator, which was to offer up himself a Sacrifice or make
intercession, as our high Priest. If any shall contend, that this is to be
referred to the proper Mediatorie intercession of Christ, it will not prove the
matter in hand: for he prayed not for all and every man, but for them that
crucified him, and that indefinitely, not universally; for them that were
present at his crucifying, and in simplicity of heart (and not of affected
ignorance (resisting the evidence of the Spirit speaking by Christ, and by
miracles giving testimony to his doctrine) in obedience to the commandment of
the Superiors, did crucify him, but not for all them that had any hand in his
death. He prays not that they might believe, if they were not wanting to
themselves: but prays for forgiveness for them that had abused natural
gifts, and supernatural means of grace: so that it cannot be referred to that
general Intercession they speak of, with any show of reason.

Some answer, the sense of the words is only this, Father seeing they have
sinned of ignorance, let them not be punished with that punishment, which the
thing they have done deserves (which was without all hope to be blinded,
hardened, and cast off) but let them not for this sin be in this state, but
show mercy on them, that they may be in possibility of repentance, pardon, and
grace, which intercession answers Christ's dying, as it respects all, which
was to possibilitate their Salvation. But this exposition is new and straightened,
and cannot be confirmed by any circumstance of the place, or signification of
the word forgiveness: and if it be granted, will not suit with their purpose.
For Christ died not to possibilitate the Salvation of every man, that had or
should abuse natural gifts and supernatural means, as the rulers of the
people, which stirred up the people to desire Jesus that he might be crucified,
nor prayed for every man, that had so fearfully abused the means of grace by
wilful and affected ignorance (if not worse) that he should not be given up to
blindness and hardness of heart. If any man shall be bold to affirm either
of these, we must desire better proof then his bare word, before we can yield
assent.

If it be said, the persons for whom Christ prayed were not in a state capable
of remission or pardon, because they were impenitent Corvin. in Mol. cap. 27.
page 7.
and unbeleevers, Corvinus answers, that we must understand the condition, if
they repent. And by the same reason, he might ask salvation for all men, scil.
if they repent and believe. And how then does this Intercession differ from
that, which they say was special for the Salvation of believers. Surely to
ask the pardon of their sins that repent, does rather pertain to special
Intercession whereby the salvation of them that believe is prayed for, then to
the general, wherein the faith of all men is craved.

An example of this general Intercession, wherein Christ prays that all men
might believe in him, we have (they say) in that 17. of John, ver. 21. That the
world may believe that thou have sent me. Some by the world in that place
understand the elect, who then were dispersed abroad, or them that were to be
converted from infidelity to the faith. But because the word world in the whole
Chapter is taken in another sense, it is most natural in this place to
understand it as before, for men that be of the world, not illightened, or
converted to the faith: and the word Believe to be put improperly for to
acknowledge or confess. The sense is, that the world, although unbeleeving,
although Maldonat. in Joh. 17. 21. Iansen. hac. 136.
an adversary to me, yet seeing the great love and concord of my Disciples, may
be compelled to believe, that is, to acknowledge and confess, that I was sent
of God, that is, that I am not as now it thinks, a seducer, but that I am
truly sent of the Father; or that the Infidels may by experience be convinced
to confess my glory, and be compelled to acknowledge and confess that thou
have sent me a Savior into the world. This sense is so plain and easy, that
we need not seek any further for the meaning: but if we grant it to be meant of
true and sound faith, it will not follow thence, that Christ made intercession
for every man in the world, that he might believe. For the world is usually
taken for men in the world indefinitely, and not simply for every man, nor yet
for the greater part of men in the world. There went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed, Luk 2. 1. but this cannot be
extended to every nation, much l^sse to every man. The Vide Psalm. 118. 10. 1
Chro. 14. 17. Jer. 27. 7. Dan. 2. 38. Matthew. 10. 22. Romans 15. Rev. 18. 3, 23.
impure spirits go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world.
Rev. 16. 14. All the world wondered after the beast. Rev. 13. 3. The whole world
lies in iniquity. 1 John 5. 19. He was in the world, and the world knew him
not. Joh. 1. 10. Behold, the world is gone after him. Joh. 12. 19. The Syriacke
Interpreter, vulgar Interpreter, and Mannus the Greek Paraphrast, add the
universal particle and read it, the whole world; But if the world be taken
for every man in the world, we must conclude, that every man in the world did
follow Christ, and that no man in the world did know him.

They ask again, what is it the Intercession of Christ required? Psalm. 2. 8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine Inheritance. Is it not
for unbeleevers to bring them to the faith? and does not Christ intercede for
the coming of Gods Kingdom, as he taught his Disciples to do? There is
therefore an Intercession of Christ for them that believe. But here we cannot
find that general Intercession of Christ they speak of, that every man might
come to the faith by fitting means, but for the most part ineffectuall. The
prayer required in the second Psalm Arminius Armin. Orat. de Sacerdot. Chr.
refers to the prayer which Christ offered to the Father for himself,
according to the commandment and promise of the Father. Ask of me, and I will
give thee the heathen for thine Inheritance: to which Promise of the Father
Christ having respect, said, Father glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may
glorify thee, as thou Joh. 17. 2.
have given him power over all flesh, that he might give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him. And from this prayer are to be distinguished
(says he) those supplications which with strong cries and tears he offered to
his Father in the days of his flesh: by those he craved to be freed from his
Agony, by this he prays that he might see his seed, and that the will of God
might prosper in his hand. But howsoever it be, the prayer spoken of in that
place, is absolute, certain, and effectual: for what God there promised,
Christ prayed for in particular, and he was heard therein: and therefore it
cannot be applied to that general Intercession of Christ which they would
maintain, as every man may plainly see.

They further reply, that this Intercession of Christ, Joh. 17. pertains to
the application of Christ's death; that Christ makes Intercession for
believers: and by the world they are signified, who did or would contemn and
reject Christ offered to them in the word of his Gospel; as the word world is
used in many other places. Joh. 1. 10. and 3. 19. and 14. 17. and 16. 8, 9. and
14. 22. But if it pertain to the application of Christ's death, it follows
thence, that the death of Christ shall be applied to them, who were given unto
him of the Father, that in special manner he might lay down his life for them,
seeing Christ offered up himself a sacrifice to the Father for them, and them
only, for whom according to his office of Mediatorship he made special
Intercession. If by the world obstinate contemners of the Gospel be
understood, what shall we think of them to whom the word of reconciliation was
never sent, or Christ offered in the Ministry of the Gospel? are they
partakers of the benefits of Christ's special Intercession? or is the death of
Christ applied unto them? If only contemners of the Gospel be meant by the
world, for which Christ would not pray, why should it be interpreted of
special Intercession, seeing our Savior (as they confess) neither laid down
his life, nor made general Intercession for such as such, that they might be
brought to the faith, or be partakers of the merits of his death? Our Savior
in that his prayer opposes the world to them that are given unto him of the
Father, and as to be given unto him of the Father, notes somewhat precedent to
effectual vocation and lively faith, though every one that is given unto him
does or shall believe, so the world notes a state antecedent to wilful
contempt, though they that be of this world; if they live under the Gospel,
will prove themselves contemners, Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me
shall come unto me; and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out,
says Christ. But to come unto Christ is to believe in him by effectual
vocation, Joh. 1. 10. The world knew not Christ: but they were the world,
before they shut their eyes against the light, and refused Christ offering
himself unto them. Joh 3. 19. They are the world who are not given unto
Christ, are not his sheep, his people, his brethren, believe not in him, be
disobedient, cast out, though they never stubbornly contemned the Gospel:
because the sound thereof never came into their ears, that light never shined
amongst them. And now for conclusion of this argument, let this one thing be
added, that if we search the Scripture we shall find no mention of this
twofold Intercession of Christ properly mediatory, one general, the other
special, which some of late have devised: but that he makes Intercession for
all and every of them that are given unto him of the Father, and only for them,
and that his Intercession is ever certain and effectual; as when he says to
Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and to all the Luke
2^. ^2. Joh. 14. 10.
Apostles, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever. And when we hear from Christ himself,
that according to the proper office of his Mediatorship he makes Intercession
only for them that are given unto him of the Father, we may conclude, that in
special manner he offered up himself a sacrifice to the Father for them only.
Other arguments are alleged for confirmation of this truth, which who list
may read at large in sundry Treatises of this matter ^ but it would be too
long to insist upon each particular, therefore here I will break off this
controversy, and proceed to that which follows in this intended discourse.

CHAP. III. How Christ has fulfilled the office of Mediator, or how he is the
Mediator of the New Testament.
IN the fullness of time, the eternal Son of God, took unto him our nature,
and became God and Man in one person, that he might be an equal middle person
between God and man. The necessity of a Mediator appears in this, that man is
guilty, and God true and righteous; If man had continued in his integrity, he
had stood in no need of an expiation: if God had been unrighteous in the
passages of man's sin, there had been due unto him no just debt of
satisfaction. But seeing man created good but mutable, did willingly and by
voluntary choice transgress that Law, under the precepts whereof he was most
justly created, and unto the malediction whereof he was as necessarily and
righteously subject if he transgressed: and God was purposed not to suffer
sin to pass utterly unrevenged, because of his great hatred thereunto, and
of his truth and the Law which he had established against it: of necessity
either God must execute the severity of his Law, whereby the creature should
everlastingly loose the fruition of him, and he should likewise loose the
service and voluntary subjection of his creature, or some course or other must
be found out to translate this man's sins on another person, who may be able
to bear them, and to interest this man's person in that others righteousness,
which may be able to cover him. Of necessity a Mediator must be found out to
stand between God and man, who must have one unto whom, and others for whom and
in whose behalf, and somewhat wherewith to make satisfaction to offended
justice: In regard of God toward man he must be an officer to declare his
righteousness, and in regard of man toward God a surety ready to procure
pardon and deliverance, not by favor or request, but by way of satisfaction.
He must be one with us in the fellowship of our nature, passions, infirmities
and temptations, that so he might the more readily suffer for us, who in so
many things suffered with us: and one with God the Father in his divine nature,
that so by the virtue of his sufferings and resurrection he might be able both
to satisfy justice, to justify our persons, to sanctify our nature, to
purify and perfume our services, to raise our dead bodies, and to present us
to his Father a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle. He must be man pure
and undefiled; man, that he might suffer, it being no way fit that one having
no communion with another, should make satisfaction by suffering for another
fault: Man pure and undefiled, otherwise he could not have satisfied for
himself, much less for them that had so grievously offended. He must be man,
that he might have compassion on them that come unto God through him: and pure
and undefiled, that his Sacrifice being pure and without spot, might be
acceptable and pleasing to provoked justice. He must be God that he might bear
the weight of Gods wrath without sinking under it, be the King and Head of the
Church, defend his people against the enemies of their Salvation, send forth
his Spirit into the hearts of his redeemed, and receive from them such divine
worship as was due to so great and gracious a Savior. He must be man, our
near kinsman, that he might have right of redemption, be a merciful and
faithful high Priest, in all things like unto his brethren. He must be God,
that by his death he might overcome death, and him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil, free us from the guilt of sin, and curse of the Law, and
preserve his redeemed unto his everlasting Kingdom. He must be God and man in
one person, and so of a middle condition between God and us, in that both the
natures of God and man do concur and are conjoined in his person, that he
might join God and man in a firm and stable Covenant of friendship and
reconciliation: and be the root, fountain and beginning of supernatural and
spiritual being, in whom the whole nat^^^ of mankind should be found in a more
eminent sort then it was in Adam. The horror of sin was so grievous, the
curse of the Law so terrible, the price of redemption so great, that a mee^
creature could not take away the one, or pay the other: and that man might not
fall away as he had done under the former Covenant, our Mediator, who was the
foundation of this new Covenant, did assume our humane nature unto his divine
person. Therefore the eternal Son of God, being ordained of the Father to
this office of Mediatorship, that he might intercede between God and man, and
join God and man in one, did assume our nature into the unity of his person,
and was born of a woman, that he might save and call sinners, and redeem them
who were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.
and shut up under the curse of the Law.

The second person in Trinity, the Son of God by nature, the Image of the
Father, by whom all things were made, was made man, that he might renew what
was disordered by sin, and make us the sons of God by grace and adoption,
who were by nature the children of wrath, it being fit our redemption should be
wrought by the Son, and sealed by the holy Spirit. For whereas a double
mission was necessary, the one to reconcile, the other to give gifts to
reconciled friends: the Father being of none, sent his Son, the first
proceeding person to take our nature and make satisfaction: the Father and the
Son both send the Spirit, the second proceeding person, to seal up them that
Christ has redeemed by his blood. And who was fitter to become the Son of
man, then he that was by nature the Son of God? who could be fitter to make
us the Sons of God by grace and adoption, then he that was the Son of God
by nature? who fitter to repair the Image of God decayed in us, then he by
whom at first man was made after the Image of God? Thus Christ was a fit and
equal middle person, conjoined by the bands of friendly society, and peaceable
agreement with both the parties, God and men, that he might be a Mediator of
reconciliation and peace between God and man. He took unto him the sanctified
nature of man, that therein he might draw near unto men, and be the root of
them that are sanctified; and retained the nature of God, that so he might not
depart from God.

Here it is questioned, according to which nature Christ is Mediator, whether
as man only, or as God and man. That he is a Mediator according to the
concurrence of both natures in the unity of his person, it is confessed by all;
for if he were not both God and man, he could not mediate between God and man:
but whether he be a Mediator according to both natures concurring in the work
of Mediation, there be some that make question, Our resolution is, that Christ
is Mediator according to both natures, the humane nature doing that which
pertained to the humanity, Bellar. de Christ. lib. 5. cap. 7. Potest tamen.
and the divine nature that which pertained to the divinity, but the humane and
divine both concurring to produce one act or work of Mediatorship. As the
divine and humane nature concur to make one Christ, so the acts of the divine
and humane Plura principia ad operationem unam possunt concurrere. Lun. ibid.
cap. 7. not. 1.
nature, distinct in virtue and operation, by cooperation concur to make up
the same work of Mediation. Some of the works of Christ the Mediator, were the
works of his humanity in respect of the thing done, and had their efficacy,
dignity and value from his divinity, in that they were the works of him that
had the divinity dwelling bodily in him: and some the works of his divinity,
the humane nature concurring only instrumentally, as the remitting of sins, the
giving of the Spirit, the raising of the dead, and such like. The works of
Ministry, the Son of God I^n. cont. 2. l. 5. cap. 5. not. 29.
performed them in the nature of man. It was the Son of God and Lord of life,
that died for us on the Cross, but it was the nature of man, not of God
wherein he died. The works of Authority and power were all performed by the
divine nature, yet not without an isntrumental concurrence of the nature of
man. Christ suffered as man, but the divine nature did support and sustain the
humane. He died as man, as God he overcame death, conquered, and rose again:
as man he was made an offering for our sins, the worth and value of the
Sacrifice was from the divinity. The two natures in Christ be distinct in their
essence and I^n. Paral. lib. 3. in cap. 9. Hebr.
properties, and so in their operations, that we must not imagine one action of
both natures: but as the natures be united in one person, so the operations
concur to make up one work of a Mediator. Many chief, necessary and
essential acts concerning our Iun. animad. in Bell. contr. 2. l. 5. ca. 3.
not. 9*
reconciliation with God, are from the Deity of Christ as from the next,
proper, immediate and formal beginning. The Incarnation of Christ is from the
Deity, which did assume the humanity, which when it was not, could not assume
it self. The manifestation of God was a work truly divine, from the humanity
of Christ as an instrument, from the Deity as the true cause. Christ as Joh. 1.
18. Matt. 11. 27.
man teaches as an instrument, and Christ the Word teaches as Mediator: for
he is not only Mediator, who supplyeth the room of an instrument: but the
Deity did move the humanity as his instrument, that is, personally united, and
not as another. Joh. 10. 18.
To lay down his life passively belongs to the flesh, to lay down his life or
soul actively to the word. The resurrection of Christ is Iun. ibid. cap. 6.
not. 1. Romans 8. 34, and 4 25. Romans 1. 4. Mar. 2. 10. Joh. 15. 26. and 16. 7.
an essential part of our Redemption: but Christ rose not by the propriety of
his flesh, but by the power of his Deity. Christ as Mediator performed many
divine acts: but the humanity alone cannot be the beginning of a divine act: as
Christ as Mediator has authority to forgive sins, to send the holy Spirit not
meritoriously alone, as Bellarmine distinguishes, but efficiently, to conjoyne
us unto God, and bring us to salvation. Christ as Mediator is the King and
Head of his Church, which dignity and office Meritum Me^^ation^^ est, and
Mediatio personae.
cannot agree to him that is mere man. For the Head is to give influence of
sense and motion unto the body, and Christ gives supernatural sense and motion
unto his mystical body, and that both by way of efficiency, and by way of
disposition, fitting us that an impression of grace may be made upon us. He
prepares and fitteth men to the receipt of grace by the acts of his humanity,
A t^ta quidem Trinitate datur Spiritu^: sed ad personam Mediatoris haec actio
terminatur quoad (...).
in which he suffered death, and dying satisfied Gods wrath, removed all matter
of dislike, procured the favor and acceptance of God, and so made men fit to
receive the grace of God, and to enjoy his favor. He imparteth and conferreth
grace, by the operation and working of his divine nature, it being the proper
work of God to enlighten the understandings of men, and to soften their hearts.

If it be alleged, that there is nothing that one person of the Trinity does
toward the creatures, but they all do it, and consequently, that those things
which Christ did in his divine nature, pertained not to the office of a
Mediator, being common to all the Persons.

The answer is, though the action be the same, and the work done by them, yet
they differ in the manner of doing it. For the Father does all things
authoritative, and the Son subauthoritative, as the Schoolmen speak; that
is, the Father, as he from whom, and of whom are all things; the Son as he by
whom are all things, not as ^y an instrument, but a principal efficient. And
in this sort to quicken, give life, and to impart the Spirit of Sanctification
to whom he pleases, especially with a kind of concurring of the humane nature
meriting, desiring, and instrumentally assisting, is proper to the Son of God,
manifested in our flesh, and not common to the whole Trinity. As the second
person in Trinity did assume our nature, and not the Father or the holy Ghost:
and as Christ is the Head of the Church, not the Father or the holy Spirit: so
he does give life and sense to the body, and not the whole Trinity. If the
special Offices of Christ be considered severally, much more if all of them be
considered jointly, it will evidently appear, that both natures must
necessarily concur in the formal execution of them. For he cannot worthily
perform the office of the chief Doctor of the whole Church, and heavenly
Prophet, nor execute the office of an eternal high Priest, that is, offer a
Sacrifice truly propitiatory, daily hear the prayers of all his people, and
present them before God; nor exercise kingly power and authority in heaven and
earth, who works to the form of mere humanity, or only as he is man: When
in those offices there must be a divine excellency and efficacy.

The end of personal union is the administration of his office; Qualis
substantia personae, t^^ li^ and operatie, and qualis operatio, talis
substantia.
and the personal union of two natures in Christ had not been necessary,
unless both had concurred as a formal beginning to that work. For every
agent necessarily works according to and by its form; whence it follows,
either that the person of the Mediator does not consist of two natures, or
both natures of Christ, as proper forms, do necessarily concur to the
proper works of a Mediator, because the proper operations must be conjoined in
one work of a Mediator, as both natures are joined and united in one person.
There is one God, says the Apostle, and one 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: adding the man Christ, to
show that in him were both natures, that is, he was God and man in one person,
and so a fit middle person or Mediator. And man may be taken personally, not
naturally, it being most usual to name the whole person of Christ from either
1 Cor. 2, ^.
nature: as he is called the Lord of glory, when his person is understood. And
so in this place, the man Christ, that is, that person, Ia^. animad. in Bell.
contr. l. 5. 6. 3. not. 11, 12.
who has that nature by which he is truly called man: and of that appellation
there may be diverse weighty reasons more, amongst the rest this, that the
Apostle would encourage us to put our trust and confidence in him as being our
elder brother. By voluntary dispensation Christ is Mediator as God incarnate,
and not by nature as God. And according to that dispensation Christ Joh. 17. 3,
and: 14. 1. 1 John 2, 1, 2.
is Mediator to the Father, who is personally called God sometimes in this
respect, and distinguished from Christ as Mediator: and Christ is our Advocate
to the Father, but never represented in Scripture praying to the Son or holy
Spirit, but the Father only: which dispensation is carefully to be observed,
from which we must not depart upon any vain speculation, which humane curiosity
might suggest.

A Mediator must be a middle person, equally distant, and equally drawing nigh
to both parties betwixt whom he does mediate. Bellarm. de Christ l. 5. c. 2..
Praeter^a. Ille solus est vere medius inter Deum and hominem, cum utriusq,
naturam habeat.
And thus Christ God incarnate is a fit middle person, for he draws as near to
the Father as God, as to us as man, and is as far distant from God as he is
man, as he is from us as God: and he comes as near to the Father, as he
departs from us: and comes as near to us, as he does to the Father.

But Christ as a just man is not so a middle person, for he comes not so nigh
to the Father as just, as he does to us as man; nor is so far distant from us
as just, as he comes nigh to us as man. Then as Mediator he should be joined
to the Father in will only, but in nature dis-joyned: and be distant from man
not in nature, but in quality only: then should he be Mediator, not as
substantially one with the Father, but only as he is united to him in will.

If it be alleged, that if Christ be Mediator as God incarnate, then he is
Mediator to himself, because he is God, and then also he should differ from
himself, because a Mediator is a middle person.

We answer, it is not necessary a thing should differ from the Iun. ibid. cap.
5. not. 1, 3, 5, 15.
extremes according to all that in respect whereof it is of a middle
condition, but it is sufficient if it differ in some thing from one, and in
some thing from another, as is before explained. So the Son of God incarnate by
voluntary dispensation differs not only from the Father and the holy Ghost,
but from himself as God only: scil. as man he differs from himself as God,
and as God from himself as man. The whole Trinity being offended with us for
sin, was to be pacified, but the Scripture teaches, Christ was our Mediator
to the Father: and we must silence our conceits, and learn of God what to
believe. And assuredly if the Father be reconciled, the whole Trinity is
reconciled. And further it may be added, that he who according to absolute
essence or nature is the party offended, may according to voluntary
dispensation sustain the person and do the office of a Mediator: and so
Christ was primarily a Mediator to the Father for us, and by consequence and
secundarily to the whole Trinity, and so to himself as God.

It is further objected, if Christ be Mediator according to his divine nature,
then all three persons in Trinity be Mediators: but this is a mere deceit:
for the divine nature is taken essentially for the divine nature common to
Father, Son and holy Ghost: or personally for the divine essence considered
distinctly in the Father, Son and holy Ghost: In the latter sense we say,
Christ according to his divine nature is our Mediator, as he was incarnate, and
did assume our nature unto his divine person, and not the Father or the holy
Ghost.

But then (it will be said) he was inferior to the Father: In office it is
true, by voluntary dispensation he is inferior, but in nature Iun. ibid. not.
13.
he is equal to the Father: and nothing hinders but one equal to another in
nature, may by voluntary and free choice under-take Phil, 2. 6, 7.
an office of inferiority. Being in the form of God, he humbled himself. The
Scripture teaches expressly, that God the Father Joh. 1. 18. and 3. 16. and
3. 13. Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 1 John 1. 7. and ^. 1. and 4. 10.
Act. 20. 28.
gave his only begotten Son to death for us: and the only begotten or proper
Son of God according to both natures, and in both states is said to administer
his office, the property of either nature observed: as also the only begotten
Son of God is said to descend from heaven to earth for our sakes, and to suffer
death for us, and to have done and suffered other such things: and that by the
blood of his Son we are reconciled to God the Father.

This office of Mediation Christ has performed. First, as the great Doctor of
his Church by revealing unto us the way to life, even 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8, 9.
the last, full, and perfect will of God concerning man's salvation; the wisdom
of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the
world, unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew: Such
things as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, or ever entered into the heart
of man to conceive: Such as the natural inquiry of Angels could never Mat.
11. 27. Joh. 1. 1^.
have discovered. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son has revealed him. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten
Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. He only it is
that opens the bosom of his Father, that is, who reveals the secret and
mysterious counsels, and the tender and compassionate affections of his Father
unto the world. He is said to be a teacher sent from Joh. 3. 2.
God, and to be the Lord which speaks from heaven, and the doctrine which he
taught an heavenly doctrine, even great Salvation. The woman of Samaria could
say, I know when the Messiah comes, he will tell us all things: And our
Savior professes Heb. 12. 25. Joh. 3. 12. Heb. 2. 3. Joh. 4. 25. Joh. 15. 15,
to his disciples, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you.

And in this the new Covenant is lifted up above former expressions of the same
Covenant for substance. For God who in sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers Heb. 1. 1. ver. 3.
by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son: who is
the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person; that is, he
in whom the glory and Majesty of the Father, Col. 1. 15.
otherwise invisible and inconspicuous, does show forth it self, and that
which is hid in the Father as in a ring, is manifested, as on the seal. And as
God is manifested in Christ, so was he manifested and made known by Christ. In
Christ are hid Col. 1. 3. Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.
all the treasures of wisdom, and he has made known the manifold wisdom of
God. The discovery of misery and sin is that which sweetens mercy, and gains
it esteem: and therefore as the mercy of God was plentifully unfolded, so was
the Law laid open, and sin discovered by our Savior more fully then it had
been in the old Testament, that as sin abounded, mercy might abound much more.
And where the malady appears hideous and desperate, there is need that we be
well acquainted with the sovereign remedy, and hence as the door of the Law
and curse is cast quite open, that men might thoroughly know themselves, so
Christ in his person, natures, office and benefits is lively deciphered, that
when men feel themselves lost in themselves, they might run unto him for
righteousness, grace, life and salvation.

Secondly, Christ has satisfied offended justice, and answered whatsoever the
Law had against us. The word satisfaction the Scripture has not, but the thing
signified thereby is plainly noted by the phrases of Redemption, Expiation,
Reconciliation, and many such like every where in Scripture. Justice did
release the debtour, or the punishment of the person offending: but would not
simply release the punishment of the offense, or pardon the fault without
satisfaction. If then the guilty be spared, the surety must suffer punishment.

It is here questioned, whether God could not pardon sin without satisfaction,
or satisfaction be absolutely necessary, the decree and pleasure of God so to
have it excepted.

Many sound, orthodox and learned Divines hold the affirmative, Martin. de
pers. Christi lib. 1. Sect. ex mundi redemp^. p. 154, 155.
because justice is essential to God, and it is a righteous thing with God to
render tribulation to them that afflict, and that every transgression receive a
just recompense, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Heb. 2. 2. Romans 1. 32. Exodus 34. 7. And if
recompense be just, it is injustice to let sin go unpunished. The Lord
testifies, that he that justifies the wicked is an abomination to his
highness: and he will not do what he abhors in others, Prove. 17. 15. Isa.
5. 23. God cannot but love his Image, and so he cannot but hate the corruption
of it, and severely punish that which is dissentanie from it. This seems to be
engraven in the heart of man by nature, that God is just, and that sin cannot
be done away without satisfaction: and hence come those many fond devices
amongst the Heathen Lex non est aliquid internum in Deo, aut ipsa Dei voluntas,
sed voluntatis quidameffectus. Lactant. de (...) Dei, cap. 19. Index peccatis
veniam dare n^ potest, quia voluntati servit alienae. Deus autem potest, quia
est legis suae ipse disceptator and judex, quam cum poneret, non uti^ ademit
sibi omnem potestatem, sed habet ignoscendi licentiam. Senec. Occidere contra
Legem nemo non potest, servare nemo pr^ter te.
to pacify offended justice: they were ignorant of the true God, and how his
wrath and displeasure was to be appeased: but assured of this, that he was
offended by sin, and that without satisfaction the sin could not be expiated or
done away. For these and such like reasons many have thought, that it is
absolutely repugnant to divine justice to pardon sin without satisfaction.

Others and those learned and orthodox are of opinion, that the necessity of
satisfaction depends upon the will and pleasure of God, and that God by his
absolute power, salva justitia, might have pardoned sin without satisfaction.
For God might out of his absolute sovereignty not have punished Adams sin, both
because it was against himself, not others to whom he is tied to do justice:
and especially, for that the demonstration of his revenging justice springs
not from the necessity of his nature, but from his voluntary disposition, as
well as the giving life perpetual, to obedience for a certain space
performed. For withdraw that voluntary Covenant, who doubts, but that had
the creature kept his innocence a thousand years, God was free to have
annihilated him? Also God is able were he pleased to show his power to turn it
to his glory, which men's impotency not attaining, being also forbidden by the
Law of their Superior, makes them that they cannot always with justice
forgive, even that wherein themselves are trespassed. If God of his absolute
power cannot pardon sin without satisfaction, then not to punish sin is simply
a thing impossible, or God in so doing should be deficient or inconformable to
the rule of his will: but to let go sin unpunished is simply the omission of a
divine act (the decree of God excepted) not deficient or inconformable to any
rule of Gods will, but rather a peculiar exercise of divine mercy. What
absolutely God can will, that he can justly will: otherwise it might be that
God can will a thing which is injust, or that he can will injustly. But it was
possible for God to will to let sin go unpunished, it is not absolutely
repugnant to his divine nature so to will.

If God cannot pardon sin without satisfaction, Hae rations tum demum locum
obtinerent, si ita De^ putaretur agere ex necessitate naturae, ut solo naturae
impetu, citra omnem intellectum, and voluntatis actum, ageret, veluti ignis
calefacit ex necessitate naturae. Windel. de mundo Sect. 2. c. 2. Lex agendi
necessitas 1. naturae 2. congruentiae. Illa per quam agens ita agit, ut per
naturam non possit non agere, estque vel sine cognitione, vel cum cognitione.
Ista per quam agens non potest non congruenter suae naturae agere.
then it is necessary that he punish sin by absolute necessity, or sin
presupposed, it is of absolute necessity that it be punished; but it is not of
absolute necessity that sin be punished, for then God should punish it always
in one manner, and as much as he can, as natural agents work: whereas we see
by experience, that God does differently punish the sins of men in this life,
the lesser offenders most, the greater least many times, ever so as their
punishments might be increased. Neither can it be said, that the greatness of
punishment in this life, does lessen their punishment in the life to come; for
the punishments of the life to come being eternal, can carry no proportion
with the punishments of this life. Then it was of absolute necessity that
Christ should suffer so many stripes and no more, be forsaken just so long and
no longer, continue in his agony so many hours and neither more nor less.
Sciendum est, non sequi injustum ex quavis negatione justi, etiam posi^is
^isdem circumstantij^. Non est perpetuum ut id quod just fiat, non nisi
injuste omittatur.
The bounty of God to reward obedience is essential as well as justice to
punish iniquity: and if God punish iniquity by absolute and natural necessity,
of necessity he must reward obedience: if he punish iniquity without divine
constitution, he must reward obedience in the same manner. God may inflict a
more mild punishment then sin deserves, therefore at least he may leave some
degree of sin unpunished: as also, it is lawful for God to men equal in sin,
to grant pardon to one, to punish another according to his deserts. To give
reward above merit is not contrary to justice, if it be given of our own: nor
to punish mercifully, and less then the fault deserves, if it be a fault
committed against our selves. And it seems as much repugnant to justice Sunt
quaedam Dei proprietates quarum exercitium, tum quoad actum, tum quoad tempu^
and modum actus, imo etiam quoad objecti determinationem, pendet a libera ipsus
voluntate. Ex promissione jus aliquod acquiritur ei cui facta est promissio: at
comminatione apertius dun^axat declaratur meritum poenae in peccante, and jus
puniendi in comminante. Cum bonitas and misericordia Dei non minus proprietas
ej^^ sit, quam justitia: ac quamquam ex misericordia non ^gisset, sed puniisset
universos, minime eo mutabilis, vel etiam immisericors potuerit dici:
similiter, neque extra decreti considerationem, mutabilem vel injustum dici
potuisse, quanquam ignovisset universis citra illam satisfactionem. Quod is qui
deliquit paenam meretur, eoque punibilis est, hoc ex ipsa peccati and
peccatoris ad superiorem relatione necessario sequitur and proprie natural, ut
vero puniatur quivis peccator poena tali quae culpae respondeat, non est
necessarium simpliciter and universaliter, neque proprie natural: sed naturae
satis conveniens. Chamier. panstrat. Tom. 2. l. 5. c. 1^. Parker de desc. l. 3.
Sect. 56. Wotton de Reconcil l. 1 c 4. V^ss. respons. ad Iud. Ravensperg. cap.
28. Isa. 53. 10. Psalm. 40. 8. Joh. 5. 19, 30.
to accept a surety, as to pardon the punishment; especially that the Son of
God, the party offended, should take upon him our nature, and make satisfaction
for us. And if God by absolute necessity must punish sin as it deserves, then
it is simply impossible to renew the sinner by repentance, or to annihilate
him, because then he does not bear what punishment his sin does call for from
the hand of justice. Justice is essential to God, so is mercy, bounty,
liberality: but God shows mercy to whom he will and does good to whom he will
freely, not by absolute necessity: only God has obliged himself by
righteousness of fidelity, that is by promises and threatenings, which must be
fulfilled, to do this or that. Sin though it has an outward disagreement,
such as may be in a creature from the Creator: yet it has no inward positive
repugnancy or contrariancy to Gods nature, such as is betwixt fire and water:
for then should the divine nature inwardly in it self be worse for the being
of sin, and should necessarily nill it. Sin is displeasing unto God, he cannot
approve it as good in it self, but it is one thing to be displeased with, or
hate sin, another to punish it of absolute and natural necessity; as it is one
thing to approve obedience, another to reward it of necessity, It is most true,
that God does not only hate, but punish all sin, but that he does, not by
natural necessity, but by natural congruity, which may stand with the most
free will of God, determining to manifest his justice, for the manifestation
whereof the punishment of sin was necessary. The hatred of sin and punishment
thereof are joined together as a free cause and effect, not as a necessary
cause and effect: for God hates sin at all times, but punishes it not ever,
but in his time or season. But it is not material to dispute this matter in
more words; for seeing* God has determined that his justice shall take her
revenge, if by breach of Covenant she be wronged, he cannot but punish sin
according to its desert, neither may he set us free from the same, but so as
wronged justice may receive satisfaction. The decree of God is unchangeable,
and the sentence of God denounced against sin must stand firm for ever,
therefore punishment must be executed, if the commandment be transgressed.

And the reasons of this decree be Omne agens quod agit naturaliter, agit in
objectum suae actionis naturaliter receptivum: quare si punire esset natural
(illa nimirum acceptatione, quae secum sert necessitatem) non possit actio
talis de persona peccatori^ in per sonam aliam transire Neque etiam sapientia
Dei, quae in boc negotio max^me elucet, locum babitura videtur; si per naturam
nequisset Deu^ aliter ^gere: sapientia enim est electrix mediorum. Luke 24. 26,
27. Joh. 10. 18.
weighty. For hereby God manifests his just indignation against sin, and
magnifieth the riches of his grace and tender compassion toward the sinner,
whom he is pleased to save from deserved wrath. Seeing then God decreed not to
deliver man from the sentence of death contracted by sin, but upon satisfaction
made to divine justice, and the punishment of sin borne by his surety, of
necessity if Christ become a Mediator to intercede for us, he must undertake
to pay our debts, and in our room and steed to suffer what we deserved. And as
he undertook, so he has borne the chastisement of our peace, and by bearing
the punishment has taken away our sins.

That Christ did under-goe the punishment due to sinners, as their surety, is
evident in this, that he died for us. For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
23 and 5. 12. which God inflicteth upon none but either a sinner, or him that
bears the person of a sinner: 2 Cor. 15. 21, 22. Col. 1. 14. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb.
12. 2. Act 20. 28. Col. 1. 20. Romans 3 25. Gal. 3. 13. Heb. 12. 24.
wherefore seeing Christ in himself most innocent, did suffer death, it
necessarily follows, that he suffered not in his own, but in our name, and
satisfied the Father for us. Hitherto it makes, that he suffered not any kind
of death whatsoever, but ignominious, violent, judicial and accursed, such as
had the sense of Gods wrath adjoined. For no reason can be imagined, why Christ
should so much dread death, which the Martyrs endured without fear, but that
for the time he was deprived of that refreshing of divine grace and favor
wherewith they were sustained and confirmed 2 Cor. 4 8, 9.
in the midst of the fire. Nor is there any thing, whither we can refer,
those tremblings of Christ, those groans and tears, in which he was heard,
that desire that the cup might pass from him, but to the imposition of our
sins, and that conflict with the wrath of God, which followed from it. The
death of our Savior is referred to his unspeakeable love toward us, Joh. 14.
Rev. 1. 5. Gal. 2. 20.
13. Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 5. 2, 23. But if he could not but i would, because he was
man, he showed his infirmity in dying, rather then the fervor of his love. For
though Christ had loved us unto death, Soc. lib. 3. de Serve. c. 5.
yet had he not commended his love in dying, if he dyed by condition of nature,
and had not being innocent laid down his life for us mortal, because sinners.
In like manner Christ is said to have Lev. 5. 1. and 10. 17. (...). Gal. 5. 10.
Ezekiel. 18. 20. 2 King. 7. 9. Sir. portavit et ascendere secit. (...), sursum
serre. Luke ^4. 51. sursum ducere. Matthew. 17. 1. Mar. 9. 2. Heb. 7. 27. Jam. 2.
21. Heb. 13. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
carried our sins, and that in his body upon the tree, which in usual phrase
of Scripture is to be punished for our sins, and pay the punishment of our
sins, Isa. 53. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Lev. 19 8. and 20. 17. and 24 15. Numb. 14.
23. and 30. 16. Lam. 5. 7. Ezekiel 18. 20. And such a carrying is described to
which smiting is adjoined, and the chastisement of our peace, from the
translation of all our iniquities upon Christ, Isa. 53. 5. For as it follows
in the same place immediately, He was afflicted, that is, with the punishment
due to sin, which was laid upon him, Isa. 53. 6, 7. Whereunto those passages
of Scripture might be referred, which say, that Christ made his soul an
offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10. that he that knew no sin, was made sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that he has redeemed us from the curs of the Law, being made
a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. in which he must of necessity be understood, who
bears the punishments of sin. And it is against reason, that he should be
said to bear the sins of others, who suffers by occasion of sin only,
unless he bear the punishment of sin, and take it upon himself. For who
will say, he that suffers loss or damage from the fault of a thief, does
bear his sin, when he does not bear the punishment of theft, nor is
punished for it. The Evangelist translates this saying of the Prophet to
corporal diseases, which Christ did not receive upon himself, it is by way of
similitude and Math. 8. 16, 177
agreement in the thing it self, although the manner of the thing be diverse;
as also by such miracles, Christ declared himself to be that Messiah, who was
to bear, and by bearing to take away our sins.

Moreover the Scripture says, Christ died for our sins, 1 Cor. (...).
15. 3. Gal. 1. 4. Heb. 10. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and was delivered to death for
our offenses, Romans 4. 23. and for sinners and wicked, Isa. (...).
53. 6. Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. to be made sin for us, 1 Pet. 3. 18. to
suffer the just for the unjust, which import, that sin was the efficient
meritorious cause of the death of Christ: for sin cannot Psalm 39. 12. Psalm.
73 18, 19. and 10^. 17. Ephesians. 5. ^.
otherwise be the cause of punishment but by way of merit, nor can any man be
said to be punished for sin, but the meritorious cause of punishing is noted
thereby. And those particles applied to other things may note the final cause,
applied to sufferings, they point out the efficient or meritorious only, and
sins deserve affliction per modum paenae, Lev. 26. 39. Deuteronomy. 18. 12. 1 King
14. 16. (...). Matthew. 5. 38. Luke 11. 11. Romans 12. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 15. Heb. 12.
16. 1 Pet. 3. 9. (...) signifies the impulsive cause. Romans 15. 9. 2 Cor. 1.
11. Ephesians. 1. 16. and 5. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 2 Cor. 7. 4. and 9. 2. and 12. 5. 2
Cor. 12. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 4. Jud. ver. 15. Sic Latini, pro beneficijs gratias
agere, ulcisci pro injurijs, etc.
Christ is said to die not only for our sins, but for us; not for our good
alone, but in our room and steed, as the phrase imports, and the one
particle used signifies opposition or subrogation and commutation, Mat. 20.
28. Mar. 10. 45. Joh. 11. 50. Romans 5. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Heb. 2 9. 1 Pet. 2.
2. and the latter, though sometimes it admit a different sense, in this matter
must be expounded by the former, Romans 9. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Christ
died, the Just for the unjust, that is, being just he was substituted for us
unjust, and suffered not only for our good, as the Martyrs may be said to do,
Isa. 53 9, 10. Romans 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 13. The same is
demonstrated by this, that Christ is said to be the Mediator, who gave
himself a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. that by redemption of
transgressions which were under the former Covenant, they that are called might
receive the inheritance, Heb. 9 15. and the mediation it self is joined to the
sprinkling of blood, Heb, 12. 24. so that none other mediation is to be
understood, then that whereby parties disagreeing are set at one. Hitherto it
is to be referred, that we are said to be reconciled to God by the blood of
Christ, Rom 5. 10 11. 2 Cor. 5. 18. Ephesians. 2. 16. Col. 1. 20. whereby our
conversion to God, is not understood, as if we who hated God before, had now
departed there from, and did set our love upon him, but that we which formerly
were under wrath are restored into favor, that which caused that separation
being taken away by the satisfaction of Christ and free condonation of grace.
Therefore Christ is called our Heb. 2. 17. sig. ibi expiati^nem, sedeam quae
fit plac^nd^.
propitiatory, Romans 3. 25. and propitiation, 1 John 2. 2. and 4. 10. not a
testimony of placation, because God in Christ is made propitious unto us, and
not we propitious to God. In Scripture God is said to reconcile the world unto
himself, according to the usual manner of speaking, wherein he that
offends, is therefore said to be reconciled, because as he gave occasion to
hatred, so he has need of reconciliation, and the pacifying of him whom he
has Sophocles in Ajace: (...) Dijs conciliari i. ips^s reddere, prop^tios.
Punitio omnis qua talis, sive impersonaliter spectata causam habet justitiam
Dei. Procata^ctica ver^ causa sunt peccata, itidem impersonaliter and in genere
spectata, sine determinatione punitio vero quae pro alio est, plane
miseri^ordiae divinae opus est: procatarctica vero caus^ sunt peccara nostra
satisf^ctionem exigentia. Voss. resp. cap. 12.
offended: although the reconciliation of them that be offended, be not
excluded.

The deliverance which we obtain by Christ is called redemption, which was
made by the payment of a price, Rom 3. 24. Gal. 3. 13. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb. 9 12.
1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Matthew. 20. 28. Mar. 10. 45. 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. and
redemption made by a price, can be no other then by satisfaction or
substitution, as the Apostle says, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. 1 Timothy 26. Faith and repentance
and preaching of the Gospel come betwixt, that we might obtain spiritual
deliverance from the captivity of sin: but no man will say, that we are
redeemed by them, as by a price whereby we obtain deliverance? In the legal
sacrifices sins were expiated no other way but by substitution: how much more
was Christ, who is the body of those shadows, substituted for the sins of
the faithful? Wherefore the Apostle says, Christ was appointed to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 2. 17. that is, that by
expiating the sins of the people, he might pacify God; in the same sense
wherein the blood of Christ is said to purge the conscience, Heb. 9. 13, 14.
Therefore the Scripture uses those words in this business, which note
recompense and subrogation; as (...) which signifies both to pacify and
reconcile Gen 3. 20 Prove. 16 14. and to recompense or satisfy, 2 Samuel 21. 3.
Exodus 21 30. Psalm. 49. 8. and (...) to recompense or pay, Genesis 31. 39. In the
legal sacrifices there was a typical expiation, but the conscience was not
purged, nor sin taken away, or heavenly Heb. 9. 9 and 10. 4. and 9. 23^.
things sanctified by such sacrifices: but the sacrifice of Christ was
necessary, by which things of so great moment were effected, which was tipified
by the legal sacrifices, and was effectual as a moral cause of Salvation,
before Christ was exhibited in the flesh. And if the Fathers of the ^l^
Testament were saved by Christ, of necessity the satisfaction of Christ was
true and real, for when it was not distinctly understood, it could not profit
them as an example or confirmation of doctrine, but as a real satisfaction
only. If Christ by his death had confirme^ his doctrine only, and not Heb. 5. ^.
made satisfaction, be had not died as a Priest, whose office it is to offer
sacrifice and make atonement: but the Scripture shows plainly, that Christ
is our high Priest, according to the order of Melchizedech, Psalm. 110. 4. Heb.
7. 14, 15. who has offered up himself a sweet smelling sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.
2. and sanctified us by one offering up of himself once for all, Heb. 10. 11,
12. And because the sacrifice of Christ may be considered, either as he offered
Heb. 9. 13, 23.
up himself for all the faithful in general, his sheep, and Church, or as
every particular faithful man is comprehended under that universality, and the
good things purchased for all, tend to the salvation of every singular
believer, God would have the first should be shadowed forth by the anniversary
sacrifice, and some others which were offered for all the people: the latter by
the private sacrifices of every sinner, Lev. 5. Exodus 29. 30. Christ then as
Mediator by his death has made satisfaction for us, and that true, full,
real satisfaction, and not by a certain fiction of Law or divine
acceptilation, as they call it. For why did God exact the bloody death of his
Son, if it had pleased him to rest in any light satisfaction? The Apostle
concludes, the sacrifice of Christ to be necessary, because it is impossible
the blood of Bulls and Goats should do away sins, Heb. 10. 4. which argument
concludes not, if Christ has satisfied only, as it pleased the Father to
accept of his imperfect satisfaction, as if it had been perfect. The
satisfaction of Christ was free, because he was freely given to satisfy, but
the decree of God presupposed to show his mercy and justice, full satisfaction
was necessary: because sin must be punished as the Law requires, or God is
not true as in his promises, so in his threatenings. None other wages is
appointed for sin but death, Romans 6. 23.
hence he that is dead is justified from sin, Romans 6 7. But Christ suffered
death, and by death made recompense to justice for our debt: and in that he
died for sin, he died once, Romans 6. 9, 10. He tasted death, that by death he
might destroy him that had the Heb. 2. 9, 14, 15.
power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their life subject to bondage. But when the Scripture names
death generally, it comprehends all that which God threatened in that sentence,
Thou shall die the death: that penal death, which is the reward of sin, but
not sin it self: which is penal only, not sinful. Other men's debts are
answered diverse ways: some answer them simply as redeemers, some as sureties.
He that answers them as a surety, must pay the Heb. ^. 6.
same sum of money that the debtor owes. Now Christ is not only our
Mediator, but our surety, Heb. 7. 22. and hence the mediation of Christ is
called a propitiation. Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. and the surety is of debt and
justice to make full satisfaction, because he has voluntarily promised it, and
God the Father did in justice exact it. Romans 3. 24, 25. and 8. 32.

In the sufferings of Christ we must consider the circumstances, and substance
of his sufferings. The circumstances, as the person of the sufferer, the cause
of suffering, and efficacy of the passion: in which respect it was more then
the Law required: for the Law did not require that God should die, nor that any
one should die that had not finned, nor such a death, and of such efficacy, as
not only to abolish death, but to bring in life, and that by many degrees more
excellent then that which Adam had lost: but if we respect the substance of
punishment, it was that which the Law required, which he paid of love free and
voluntary, and yet of justice. Justice requires the same sum of debt, the
dignity of Christ's person nothing hindering: and according to justice Christ
made satisfaction. As concerning the substance of punishment, Christ suffered
what was due to us, but in the circumstances, which pertained not to the
substance of the debt, some thing was pardoned, to the dignity of the person.
In this stands the dignity of Christ's person, that he might be fit
meritoriously to pay our debt, so far was it from freeing or acquitting him
for any part of our debt. He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, 2 Cor.
5. 21. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Isai. 53. 4.
When the Scripture speaks so fully, why should humane curiosity limit the
sufferings of Christ, as if they were not fully satisfactory, but by divine
acceptilation only? Christ suffered not every particular punishment that every
particular sinner meets withal: but his passion was a common price paid at
once for all his people, satisfying justice for all their offenses, Romans 5. 19.
Heb. 10. 14. Romans 8. 33. He bore our sins in his body upon the tree. 1 Pet.
2. 24. We are redeemed by his blood. Ephesians. 1. 7. The blood of Christ cleanses
us from all sin. 1 John 1. 6. Phil. 2. 8. Col. 1. 20. He has made peace by
the blood Voss. respons. ad Iudic. Ravens. cap. 6. Robert. Loeus Examen. Eccl.
The saur. effigiet very Sabbath.
of the cross.

Touching the punishments which Christ suffered, they were not ordinary, but
beyond measure grievous, bitter and unsupportable; yea, such as would have made
any mere creature to sink down under the burden of them to the bottom of
hell. For he suffered grievous things from all the things in heaven, earth and
hell. He suffered at the hands of God his Father, and of men; of Jews, of
Gentiles, of enemies insulting, of friends forsaking, of the Prince of
darkness, and all his cruel and merciless instruments. But whereas of the
punishments of sin, some be sins and punishments both, others punishments
only: and some common to the nature of man, others personal growing out of
some imperfection and defect in the virtue and faculty forming the body,
disorder in diet, or some violence offered: and some for sin inherent, others
for sin imputed: Our Savior Christ suffered the punishments that are only
punishments, and not sin, common to the whole nature of man, not personal to
this or that man; the punishments of the sins of other men, not his own, and
that of them that should break off their sins by repentance, not of them that
would sin for ever, if they might live for ever. The whole life of our Savior
was a life of suffering, but his special sufferings were those he endured in
the Garden, or upon the cross. In the Garden he was in an agony: upon the
cross he was pressed with the weight of grievous and unsupportable evils. His
agony was that sorrow, wherein his soul was beset round with heaviness and
fear even unto death. Thus the Evangelists describe it, He began to be
sorrowful, and very heavy. Matt. 26. 37, 38.
Then says he to them, scil. Peter, James and John, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death. He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy,
And says unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful Mar. 14. 33, 34. Joh. 12.
27.
unto death. Now is my soul troubled. His soul was smitten with horror, that
all powers and faculties for a time left their proper functions, and did
concur to relieve nature in that extremity; as when a man has received some
gashly wound, the blood does at first retire to comfort the heart. But this
stay came not from any internal defect, which had been sinful, but from an
external cause, to wit, the horror which fell upon him, as the wheels of a
Watch may cease from motion without any fault in them, when they are stayed by
the hand of the Artificer. He feared also the stroke of the justice of God his
Father, sitting on the Tribunal or Judgment seat, to punish the sins of men,
for whom he stood forth to answer; this he feared, as a thing impossible to be
escaped, in respect of the resolution and purpose of God his Father, that by
his satisfactory death, and no other way, man should be delivered. And he
declined everlasting destruction, as a thing he knew he should escape without
all doubt or uncertaintie of event, though not without conflicting with the
temptations of Satan, and the enduring of many grievous and bitter things.

These passions in Christ were most pure, because he himself was most free
from all taint of sin, as if you put clear water into a clear glass, though
you shake and stir it never so much, it will raise no mud.

The effects of this agony were two; Earnest prayer and bloody sweat. Being in
an agony he prayed more fervently. He Luke 22 44.
fell on his face and prayed: He prayed thrice the same words, O my Father, if
it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, Matt. 26. 39.
not as I will, but as thou will. As the sense of nature and inferior reason
presented death, and the ignominy of the cross unto him, as they are in
themselves evil, without the consideration of any good to follow, he desired
to decline them. But as superior reason considered them with all
circumstances, knowing Gods resolution to be such, that the world should
thereby be saved, and by no other means, he most willingly accepted of them.
Between these desires there was a diversity, but no contrariety: a
subordination, but no repugnance or resistance. Consider Christ in private as a
man, of the same natural affections, desires and abhorrencies with other men,
and the cup as it was very bitter and grievous, and so most justly he feared
and declined it, and could not but decline it, unless he had put off the
nature and affection of man: But consider him in his public relation, as a
Mediator, a surety, a merciful and faithful high Priest, and so he most
willingly and obediently submitted unto it. And this willingness in respect of
his office was much the greater, and the comfort we may draw from thence the
sweeter, because in respect of nature, his will could not but shrink for it.
If nature had not necessarily shrunk, sweat startled, and stood amazed at that
service, Christ had not manifested so much love and free submission to the
command of grace, nor could we have had so much comfortable assurance of the
truth of our redemption thereby: for it is impossible the nature of man should
conflict with the terrible wrath of God, and not dread and tremble. The Apostle
says, Christ in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and Heb. 5. 7.
tears, and was heard in the thing he feared. In the New Testament the word
signifies reverence, Luke 2. 25. Act. 2. 5. and 8. 2. Heb. 12. 28. or
circumspect caution joined with fear. Heb. 11. 7. Act. 23. 10. but fear is
most fit to this place, as it signifies commonly in good Authors, and by the
phrase it self may be confirmed: for he was heard from his fear, as he was
delivered from death.

The second effect of this Agony was a bloody sweat. In a cold night, when
our Savior lay upon the ground, in the open air, no man being near unto him,
no violence offered unto his body, he did sweat clotted blood, in such
abundance, that it streamed through his apparel, and wet the ground. Never was
there sweat like this sweat, nor anguish of soul like this anguish that ^e then
endured. But these I may call the beginnings of sorrow. Upon the cross he
uttered that doleful complaint, My God, my Matthew. 26.
God, why have thou forsaken me? He complains not that his heavenly Father
had forsaken his, but him. Formerly he had wept over Jerusalem, and commended
his Disciples unto the custody Joh. 17.
of his Father, being assured they should be gathered, though for the time
dispersed. But the cause of this lamentation was, that being now in the hands
of his cruel, bloody, merciless enemies, left to endure the extremity of
their rage and fury, his Father for a time withdrew from him that solace he was
wont to find in him. The unity of his person was never dissolved, his
righteousness or graces were never either taken away or diminished: neither is
it possible he should want assurance of future deliverance and present support:
but for a time the Father did withdraw the sense of favor and comfort, that
his humane nature might suffer what our sins deserved. This dereliction was
altogether without sin; because Christ our Savior brought it not upon
himself, but was called unto it, and in the conflict his faith was most firm,
not shaken with any degree of unbelief: in which cases only the want of comfort
is a fault, scil. when we bring it upon our selves, or stain it with infidelity.

It is here objected, that an innocent person ought not to suffer for a nocent,
for guilt is inseparable from sin; The son shall not bear the iniquity of
his Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the son, the soul
that sins the same shall die. Ezekiel. 18. 20.

For the clearing of this objection, we must note, that there is a twofold
manner of guilt, either such as grows out of sin inherent, which is the
deserving of punishment, as it is in us: or such as grows out of sin imputed,
and that not by reason of union natural; as the guilt of Adams sin is imputed
unto us (which manner of imputation likewise is the foundation of punishment
deserved) but voluntary by way of vadimonie and susception. And so guilt is
only a free and willing obnoxiousnesse unto that punishment which another has
deserved. In an ordinary course of providence it is true, the son shall not
bear the punishment of the Fathers sin; because he is altogether personally
distinct, he is not appointed so to do, as Christ was, he is not able to bear
them so as to take them off from his Father, as Christ did ours, and already
has too many of his own to bear: but this was no natural or unchangeable
Law, and if the will of the Son go along with the Father in sinning, it is
not strange, not unusual for him to suffer for his Fathers and his own sin
together, as for the continuation of the same offense. More particularly for
resolution of the question, whether an innocent person may suffer for the
guilty, we must note, first that God out of his dominion over all things, may
cast pains upon an innocent person, as it is manifest he did upon Christ, who
suffered most grievous things, and death it self; And what ground of complaint
could any creature have against God, if he should have created it in fire, and
made the place of its habitation, the instrument of its pain? Do not we our
selves without cruelty, upon many occasions put creatures that have not
offended us, unto pain?

Secondly, it is not universally against equity for one to suffer the
punishment of another sin: We see the Infants of Sodom, Babylon, Egypt, of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were involved in the punishment of those sins of
which themselves were not guilty. The Lord reserveth to himself the punishment
of the Fathers upon the children. Exodus 20. 5. and 34. 7. He punished the
sins of three hundred and ninety years all together. Ezekiel. Lam. 5. 7.
4, 2, 5. Cham committed the sin, and yet Canaan was cursed 2 Samuel 1^. 13, 14.
for it, Genesis 9. 22, 25. The sin was Gehezi's alone, and yet the Leprosy
cleaved not to him only, but to his posterity. 2 King. 5. 27. For the sin of
Saul, his sons are hanged up before the Lord. 2 Samuel 21. 8, 14. Achan
trespassed alone, but he perished not alone, but his sons and his daughters,
and all that he had with him. Josh. 7. 24. The sin of crucifying Christ was the
sin of the Jews in that age alone, and yet wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost, even unto this day, Matthew. 27. 25. 1 These. 2. 16. vid. 1 King. 21.
21. and 14. 10. Judge. 9. 56. 1 King. 2. 33. Jer. 22. 30. And if it be not
unjust to punish one for another fault, and grant impunity to the offendour,
it is not unjust to punish the innocent for those faults, which are remitted to
the guilty, 2 King. 8. 9, 10. 1 King. 21. 21. For it is essential to
punishment that it should be inflicted for sin, but not that it should be
inflicted upon him that has offended.

Thirdly, that an innocent person may thus in justice and equity suffer for a
nocent, there is required (besides the acts of ordination in the supreme, of
submission in the surety, and of consent in Actus cui poena inest, est actus
nocivus: qui nec omnibus, nec in omnes concessus. Quare ut poena sit justa,
requiritur ut actus ipse poenalis sit in potestate punientis: quod ter
contingit, aut antecedenti jure ipsius punientis, aut justo and valido consensu
ejus de cujus poena agitur, aut ejusdem delicto.
the delinquent) first, an intimate and near conjunction in him that
suffers, with those that should have suffered. Several unions and
conjunctions there are, as Politic between the members and subjects in a
state: and thus the people were punished for David's sin. 2 Samuel 24. 14, 17. and
in a commonwealth universally sinful, a few righteous men may as parts of
that sinful society be justly subject to those temporary evils, which the sins
of that society have contracted. See 1 Samuel 12. 25. Natural, as between
parents and children, so the Lord visited the sins of Dathan upon his little
ones. Numb. 16. 27, 33. Valor. Max. de Dion. Siculo. Plutarch. de sera Number.
vindict. Mystical, as between man and wife, so the Lord punished the sins of
Amazia^ the Priest of Bethel, by giving over his wife unto whoredom, Amos 7.
17. And we see in many cases the Husband is liable to be charged and censured
for the exorbitancies of his wife. Stipulatorie and by consent, as in the case
of fide jussores and obsides, who are punished for the sins of others whom they
represent, and in whose place they stand as a caution and muniment against
injuries which might be feared, as we see in the Parable of a Prisoner
committed to the custody of another person. 1 King. 20. 39, 42. So the surety
is punished for the debtor. Possessorie, as between a man and his goods, and so
we find that a man was to offer no beast for a sin-offering, but that which was
his own. Lev. 5. 6, 7. Besides, there is required in the innocent person
suffering, that he have a free and full dominion over that from which he
parts, in his suffering for another. As in suretiship, a man has free
dominion over his money, and therefore in that respect he may engage himself to
pay another man's debt; but he has not a free dominion over himself, or his own
life; and therefore he may not part with a member of his own in commutation,
for another, (as Zaleucus did for his son) nor be (...), to lay down his own
life for the delivering of another from death, except in such cases as the Word
of God limiteth and allows. Now all these things hold in Christ in a special
manner. There is a most near conjunction between him and us. He conversed
amongst men, and was a member of that Tribe and Society amongst whom he lived,
and therefore was together with them under that Roman yoke which was then upon
the people, and in that relation paid tribute unto Caesar: He had the nature of
man, and was subject to all humane and natural infirmities without sin. He
was mystically married unto his Church, and therefore was answerable for the
debts and misdemeanors of his Church. He entered into Covenant, and became
surety for man, and therefore was liable to man's engagements. He became the
possession in some sort of his Church, whence it is that we are said to have
him. 1 John 5. 12. not by way of dominion (for so we are his. 1 Cor. 6. 19.)
but by way of communion and propriety. He was Lord of his own life, and had
therefore power to lay it down, and to take it up. And this power he had
(though he were in all points subject to the Law as we are) not solely by
virtue of the hypostaticall union, which did not for the time exempt him from
any obligations of the Law, but by virtue of a particular command,
constitution, and designation to that service of laying down his life. This
commandment have I received of my Father. Joh. 10. 18. Moreover, he had power
ample enough to break thorough the sufferings he undertook, and to assume his
life, and former condition again. I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it up. And therefore it was most just and righteous, that Christ in
himself innocent, should suffer for us in our selves guilty, which does more
plainly appear, in that all parties are glorified, and all parties are willing
and well-pleased. All parties are glorified: The Father is glorified in the
obedience of his Son. Joh. 12. 27, 28. John 17. 4. The Son is glorified by
the Father. Joh. 17. 5. Heb. 2. 7. crowned with glory: and the sinner
glorified, being received into favor. Ioh. 17. 24. All parties are willing;
the Father is willing, for by his Ordination he appointed Christ unto it. Act.
4. 27, 28. and in his love and compassion bestowed Christ upon us. Ioh. 3. 16.
by his divine acceptance he rested well pleased in it. Matthew. 17. 5. and by
his wonderful wisdom fitted it to the manifestation of his glory and mercy,
to the reconciliation of him and his creature, and to the exaltation of his
Son. The Son is willing, he chearefully submitted unto it. Heb. 10. 9. and
freely loved us, and gave himself unto us. Gal. 2. 20. The sinner is willing,
and accepts and relieth upon it. The sum of all is this, By the most wise,
just, and merciful will of God, by his own most obedient and voluntary
susception, Christ Jesus, being one with us in a manifold and most secret
union, and having full power to lay down, and to take up his life again, by
special command and allowance of his Father given him, did most justly,
without injury to himself, or dishonor to or injustice in his Father, suffer
the punishment of their sins, with whom he had so near an union, and who could
not themselves have suffered them with obedience in their own persons, or with
so much glory to Gods justice, mercy and wisdom. And though the will of God
being ever just, is to us a sufficient cause of what God wills, and the
reason thereof be to us unsearchable: yet in this matter we can assign just
and weighty reasons of this will of God out of the Scriptures. God will not
execute the severity of his Law, because he is merciful, slow to anger, and
ready to forgive. His free and everlasting love, and infinite delight which he
has in mercy, disposes him abundantly to pardon, and exercise loving
kindness in the earth. Exodus 34. 7. Micha 7. 18. Jonah 4. 2. 2 Chronicles. 30. 9.
Psalm. 86. 5. Psalm. 103. 8. Isai. 55. 7. Ier. 9. 24. and 31. 20. Luke 6. 36.
Romans 2. 4. And if the Lord should utterly destroy all men, there should be no
Religion upon earth, as man should everlastingly loose the fruition of God, so
he should likewise loose the voluntary service and subjection of his creature;
John 15. 8. Ezekiel. 33. 11. For these reasons God purposed not utterly to cast
man off, and pour upon him deserved vengeance: but withal he purposed not to
let sin go unrevenged, and that for these reasons.

First, because of his great hatred thereunto. He is of purer eyes then to
behold evil, he cannot look on iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. it provokes abhorrency
in him, Psalm. 5. 6. Zach. 8. 17. Rev. 3. 16. Amos 5. 21, 22. Isa. 1. 13, 14.
And what is more convenient then to testify how much sin is displeasing unto
him, which is done most conveniently by punishment, Exodus 32. 10, 11. Numb. 11.
1. and 16. 22. Joh. 3. 36. Impunity has this in it, that it makes that sins
be l^sse esteemed: as fear of punishment is a ready way to keep men in awe.
They that have written of the relaxation of Proxima sunt idem ac tantundem.
Laws do note, that those relaxations are best, to which some commutation or
recompense is annexed: because by that means the authority of the Law is
preserved, and obedience given to that reason, which was the cause of the Law.

And hence we may gather a second reason, why God would not pardon sin
without satisfaction, sc. his truth and the Law which he had established
against sin, which he will in no wise abolish: one jot or title shall in no
wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5. 18. For it is
altogether undecent, especially to the wisdom and righteousness of God, that
that which provokes the execution, should procure the abrogation of his Laws,
that that should supplant and undermine the Law, for the alone preventing
whereof the Law was before established.

Also God will have men always to tremble before him, and by his terror to be
persuaded from sinning, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. and therefore he reserveth to
himself entire the punishment of sin, that men might always fear before him,
Matthew. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4. The omission of punishment after the publication of
the Law, does detract somewhat from the authority of the Law, with the
subjects: God therefore willing to show mercy to the creature fallen, and with
all to maintain the authority of his Law, took such a course as might best
manifest his clemency and severity, his hatred of sin, care to stablish the
Law, and tender compassion toward them that had gone astray. And hereby the
love of God toward them that are spared is the more illustrious, that he
spared them, who rather then he would not punish sin, would give his only
begotten Son to die for sin.

It is objected again, that God does freely remit and pardon sin, therefore
he willed not that Christ should make satisfaction: because free remission will
not stand with satisfaction. And most sure it is, that God is favorable to our
iniquities, Ier. 31. 34. but God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood. Romans 3. 25. Act. 10. 43. Luke 1. 68, 69, 70.

There is a twofold payment of debt: one of the thing altogether Remissio est
absoluta in qua Creditor sibi satisfieri no^ vult: and conditionata, in qua
Debtor obligatione debiti solvitur at satisfactione aliunde interveniente.
Stegma p. 505. Noxa sequitar caput. Genesis 2. 17.
the same, which was in obligation, and this ipso facto freeth from punishment,
whether it be paid by the debtour himself, or by the surety. Another of a
thing not altogether the same, which is in the obligation, so that some act of
the Creditour or Governor must come unto it, which is called remission: in
which case deliverance does not follow ipso facto upon the satisfaction. And of
this kind is the satisfaction of Christ: for in the rigor of the Law, the
delinquent himself is in person to suffer the penalty denounced. Every man
shall be are his own burden, Gal. 6. 5. In the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall die the death. So that the Law in the rigor thereof, does not admit
of any commutation, or substitution of one for another. And therefore, that
another person suffering may procure a discharge to the person guilty, and be
valid to free him, the will, consent and mercy of him to whom the infliction of
the punishment belongs, must concur, which in respect of the debtour is
remission; and his overruling power Qui solvit hoc velle debet, ut debtor
liberetur. Romans 3 24. Tit. 2. 14. Manet nihil ominus gratuita Dei gratia. 1.
Ratione decreti gratuiti. 2. Ratione doni gratuiti, and 3. Ratione
acceptationis gratuitae: quod tale consiliam invenit quod tale medium dedit,
quod satisfactionem talem acceptavit. Col 2. 13. and 3. 13. Ephesians. 4. 31. See
Act. 25. 11, 16. 2 Cor. 2 7, 10.
must dispense, though not with the substance of the Laws demands, yet with
the manner of execution, which in respect of the Law is called relaxation.
Remission therefore is not repugnant to antecedent satisfaction: but only to
that payment of the thing due, which ipso facto does deliver and set free.

It may be added that of grace Christ was ordained to be our surety, that at
the commandment of grace he made satisfaction, and that his mind and will in
satisfying was, that grace might justly glorify her self in pardoning
offenses, and not that pardon should be given of justice. And so the
satisfaction of Christ is full and perfect, and our pardon is every way free
and gracious. And seeing every one may impose a Law to the act depending upon
his own free will and pleasure, he that prays for another, and he that
admits the payment of one thing for another, may covenant, that remission
shall follow presently, or after a certain time, purely or upon condition. And
this was the will and pleasure of Christ making satisfaction, and of God
admitting satisfaction, and this the Covenant, that God should pardon sin, not
presently in the very time of Christ's passion, but when man is turned unto God
by true faith in Christ, humbly entreating pardon. To forgive sin, is not
opposite to the accepting of that satisfaction which is freely admitted, when
it might be refused, and to which he upon whom the benefit undue is conferred,
does confer nothing.

It is further objected, that Christ satisfied not justice fully, but by divine
acceptilation only: because he suffered but for a time, whereas we deserved to
die eternally.

Sundry answers are made to this doubt. Some say his suffering for a time was
more then if all mankind had suffered eternally, in respect of the excellency
of his person. But the worth and excellency of his person, was neither to
dispense with time, nor grievousnesse of his punishments, but to make the
passion of one availeable for many. Otherwise if it might have dispensed with
one degree of extremity of punishment due to sin, it might also have dispensed
with two, and consequently with all.

Others answer, that the punishments of sin eternally remaining, must according
to the rules of divine justice, be eternal: but it is no way necessary,
neither does the justice of God require, that the punishments of sin repented
of, ceasing and forsaken, should be everlasting. For as Divines note, there are
three things to be considered in sin; the aversion from an infinite and
incommutable good; the inordinate conversion to a finite good, and the
continuing in the same, or ceasing from it: and to these several things in
sin, there are three several things answering in the punishment of it. For to
the aversion, which is objectively infinite, there answers the loss of God,
which is an infinite loss. To the inordinate conversion of the sinner to
things transitory, there answers a sensible smart and grief intensively
finite, as the pleasure the sinner takes in the transitory things he
inordinately loves is finite. To the eternity of sin remaining everlastingly
in stain or guilt, or continuance of it for a time, answers the eternity of
punishment, or the suffering of the same, but for a time. Now our Savior
Christ suffered only for those sins, which he meant to break off by framing
the sinners to repentance, and therefore it was no way necessary for the
satisfying of divine justice, that he should endure eternal punishment.

A third answer is, that Christ suffered for a time, because he suffered to
satisfy, and so to overcome upon the cross, he triumphed meritoriously over
principalities and powers, therefore his sufferings could not continue for
ever, but must have an end. For in suffering he had not satisfied justice, nor
conquered the enemies of our salvation, if he had lien under the punishment of
our sins eternally. But this shows the reason why Christ suffered but for a
time, rather then how his suffering for a time could satisfy the justice of
God for ever, which had deserved eternal death.

The fourth answer is more full and free from exception, that Christ suffered
but for a time, because it was impossible he should be held under of the
sorrows of death, Act. 2. 24. The wicked suffer eternally, because they being
cast under the curse, they cannot deliver themselves, and justice will not set
them free: but Christ in suffering did overcome, and delivered himself, so
that his sufferings continued but for a time. In kind his sufferings were the
same with those, which in us should have continued for ever, Chamier. Tom. 2.
l. 5. cap. 12. Sect 4.
although they did not continue: wherefore? because they had an end not of
themselves, or their own nature, but of the power of Christ. He overcame those
punishments which had been altogether eternal, if he could not have overcome.

Lastly, it is objected, that if God did elect and choose some men to grace and
glory in and through Jesus Christ, Christ needed Synodal. Dord. ubi supra.
not, nor yet could make satisfaction for them; for in as much as they were
beloved of God, we cannot conceive how satisfaction should be needful or could
be made for them. Thus some dispute with great confidence, but little strength.
For this Proposition, God loves whom he has chosen, or to choose is to love,
does admit a double sense: one this, whom God does elect, them he loves, or
wills well unto them, in time to make them actual heirs of grace and glory
in Jesus Christ, and thus it is most true, Illi tantum a part ante ratione Dei
n^gant meritum Christi and effectum electionis illud constituunt, ita ut Deus
prius homines elegisse, postea sic absolute electis Filium tanqua^ salutis
medium d^disse dicatur* St^g^ page 49^
and does not exclude, but infer the necessity of satisfaction; another sense
may be, that whom God does elect, them he does love as made actual heirs of
grace and glory by the influence of his love, and in this, it should exclude
the necessity of satisfaction, but so it is not to be admitted. It is not
absurd to say, the elect are in grace with God in respect of ordination or
appointment; but after are brought into grace by Christ in respect of the
actual collation and communication. When Christ is said to reconcile us unto
God, the meaning is not, that God did then first begin to love, or will well
unto us, as if he did hate and will to damn us before: for then we must admit
a proper change in the purpose and internal will of God proceeding from an
external cause, which is contrary both to Scripture and sound reason: but
whereas formerly we lay under wrath deserved by sin, now we are received into
favor and friendship with God. For reconciliation is a transient act, done in
time, which inferrs a change in the creature reconciled, a change of state, not
of qualities, and follows the obedience of Christ, as the effect the cause,
and which God imparteth to believers. Reconciliation, as the Scripture speaks
of it, imports not any change in God, nor the external good will or love of
God, which remains in himself, and works not any change in the creature: but
a blessing granted to us in time, that we who were the children of wrath by
nature, should be the Sons of God by grace; we who were enemies, and hated in
respect of the effects of wrath, and desert of sin, should be made friends and
dear to God, the enmity being taken away by the blood of Christ. And from
hence we may learn how the new Covenant in many things has the prerogative
above the old. For wherein Moses mediated it was by the power of Christ, but
Christ was that one Mediator, who mediated from his own authority and
immediate power. Moses was called by God and the people, but an imperfect
Mediator, as not a right middle person: but Christ was a fit middle person
both God and man, partaking the nature both of the offending and offended
party, and so a middle person not only in office, but in nature, willing and
fitting to mediate. Moses by reason of his weakness, was neither powerful
with God, nor yet fully compassionate and powerful with the people: But Christ
was man for the whole body of his brethren to prevail for them: and man with
his brethren, to be fully sensible and compassionate, Heb. 2. 17. Again, he
was man with God to present a perfect ransom or price of reconciliation: and
he was God with man to bow them sufficiently to accept the reconciliation
offered. Moses stood in need to mediate for himself, as for the people: but
Christ having no controversy for himself, mediated only for the people, and
has perfected, wherein Moses wanted. For he fully bows and circumciseth the
hearts of his brethren to seek atonement and to walk sutably: He does remove
the guilt of sinfully from the conscience of the offending brethren, Heb. 9 14,
15. He is potent with God to satisfy revenging Gal. 3. 13, 14.
justice by presenting his blood to remove the curse of the Law, that those
which are called might receive the inheritance. He alone has in his own
person performed obedience to the broken Law of God, and fulfilled all
righteousness: and by his cross has cancelled the handwriting that was
against us, and broken down the partition, and slayed hatred and enmity
betwixt the brethren, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. But of this more hereafter. The Fathers
received Heb. 11. 13, 14.
not the promises, but saw them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
saluted them with great sweetness: but under the new Covenant we have recived
the promise, God has sent his Son into the world, borne of a woman, and made
under the Law, and openly manifested him to be the Son of God. And if Gal 4. 4,
5.
the appearing of Christ God and man, did add much to the joy and comfort of
the Saints in glory: the manifestation of Christ in the flesh must add to the
faith and comfort of them, that waited for the salvation of Israel. The
Incarnation of Christ was the day of his Coronation, and of his espousals,
wherein in special manner Cant. 3. 11.
he contracted him unto his Church. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and
behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day
of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of heart. The Fathers
expected deliverance from the curse of the Law, and to inherit the promises in
and through the Messiah: and the Sacrifices did prefigure, and Prophets
foretell the death of the Messiah; but we may well think, the faithful did
not distinctly understand, how the Savior promised, was to satisfy justice,
and by death to overcome him that had the power of death. But in the new
Testament we learn expressly, that Christ is made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, how he satisfied justice by one
oblation of himself, removed the curse of the Law, destroyed him that had the
power of death, purchased the promised Spirit, and ratified all the promises of
the Covenant by his death and bloodshed, Heb. 9. 15.

Thirdly, He is entered into heaven, appears before the Father, and makes
request for his people: unto which there is pre-required a power and
prevalencie over all his enemies, to break through the guilt of sin, the curse
of the Law, and the chains of death, with which it was impossible that he
should be held. And this power of Christ was showed in his Resurrection,
wherein he was declared to be the Son of God with power, Romans 1. 4. and in his
ascension, wherein he led all his enemies captives, Ephesians. 4. 8. and in his
sitting at the right hand of God, far above all principalities and powers,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. All which did make way to the presenting of his Sacrifice
before the Mercy-seat, which is the consummation of it, and without which he
had not been a Priest. We have such an high Priest (says the Apostle) as is
set down at the right hand of the Majesty in the heavens, for if he were on
earth he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests which offer
gifts according to the Law, Heb. 8. 1, 4. Christ our high Priest having offered
up himself an expiatory Sacrifice once for all, by his divine power rose
again from the dead, and is entered into the very heavens, to appear in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. Levit. 16. 11, 15.
It was the same continued action, whereby the Priest did offer without the
holy place, and did then bring the blood into the holiest of all, Heb. 13. 11.
For the reason why it was shed was to present it to the mercy-seat, and to show
it unto the Lord there. Heb. 9. 8. Inchoari potest functio very Sacerdotis
stante* typico Sacerdotio and perfecta esse non potest illo sta^^e Oblatio
peracta in terra perfectissima f^it, sed perfectione partis non perfectione
totius* Aliud est offerre in terra, aliud peracta* oblatione manner in terra.
Heb. 1. 3. and 10* 5, 6 and 9. 1^. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
So Christ's act or office was not ended, nor fit to denominate him a complete
Priest, till he did enter with blood and present his offering in the holiest of
all not made with hands, Heb. 9. 24. And therefore he had not been a Priest if
he should have continued on the earth, for there was another Priesthood there,
which was not to give place but upon the accomplishment of his; for the whole
figure was to pass away when the whole truth was come. Now Christ's oblation
was the truth prefigured in the Priests sacrificing of the beast, and his
entrance into heaven was the truth prefigured in the Priests carrying of the
blood into the holiest of all. And therefore both these were to be
accomplished, before the Leviticall Priesthood did give place.

Some refer this to the oblation of Christ, whereof they make two parts; the
one exp^atory, when Christ suffered upon the cross: the other presentatory,
when he does appear in heaven before God for us: the one of killing or
suffering, the other of ostension: the one finished on earth, when Christ
suffered without the gate: because as no sin, so no punishment can come within
the holy place: the other performed in heaven, satisfaction being Heb. 13. 11,
12.
first made on earth. The first was not a preparation of a Sacrifice, but a
Sacrifice: the latter was not so much a Sacrifice, as the commemoration of the
Sacrifice made: for appearing in heaven is not properly a sacerdotall act,
unless it lean upon the virtue of the Sacrifice performed: the first was an
act of humiliation; the latter. Heb. 10 8, ^^.
of glory: the first performed once for all: the latter done continually: that
the explatory Sacrifice or obtaining of redemption: this the application of
redemption. The Sacrifice consisted in the Videtur etiam spect are
consuetudines Regum and Iudicum inter homines. Reges enim soederati in suis
aulis matuo habent Legatos pacis obsides, qui quamdiu apparent in Regis
conspectu, firma stat confoederatio.
death of Christ alone, the application thereof is grounded upon Christ's death
as its merit, but effected by the life of Christ as its immediate cause. When
the Apostle says, Christ appears before the Father for us, the expression is
borrowed from the custom of humane Courts; for as in them when the Plaintiff
or Defendant is called, their Attorney appears in their name and behalf: so
when we are summoned by the justice of God to defend our selves against those
exceptions and complaints, which it prefers against us, we have an Advocate
with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who stands out, and
appears for us. 1 John 2. 1.

It consists in two things; First, his appearing or presenting of his person
in our nature and in his own, as a public person, a Mediator, a sponsor and
pledge for us; as Judah was both a Mediator to request, and a surety to engage
himself to bear the blame for ever with his Father for his brother Benjamin,
Genesis 43. 8, 9. And Paul for Onesimus a Mediator, I beseech thee for my son
Onesimus, Philem. 9, 10. and a Sponsor, If he has wronged thee, or owes thee
ought, put that on mine account, I will repay it, ver. 18, 19. So Christ is
both a Mediator and surety for us, Heb. 7. 22. and 8. 6.

Secondly, the presenting of his merits as a public satisfaction, for the debt
of sin: for the justice of God would not be entreated or pacified without
satisfaction, now that is for ever, because he shall not cease to appear.

The Intercession of Christ is his gracious will, fervently and immoveably Heb.
7. 25, 28. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25.
desiring, that for the perpetual virtue of his Sacrifice, all his members
might be accepted of the Father, whereunto answers the consent of the Father,
in whose bosom he is, who hears him always, Joh. 11. ^2. and in whom he is
well pleased, Mat. 17. 5. who called him to this office of being as it were
master of Requests in the behalf of his Church, and promised to hear him in
his Petitions. Romans 8. 34. 1 John 2. 1.


This Intercession of Christ is general and particular, for all and every
faithful man. I pray not for the world, but for all that thou have given me,
Joh. 17. 9. for all that shall believe, verse. 20. Simon, Simon, Satan has
desired to winnow you as wheat, but Exodus 28. 21.
I have prayed for thee, Luke 22 31, 32. As the high Priest went into the
Sanctuary with the names of the twelve Tribes upon his breast: So Christ entered
into the holiest of all with our persons in our behalf, and does carry all his
people upon his breast, and presents his desires unto his Father for them.

It is also heavenly and glorious: for our Savior does not fall upon his knees
or prostrate himself before his Father, as in the da^es of his humiliation:
for that is not agreeable to that glory he has received, and to which he is
exalted: but after a manner befitting his glory, does present his good will and
pleasure to his Father, that he may thereunto put his seal and consent. It is
a praying not out of private charity, as the Saints pray one for another in
this life, but out of public office of mediation, by a public person set up,
not only to pray for the Church in general, but to present the prayers of
particular men to God in their behalf; Quia enim pij^ perpetuo littgandum fit
cum Satana, mundo and car^e, ac etiam ipsa lege and ira Dei, ejuso
probationibus ac mora in exaudiendo, ipse Spiritus S. illos consolatur and
instituit, ut Advocatus in foro clientem. Dicitur ergo Paracletus, Alvocatus
and Patro^as, qui suo clienti in per^culo judicij ad ^at eum consclatur,
instituit, pro eo etia^ loquitur and deniq omnibus modis illi patrocinatur.
not out of humility, which is a proposing of requests for things unmerited,
which we expect of mere grace, according to the free promise of God; but out
of authority, which is the desiring of a thing so, as that he has with all a
right jointly of bestowing it, who does desire it.

True Intercession as it is a public and authoritative act is founded upon the
satisfactory merits of the person interceding: He cannot be a right Advocate,
who is not a propitiation too. The Spirit is our Advocate by energie and
operation, by instruction and assistance, as by his counsel, inspiration, and
assistance he enableth the faithful to plead their own cause. But Christ is
our Advocate by office, as he takes upon himself the cause of his Church, in
his own person applies his merits in heaven, and furthers the cause of our
Salvation with his Father. The Spirit makes inter^ellation for men in and by
themselves, emboldening them in their fears, helping them in their
infirmities, when they know not what to pray, and giving them access unto the
Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. Heb. 10. 15. 19. Romans 8. 26. Ephesians. 3. 16. and is their
Advocate, as he leads them into all truth, and teaches them so to plead
their cause, that they have wherewith to defend and comfort themselves, Joh.
14. 16. against the criminations and tyranny of the world, Joh. 16 7 8 But
Christ by his Intercession applies his satisfaction made, and lays the salve
to the very sore. And so the Intercession of Christ implies three things. The
perpetual vigor of his sacrifice; the will of Christ fervently desiring that
all his members might be accepted for the virtue of his sacrifice: and the will
of God resting well pleased with us in his beloved Son.

The Saints on earth pray mutually one for another according to Gods
commandment, not in their own names, or for their own merits, but for the
merits, and in the name of Jesus Christ: but the Intercession of Christ is no
ways reciprocal, he prays for all and every one that is given unto him of
the Father, and that through the virtue of his sacrifice, but they pray not for
him.

This Intercession of Christ is ever effectual, because the Father hears and
answers him, and as he has a power to intercede for us, so has he power to
confer that upon us for which he intercedeth. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. If I go not away the Comforter
will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you, Joh. 16. 7.
Christ as man praying for himself, was heard in that which he feared, though
the Cup did not pass from him: but Christ as Mediator is ever heard in the
particular which he desires.

Many and great benefits come to the Church of God by the Intercession of
Christ Jesus. 1. Hereby the faithful are assured of protection and defense
against the continual temptations, assaults and accusations of all their
spiritual enemies, Satan and the world. Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8. 34. I pray that thou
would keep them from evil, Joh. 17 15.

But are not the faithful subject to evils, corruptions and temptations
still? how then is that part of the Intercession of Christ made good unto us?

For the understanding hereof, we must know that the Intercession of Christ is
a vaileable to the faithful presently, but in a manner suitable and convenient
to the present estate and condition of the Church, so that there may be left
room for another life, and therefore we must not conceive all presently done.
As the Sun shines on the Moon by leasurely degrees, till she come to her
full light; or as if the King grant a pardon to be drawn; though the grant be
of the whole thing at once, yet it cannot be written and sealed but word after
word, and line after line, and action after action: so the grant of our
holiness is made unto Christ at first, but in the execution thereof, there is
line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little; such
an order by Christ observed in the distribution of his Spirit and grace, as is
most suitable to a life of faith, and to the hope we have of a better Kingdom.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, says Christ to Peter, yet we
see it did shake and totter: the prayer was not that there might be no failing
at all, but that it might not utterly and totally fail.

2. Hereby they are assured of the pardon of their daily infirmimities, and
their rising again if they fall. If any man sin of infirmity, he has a
pardon of course granted, for Christ is his Advocate to plead his cause, 1 John 2. 1. If any man slip of weakness, he shall rise again, for Christ has
prayed for him, that his faith might not fail, Luke 22. 31, 32.

3. All the workings and comforts of the Spirit in our hearts which we enjoy,
are the fruits of Intercession. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, or Advocate, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of truth, Joh. 14. 16, 17. who shall lead the faithful into all truth,
and enable them to plead their cause against the calumnies of the devil, and
accusations of the world: who does teach them to sigh and groan unto God for
mercy, speak unto his highness in prayer, furnishes them with wisdom and
prudence in every condition, directs them to grapple in all temptations,
serve God in all estates, raises the desires to heaven, forms Christ upon
the heart, enflameth with the love and comfort of the truth, heals, renews,
reviveth, pres^rveth, strengthens, supporteth, and seals up unto eternal
life.

4. The fourth benefit is free access to the throne of grace, and assured hope
of all blessings here, and heaven hereafter. Seeing then that we have a great
high Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us
hold fast our profession, and come boldly unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 14,
16. And again, This man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for
ever, sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool: from whence the Apostle infers, Having
therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, and having
an high Priest over the house of God, Let us draw near with a Heb. 7. 25.
true heart, in full assurance of says, Heb. 10. 12. -- 23.

5. The prayers and works of the faithful are sanctified and accepted in the
sight of God, the imperfections that cleave unto them being covered and
removed; as the high Priest in the Law was to bear the iniquity of the holy
things of the children of Israel, that they might be accepted, Exodus 28. 36, 38
Christ is the Angel of the Covenant, who has a golden Censor to offer up the
prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8. 3. And this is a benefit which runs through
the whole life of a Christian: all the ordinary works of our calling (being
parts of our service unto God, for in them we work as Servants to the same
Master) and works of mercy and righteousness, are unto us sanctified, and to
the Father made acceptable, not-with-standing the adherencie of sin unto
them, by reason of our imperfections, by the intercession of 1 John 2. 1, 2.
his Son, who has made us Priests to offer our Sacrifices with acceptance
upon this Altar, Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Isa. 65. 7. Phil. 4. 18.

6. The sixth benefit is fellowship with the Father and his Son, I pray for
these, that as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, they also may be one in
us, Joh. 17. 21.

7. Continuance in the state of grace, and strength against sin, so that the
faithful shall not finally be overcome, is the gracious and comfortable effect
of Christ's intercession. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luk
22. 32. Father I will that they also, whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, Joh. 17. 24. Some
may say, in our Saviors prayer for Peter there was somewhat singular. And
every example is singular, and so this as an example: but it contains nothing
singular which is not common to all the faithful, and such as are given unto
Christ of the Father: for then we must say, Christ prayed so for Peter, as he
prayed not for his people who stood in more need of his Intercession then
Peter, (if the matter be weighed according to the judgment of men,) who had
obtained many privileges. And if Peter's faith shall persevere, because Christ
prayed for him, they for whom Christ makes intercession that their faith may
not fail, they shall continue in faith unto the end. If they say, this
privilege was granted to Peter as an Apostle: then it was granted to all the
Apostles: but this privilege was not common to Peter and Judas. It remains
then that it was given to him as a faithful Apostle, and so agrees to all the
faithful with him. And the things which Christ asks for his Apostles are to
be distinguished: for some things are simply necessary to Salvation, as that
they might be saved from evil, and sanctified by the truth; others which
pertain properly to the Apostolical office. Now when Christ asks things
necessary to Salvation, he prays not for his Apostles as Apostles, but as
faithful and beloved. For what things are asked for this or that man, as he
executes this or that office, they properly respect that office: but
whatsoever things tend directly to the salvation of the Soul, are not to be
reckoned amongst the things which are peculiar, but which are common.

Further they object, that Christ ever prayed Christ's Intercession is not for
the faithful as faithful, but as given unto him of the Father: for Christ
has prayed for them that they might believe: Christ's Intercession is not
conditional: for then that condition is purchased by the blood of Christ or
not. If not, then some spiritual blessing is necessary for us, which Christ
has not purchased. If yes, then Christ does not desire his might receive what
he has purchased. If Christ's Intercession be conditional, then what is the
condition, and whether is that purchased by his death, or of our selves.
for the absolute perseverance of believers, but after a sort, and upon
condition. But the prayer of Christ is certain, and not suspended. They for
whom Christ prayed do not love the world, but that they love not the world, is
an effect of Christ's prayers, not a condition required in them that he might
pray for them. Some prayers raci^ly include a condition in him for whom we
pray, as if we pray God to give eternal life to a sinner, we presuppose faith
and repentance: because without faith and repentance life cannot be given, nor
desired: but some prayers presuppose no condition in him for whom we pray, as
when we pray God to give faith or repentance to any man. Now the Intercession
and request which Christ makes for the faithful does presuppose no condition;
for he prays not simply that life might simply be given to the faithful, but
that they might be kept from evil, and if they be kept from evil, they must
persevere in the faith: for to fall from the faith is the greatest evil.
Neither can it be said that Christ prays for them that would persevere, but
he prays that they should persevere: for the object of the thing for which we
pray, must be distinct from the thing it self prayed for. No man would pray
for men to persevere if they do persevere: but rather that they might
persevere, which otherwise would not. Yet they reply, Christ prays that his
Apostles might be kept from evil, as he had kept Judas. Joh. 17. 12. Belike
then Peter had no greater assurance of his recovery, nor the rest of the
Apostles of their perseverance in the faith, then Judas had. Judas was given to
Christ in respect of his office and ministry, but not as an heir of
Salvation, or as the faithful are said to be given; The particle translated
But, in that clause ( But the child of perdition) is not ever an exceptive, but
an adversative in many places; as (...).
Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but
by the faith of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 12. 4. Which was not (...).
lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but only for the
Priests. See Gal. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 17. Rev. 9. 4. and 21. 27. And (...) Psalm. 1.
2, 4. Genesis 18. 15.
the Hebrew particle im lo and ki im, which the Septuagint turn (...), Genesis
22. 26. (...), Genesis 24. 38. Isai. 59. 2. and (...), 2 King. 5. 17. is used
adversatively. And (...), which the Syriac Interpreter uses, is now and then
put for an exceptive, in which sense usually (...) follows it, but without
it, it is most commonly an adversative. For the Sir. (...) is compounded of
(...), and Pro nobis unicus interpellat in coelo, praestat cum patre quod
postularat a Patre: quia Mediator est and Creator: Mediator ut poscat, Creator
ut tribuat. Smaragd. in Act. Apost. cap. 10.
(...), and is the same with the Hebrew Im lo. And so in this place, Judas is
opposed to them that were given unto Christ, and not excepted from that number,
as if he had been given also. We may therefore conclude that our Savior prayed
for the certain perseverance of them that were given unto him, or that they
might be kept from evil, and that he was heard in that which he desired.

Fourthly, Christ being advanced at the right hand of his Father, does exercise
his Kingly office, both for the comfort of his chosen, and the bridling and
repressing of his and their enemies. This is noted by his sitting at the right
hand of the Father: which was foretold by the Prophets, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
See Deod. in Psalm. 110. 1.
Psalm. 110. 1. Act. 2. 34. Matthew. 22. 43, 44. Luke 20. 42. and by our Savior
himself: Ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power. Mark
14. 62. And accordingly it was accomplished, This man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. Heb. 10.
12. Thus Christ is said (...)
to stand at the right hand of God. Act. 7. 56. to be at the right (...).
hand of God. Romans 8. 34. 1 Pet. 3. 22. to sit at the right hand of God. Mark
16. 19 to sit on the right hand of the power of God, Luke 22. 69. and to sit
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 1. 3. The right and left
hand are proper differences of corporal positions: but figuratively the right
hand is put for power, strength, counsel, work, aid, love and fidelity; as
Psalm. 26. 10. Their right hand is full of bribes. Psalm. 144. 8. 11. Their right
hand is a right hand of falsehood, that is, either confidence in their own power
will deceive themselves, or they will deceive others to whom they promise
succor and assistance. 1 Samuel 14 19. Is not the hand of Ioah with thee in all
this? Gal. 2. 9. They gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.
And being applied to God it notes his power, strength, aid, Majesty, glory,
sovereignty, and divine authority. Psalm. 44. 3. Thy right hand, and Isai. 48.
13. right hand to span the heavens.
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto
them. Psalm. 77. 10. This is mine infirmity, but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High: where we find Gods hand, that is, his power
opposed to the infirmity of his servant. My infirmity and weak faith made me
apt to sink under the sense of Gods displeasure, but when I called to mind the
experiences of Gods former power in like distresses, I recollected my spirits,
and was refreshed again, Psalm. 89. 13. Strong is thy hand, and high is thy
right hand. Psalm. 20. 6. He will hear him from his holy heaven, with the
saving strength of his right hand. Psalm. 21. 8. Thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee. Psalm. 118. 16. The right hand of the Lord is exalted, the
right hand of the Lord does valiantly. Psalm. 17. 7. Show thy mavelous
kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in
thee. Psalm. 48. 10. Thy right hand is full of righteousness. Psalm. 138. 7. Thy
right hand shall save me. Psalm. 139. 10. Even there shall thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me. Hab. 2. 16. The cup of the Lords right hand
shall be turned unto thee.

And God strengthens, and helps and upholdeth his people by the right hand
of his righteousness. Isai. 41. 10. that is, by his power and faithful
promises, which in their weakness strengthens them, in their fear and flagging
helps them, in their sinking and falling upholds them. Therefore also Gods
right hand is called the right hand of Majesty, Heb. 1. 3. and the right hand
of power. Luke 22. 69.

To sit properly betokens a site of body opposite to standing, or moving: but
figuratively it signifies to rest, stay, dwell, inhabit, rule or govern, as
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after,
that I may sit, or dwell, in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. 1
King. 1. 30. He shall sit upon my See Luke 24. 49. Ruth 1. 4. Matt. 23. 2.
throne in my stead. Prove. 20 8. A King that sits in the throne of
judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes. Isai. 16. 5. And in m^rcy
shall the throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in truth. To stand or
sit at the right hand is an usual phrase in Scripture. By the former diverse
things are not^d; First, to resist, oppose, or (...)
hinder the endeavors of any one; Psalm. 109. 6. Let Sat^n stand at his right
hand, scil. to stay or hinder that it might not move, to infringe, or weaken
his endeavors. Zech. 3. 1. And he showed me Joshua the high Priest standing
before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist
him.

Secondly, to assist, defend, protect against enemies and manifold Vid. 1 Chronicles. 6. 30. (...) Psalm. 16. 10.
dangers, whereunto men are subject. He shall stand at the right hand of the
poor, to save him from those that cond^mne his soul. Psalm. 109. 31. I have
set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be
moved.

Thirdly, they are said to stand at the right hand, that obtain the next
degree of honor with him at whose hand they are said to stand. Psalm. 45. 9.
Upon thy right hand did stand the (...)
Queen in gold of O phyr.

For the second, Great Kings and Princes do set them at their right hands,
whom they specially love, favor, or honor; and whom they mind to advance to
the chief degrees of power and authority under them, or to be as it were in
their stead, and in office to represent their person; The King rose up to meet
Bathsheba, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his Throne, and caused
a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and she sat on his right hand. Ad
dextram Dei sedere, est proximam post Deum potesta. tem habere. Verbum sedere
Regni significat potestatem. Hieron. in Ephesians. cap. 1.
1 King. 2. 19. To sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give,
but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. Matthew. 20.
21, 23. By Christ's sitting at the right hand of his Father, is noted that great
honor and glory, plenitude of power, and judiciarie office or dominion, which
God the Father has given unto his Son, after his manifestation in the flesh,
in his Nativity; and justification by the Spirit, in his Resurrection: for then
amongst other dignities, he was received up into glory. 1 Timothy 3. 10. It may be
described, the highest and supreme degree of Christ's exaltation, wherein he
has received of the Father, excellent glory, dignity, power and dominion, and
is actually made the head of his Church; and Lord and Ruler of all things both
in heaven and earth. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God,
Angels, and authorities, and powers, being made subject unto him. 1 Pet. 3. 22.
He has s^t him on his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities and power, and ^ight, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come: And has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the
Church. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. Thou have put all things in subjection under him,
he left nothing that is not yet put under him. Heb. 2. 7, 8, 9. Unto which of
the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand. Heb. 1. 13. which the
Apostle expounds, He must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. 1
Cor. 15. 25. By this sitting at the right hand of the Father, not the propriety
of his humane nature; but the exceeding glorious state of his person is
signified. We have such an high Priest, who is set on the right hand of the
throne of the Majesty in the heavens. Heb. 8. 1. Set down at the right hand
of the throne of God. Heb. 12. 2. His divine nature could not possibly receive
any intrinsecall improvement or glory, all fullness of glory essentially
belonging thereunto: but so far forth as it was humbled for the
administration of his office, so far it was re-advanced. He emptied and
humbled himself, not by emptying and putting off his divine glory, but by
suffering it to be over-shadowed with the similitude of sinful flesh, and to
be humbled under the form of a servant: and he is magnified at Gods right
hand, as he does manifest and show forth his divine glory in his humane nature,
which before was covered and shadowed therewith, as with a veil. And how-ever
we cannot say the Deity or divine nature was exalted in any other sense then by
evident manifestation of it self in that man who was before despised, and
accused as a blasphemer, for that he made himself equal with God, yet by
reason of the communication of properties from one nature to another in the
unity of one person, it is true that as God saved the world by his blood, and
the Prince of life was crucified, and the Lord lay in the Grave, so God was at
the right hand of Majesty exalted again. The humane nature of Christ is most
highly exalted, as he has obtained a new eminency and dignity over all
creatures, which in respect of his humane nature he never had before: he has
an ample and immediate claim to all that glory which might in the humane
nature be conferred upon him. This glory, dignity and dominion Christ received
from his Father according to his eternal decree and Covenant. He sits at the
right hand of his Father, and from his Father he received his power, authority
and rule.

Christ is a King both by the providence, and by the good will and immediate
consecration of his Father. The Father loves the Son, and has given all
things into his hand. Ioh. 3. 35. He judges Dan. 7. 14. Matthew. 11. 27. Joh.
17* 2.
no man, but has committed all judgment to his Son. Ioh. 5. 22. that is,
has entrusted him with the actual administration of that power in the Church,
which originally belonged unto himself, He has made him to be Lord and
Christ, Act. 2. 36. and raised him up to sit on his throne, ver. 30. Him has
God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel. Christ's natural Kingdom does belong unto him as God
coeffentiall and coeternall with the Father. Christ's dispensatory Kingdom is
his by donation as Mediator. Matt. 18. 19. Rev. 1. 1. Dedit autem haec Jesus
Christo, quatenu^ Med^atori, nou ut coessentiali filio. Joh. 17. 5. Haec
ordinem magi^ docent, quo Deus cognitione^ Ecclesi^ impertit, quam origi^em
scienti^ respe^^ ^ilii.
Act 5. 31. He has ordained him to be a Judge of quick and dead. Act. 10. 4^.
He has appointed him over his own house. Heb. 3. 2, 6. He has crowned him,
and put all things in subjection under his ^^it. Heb. 2. 7, 8. He has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name. Phil. 2. 9. Therefore he
calls him my King, set up by him, upon his own holy hill, and that in the
virtue of a solemn decree. Psalm. 2. 6, 7. Therefore to sit on the right hand
of the Father does not note glory and dominion properly divine, which does
belong to the Son as coessentiall and coeternall with his Father, and is his
by nature: but glory and dominion next unto that which is essentially divine,
which belongs to Christ as Mediator, and which is his not by nature, but by
donation and unction from his Father, being made the Head of his Church, a
Prince of Peace, and King of Righteousness. This glory and dominion was given
unto Christ: and so was not that eternal glory, natural and essential, which
he had with his Father before the foundations of the world. This glory Christ
had not before his ascension into heaven: but the other as it is natural, so
it was from everlasting. Saint Paul and Peter do construe it by reigning
immediately over every creature, till the Mystery of our redemption shall be
finished, 1 Cor. 15. 25. Psalm. 110. 1. The setting Christ in the throne of
Majesty, Heb. 1. 3. and 8. 1. and 12. 2. at the right hand of the throne of
God, the making of him Christ and Lord, Act. 2. 35, 36. and 5. 31. It is not
then Si sessionen^ Christi non pro jure tantum regende ecclesiae, sed pro ipso
regnandi actu accipiamu^, cooperatio illo, de qua agit^r, part ipsius sessionis
recte vo^^bitur. Mart. de person. Christ. p. 11 87. Psalm. 110. 1. Joh. 5* 27.
the might of divine sovereignty over the creatures which is given unto him,
for this does so follow the nature of God, that it is necessary with every
person that has this nature. This the Son could not relinquish, this he cannot
be taken unto, as which does necessarily agree to him, as God blessed for
evermore. What is it then? A right of executing immediately and in a manner
appropriate to this person, the sovereign dominion of God, over every
creature. This sovereignty is given to the person of the Son both as God and
man now ascended: as God, for it is a power which none that is a pure creature
can take or execute: As man, because it is given him now ascended into heaven
with his humane nature, and is to be executed by him as man; for his manhood
does concur as an instrument working with his Godhead in the administration
of it.

The meaning then of this phrase is not to be admitted to Neque per ejusdem
essentiae communicationem, neque per physicam aliquam transfusionem se^
transitionem ^e subjecto in subjectum, sed per solam ejusdem personae (...).
equality to the divine nature, for this Christ ever had as God, and could not
but have: neither to be admitted into the divine blessedness setledly to enjoy
it: for Christ as God ever had and could not but have that essential
beatitude. Neither does it import thus much, That the humane nature of Christ
is elevated to this honor, that it may freely use the divine Attributes,
omniscience, omnipresence, omnipotency, so as to become by them omniscient,
omnipresent, omnipotent no less properly then the divine, though after a
manner far otherwise; the divine nature being thus by natural necessity: the
humane being thus by union with the divine, by gracious communication of these
unto it, with liberty to Non essendo, sed habendo, non (...) sed (...), non per
naturam, sed per gratiam, non in seipsa, sed persona (...), etc.
use them for the perfecting of it self. So that according to this opinion,
the humane nature of Christ is made omnipresent with the omnipresency of the
divine nature, not as a thing subjectively inhering in it, but so really
communicated with it, that it is made truly omnipresent by it, though the
divine Attribute never go forth of the nature of God, in which as the proper
subject they grant it immoveably inherent. The ground of this error is, that
they suppose upon the union of the two Vrsin. tom. 2. de lib Concord. cap. 8.
p. 598. Inseparabilis unio non inducit coextensionem duarum in Christo
naturarum: quippe quarum una finita est, altera infinita. T^t^ Christ^^ sed non
totum Christi est ubique* Sicut caro habet immensitatem, i. arcte c^pulata est
immenso verbo, non minus verbum habet finitionem, i. arcte unitum est carni
fiaitae. Martia. de person. page 637. Dici de ^liquo requirit inesse: ergo si
vere praedica^tur de humana natura, vere etiam eide^ inesse ^p^rtet, sive per
naturam, sive per gratiam, sive ut in subjecto primario sive secundari^.
natures in Christ a real communication of divine Properties to follow, as
that the humane nature is made truly omnipotent or omniscient, not by any
confusion of Properties, nor yet by any bare communion and concourse of it to
the same effect, each nature working that which belongs to it with communion
of the other, but by a real donation, by which the divine omnipotency does so
become the omnipotency of the humane nature, that it may work omnipotently with
it, no less then the divine nature does it self. But the union cannot cause
the humane nature partake more in the Properties of the divine, then it causes
the divine partake in the Properties of the humane. Again, if a true and real
communication did follow of divine attributes, it must needs be of all, as
eternity and infiniteness, seeing these are the divine essence, which can no
way be divided. Beside in the union of soul and body which is personal, the
life of the soul is not communicated with the body, but an effect of it only.
And to what end should created gifts serve, when now more noble Properties do
enter? Not to mention that infinite perfections cannot perfect finite natures,
no more then reasonable perfections can make perfect unreasonable creatures.
Finally, this opinion makes the divine Properties become instrumentary
faculties as it were to a finite nature.

The place where Christ fits at the right hand of his Father, in respect of his
Humanity, is in heaven: because where that is, there it is also inwardly
glorious in it self, and has in it self, Luke 24. 51. Mark 16. 19. Hebr. 4.
14. Act. 1. 11. 1 ^e^. 3. 22.
as in a subject, his power, and works by that power within the sphere of it
finitenesse, not severally from the word, but with it, and in it. He is at the
right hand of God in the heavens, Ephesians. 1. 20. in the highest places, Heb. 1.
3, 8. above, Col. 3. 1. This his Sovereignty is a consequent following on his
Ascension into Heaven. Look as Kings are crowned in the chief Cities of their
Kingdoms, and keep their residence in their Palaces near unto them: so it was
decent that our Savior should be crowned in this heavenly Jerusalem, and keep
his residence as it were in his heavenly Mansion. There Christ sits at the
right hand of God, where he appears for us, where he makes intercession for
us: But Christ appears for us in Heaven: Heb. 9. 24. and 8. 4. and in Heaven
he makes request for us, and from Heaven we 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Isai. 66. ^.
expect the Lord Jesus. Phil. 3. 21. God is infinite, Heaven is his throne, and
the earth his footstool: but the humanity of Christ is finite, and not every
where present: Christ is ascended above these visible heavens, above them and
without them, but he sits at the right hand of the Father in the highest
heavens, above them, not without them. So the Cherubims were over the Arc
Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. Heb. 9. 5.
of the Covenant, and yet they stayed upon the Arc, as the place. Heaven is
one thing, heavenly glory another, (...). Exodus 25. 21, 22. Heb. (...) Sept.
(...), est id, quod (...) seu (...), in coelo est, Heb. 9. 23. Heb. 8. 4. Ita
coelum dicitur (...). a Mac. 3. 39. Job 22. 12. Sept. (...), and 16. 19. (...).
Isai. 33. 5. Sept. (...). al. (...). 1 Cor. 15. 20. corpora (...). Ephesians. 2. 6.
Ephesians. 6. 12. and 2. 2. Joh. 3. 11, 12. Ignat. Epist. 11. Psalm. 68. 34. When a
finite nature is in heaven, it is not in earth. Christ is not so supra omnes
coelos, ut sit extra illos, and non in eis: extraterras tamen; quia mundum bunc
reliquit. Eidem carni duplex isque contrarius existendi modus tribui non
potest, sc. localis and illocalis, seu physicus and hyperphysicus.
as earth and earthly misery. Heb. 11. 13. Joh. 14. 2. But whilst we say,
Christ is in heaven, his presence in earth, in the Church, in the midst of his
enemies is not excluded. For the same Christ, who is man, is also God and every
where. Christ in his body is in the heavenly and triumphant Church, absent from
the earth: by his infinite Deity he is present together in the earthly militant
and heavenly. But concerning his Body we may truly conclude, because he is in
heaven, therefore it is not every where: for Christ cannot be said to be made
every where in the heavens, without a contradiction, no more then to be made
infinite within limited bounds of being. This being taken for granted, that
heaven can signify nothing but a place limited for the extent of it. Christ as
God and man has power of rule over all things, by the essence of his Deity he
is every where; by the essence of his humanity now he is in heaven: but he
rules every where by the ministeries of his domination. Where as man at the
right hand of the Father, there he is said to be as man in respect of place:
and if where he sits as ruling, there also he be in all places in his body, he
is also in his body out of his body: then which nothing is more absurd. Christ
is received into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, by a mediatory
action, which he executes according to both natures, the word working what
pertains to the word, and the flesh what appertains to the flesh. Christ is
Mediator, as God and man: and glory has redounded unto him as God and man:
and living in this glory he rules and governs his Church as God and man. He
ascended into Heaven in his humanity: he sits at the right hand of God as
Mediator in respect of both natures; he works together with the Ministers of
the word by his divine and every where present efficacy.

The first thing implied by Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father, is
the filling of his humane nature with supernatural gifts of knowledge, power,
etc. and whatsoever does any way pertain to the administration of his office.
God, his God has anointed Psalm 45. 7. Heb. 1. 9.
him with the oil of gladness above his fellows. In respect of us these
gifts may be called infinite, but simply they are not, because they are things
created, the effects and works of the holy Spirit, Joh. 3. 34. Isa. 11. 2. Men
sura est divisio quaedam donorum: at in Christo plenissima copia and ubertas
Ephesians. 4. 7. Romans 12. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 11. So (...). Labor immensus. Ov. and
(...), dolor immensas Senecae dicuntur. Joh. 1. 16. Non deplendo aliquidex
ipsius neque imme^sitate neque dimensione, sed implendo nostra^ indigentiam ab
ipso.
absolutely they are finite, comparatively infinite. He received the Spirit
above measure, that is, the whole Spirit, all the gifts of the holy Spirit, in
higher degree then any creatures, men or Angels, in full abundance. That is
said to be done in measure which is done sparingly, moderately, in proportion:
for he that gives bountifully or largely does not measure or number what he
gives, but powers out copiously, as we say, from the full heap or with both
hands. And that which is plentiful, abundant, full, is said to be above
measure, not that simply and absolutely it is infinite, but in comparison. By
that which is given, and not by measure, not that which is infinite, but that
which is whole and entire is signified. And of his fulness we all receive,
grace for grace: we so receive of his fullness, that his sufficiency is no whit
diminished: our want is filled by him, but his fullness is not emptied by us.
The Sun is not greater, if it be beheld of many, not the less, if of fewer:
the same is true of the righteousness of Christ imputed. The Sun does not
decay by motion; an Angel is not wearied with the service of God; Christ man
is not wearied with the care of the Church, nor his store and plenty wasted
with that which he does every day impart unto his Church, not as a material
beginning, but as an efficient. In himself Christ shall ever have sufficiency,
and in respect of us perpetually redundance. But the same wisdom and
holiness, which Christ has in himself he does not infuse into us, but he does
work in us by his efficacy, wisdom and holiness answerable or
proportionable in a sort. Numb. 11 25.
With such gifts we are adorned as our head, but not with so great. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Christ is the anointed, and does anoint us: but we are only anointed, the
redeemers of others we are not. The fountain of grace is in Christ alone; the
stream flows to the faithful: but the stream is from the same fountain,
though less then it. Christ is anointed above his fellows. The things here
compared are Gal. 4. 6. Psalm. 45 7. (...) Chald. Plus seu amplius prae
consortibus Vulg. prae particibus. Sept. (...). Sym. (...) Vox Gr. and Heb sig.
participationem quamcunque rei alicujus pluribus communi^. Heb. 7. 13. and 2.
14. 1 Cor. 10. 21. Heb. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 9. 12.
Christ and his fellows, and the mean wherein they are compared is the
anointing: for which the Lord is called Christ, and we Christians: together
anointed, not together anointing. We are like to Christ, and shall be liker
unto him, but equal in dignity we are not, nor never shall be. Concerning his
office Christ has no fellow, he alone is Mediator: as concerning his person,
there is none in heaven or earth, who dares to boast that he is the fellow of
Christ: But according to his humane nature, the faithful are his fellows, whom
he does acknowledge for brethren. Our union with Christ, and the union of the
humane nature with the Word differ in kind and in very deed: but both these are
freely effected of God, and the one is like to the other, although the one do
far excel the other. Christ is anointed as our head with most abundant
grace: we as his members in degree convenient for us.

The fullness of grace is of two sorts: First, in respect of the grace it
self: And secondly, in respect of him that has it. The fullness of grace in
respect of grace it self, is then, when one attaineth to the highest and
uttermost of grace, both quoad essentiam and virtutem, intensive and extensive:
in the essence and virtue of it intensively and extensively, that is, when he
has it as far forth as it may be had, and to all effects and purposes
whereunto grace does or can extend it self; as he is said to have life
perfectly, or the fullness of life, that has it, not only in the essence, but
according to all the operations and acts of life, sensitive, intellectual,
rational, spiritual and natural. This kind of fullness of grace is Tho. Sam.
T^e^. par. ^. qu 7. Art. 9.
proper to Christ only. The fullness of grace in respect of the subject or him
that has it, is then, when one has grace fully and perfectly according to his
estate and condition, both intensively to the uttermost bound that God has
prefixed to them of such a condition, and extensively in the virtue of it, in
that it extends to the doing and performing of all those things that may any
way pertain to the condition, office, or estate of such as are of his place
and rank. Or we may say, there is a fullness according to measure, the
fullness of a measure or vessel, a fulness for themselves only, a fullness
of activity, courage and resolution: and so Luke 1. 15. and ^ 55. Act. 6. 3. 1
King. 7. 1^.
John the Baptist, Steven and others are said to be full of the holy Ghost, of
wisdom and understanding. But fullness without measure, like the fullness of
light in the Sun, or water in the sea, which has an unsearchable sufficiency
and redundancy for the whole Church, is proper to Christ alone. So that as he
was furnished with all spiritual endowments of wisdom, judgment, Ephesians. 4. 8.
Isa. 11. 2 and 61. 1.
power, love, holiness, for the dispensation of his own office: So from his
fulness did there run over a share and portion of all his graces unto his Church.

Certain it is our Savior from the very Col. 2. 3. Christ as man knows God
more fully then all the creatures, though not so fully as God is known of
himself. But the Apostle speaks not of the manhood of Christ only, but of
his whole person; nor of his manhood as in the time of his humiliation, but of
Christ now glorified. In every age Christ had actually given him all such gifts
as might fitly stand with the mystery of his humiliation. Luke 2. 52.
time that he took our nature was perfectly sanctified, and received the
Spirit above measure: but the personal union did not endow the humane nature
with the real titles of the divine; otherwise Christ's strength as man should
have been infinite from the womb: and his body should have been every where.
And it would be less unreasonable to say, that his body is at this day
infinite, and his humane nature every where, then that his wisdom or knowledge
as man, should have been infinite, or as great whilst he was in the womb as
now it is. If the divine nature did not communicate his infinity to the humane,
nor make the Son of God so complete a man for strength or ability of body from
the womb, as at thirty years he was, what reason have we to imagine, that our
blessed Lord and Savior did not as truly grow in wisdom and knowledge, as he
did in strength and stature of body. Simple nescience can be no sin in any
child, nor in any man, unless it be of those things which T^^ fuit corpus
unitum D^^tati, quam anima. Heb. 5. 8. Obedientiam didicit ex ijs quae passus
est, quam sc. res ardua and gravis sit, in tam ac^rba and ignom^n^osa morte
sufferen^a Deo par^re. Mark 13 32. Man. 2^. ^9.
he is bound to know: but proficiency in wisdom and knowledge is to the Sons
of men a praiseworthy perfection: which must not be denied unto our Lord and
Savior in his infancy or his youth, no more then he is to be robbed of any
royal attributes now he is made King. That he was without all stain of sin,
the most holy Sanctuary of the most holy and blessed God, is steadfastly to be
believed. But that he had the same measure of knowledge at his circumcision
which he had and gave proof off when his Parents found him in the Temple, or
at his Baptism, as since his resurrection and ascension he has, this the
Scripture testifies not. As man he was ignorant of the day of judgment, which
now in heaven he knows, as all other things pertaining to his office. However
therefore our Savior had the habit of all knowledge from the beginning, yet he
had not the act and use of it. That which some See Maldonat. in Luke 2 40. Quod
voluntatem concernit, omnes virtutes ta^e incrementum in ea accep^runt, quale
in creaturam cadere potest Jun. Th^ss. Theolog. 29.
answer, that Christ by infused knowledge knew all things, and after attained
another kind of knowledge, which they call acquisite is not so fit, because
knowledge acquired and infused of the same things is of the same nature and
condition, and two forms or qualities of one kind cannot be in the same
subject.

The second thing implied in Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father is
to be admitted into divine blessedness, setledly to enjoy it. Christ as God
ever had, and could not but have that essential beatitude: and that
blessedness which he receives as man is not to have end. The good that is in
an intellectual nature is of two sorts: the one of virtue, the other of sweet,
joyful and pleasing delight: And though both these concur sometimes, as in
the fruition of God in heaven, wherein the perfection of virtue, and fullness
of joy and delight do meet together: yea and though every thing that is
virtuous be delightful, yet it is not so much the height of virtue, as of
delight, that is judged happiness. Now our Savior Christ was joined to God by
the affection of virtue or justice, and Vt mori corpus Christi potuit, and
tamen cum unionem, tum eff^ctus quosdam De^tatis participare: Ita and mori
mortem suam and derelinqui anima potuit, and tamen uni^ne sua, and hujus
unionis effectis frui. Can ^^^ (...) lib. 12. cap. 1^. Ma^donat in Mat. 26. Isa
5^. 4. Joh. 4 6. H^b. 4. 15. Joh. 14. 23. Prove. ^5. ^5. Chamier tom. 2. lib 5.
cap 20. Nullus comprehensor est obnoxious ul^^s calamitatibus.
could not be divided or separated from him, no not for a moment, because he
could not but love him, fear him, trust in him; but by the affection that
see^eth pleasing content in enjoying those ineffable delights and pleasures
that are found in God our Savior as man might, and was for a time divided from
God. Moreover our Savior Christ in his life time here on earth, so restrained
and kept within the closet of his secret Spirit, the happiness that he enjoyed
in seeing God, that it should not spread farther, nor communicate it self to
the inferior faculties of his soul, or impart the brightness of it to the
body, but it was subject to misery and passion. The godly in this life do taste
not only some hope of heavenly life, but the first fruits of this heavenly joy.
The Church and every Saint is heaven: the soul of the righteous is heaven. Our
Savior was both viator and comprehensor, blessed in this life, with that
blessedness, which is not to be had but in heaven: but now our Savior
advanced on the right hand of God, is admitted into that incomprehensible,
glorious, settled blessedness, never to suffer the least eclipse for one
moment, which does communicate it self to Cham panst. tom. 2. lib 4. cap 4 and
5. Man. 17. 2. 1 P^t 1. 11. Heb. 12. 2 Phil. 3. 21. Vere contr^stari, dolere,
and pati non potest, cui divina ^e^t^tud^ and impassibilitas vere and reali^er
communicata fuit. Vrsin. Tom. 2. co^f^ss de person. Christ. page 407.
all powers of soul and body, that it is and shall remain for ever
incorruptible, impatible, immortal, increased with strength and nimblenesse,
shining with brightness and glory celestial and divine.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ as man is taken to have prerogative before every
other creature. For this phrase of setting at his right hand, notes the
pre-eminence of him, as next to God himself: that look as one made a King,
has a dignity above all persons named in his Kingdom, Dukes, Earls, Lords:
So our Savior taken up as man to this kingly dignity, must needs be in
pre-eminence before them. It is no wonder, for this nature essentially
appertains to that person, which made all these things, visible and
invisible. Again, every person, the nearer he is in conjunction of blood to an
earthly King, the more he has prerogat^ve Col. 1. 16 Joh. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 2, 3.
Revel. 4 ult.
above others, more dis-joyned: so this created nature, seeing it is made one
personally with God, by how much it is more nearely united, by so much it is
fit that it should have prerogative before others. Not to speak, that being
heir of all things, it is meet that he should be before all, who are but parts
of his inheritance, and having more excellent endowments, I mean created gifts
than any other, it is meet he should have the first place before all other.
Christ is set far above all principality, and power, and might, and
domination: which words are commonly understood of the Angels, but the two
first words may fitly be interpreted as names of excellency found in this
present world. For principalities and powers when they are put for angelical
natures, they are not termed so simply, but with an addition to the place; but
these words put for humane excellencies, we read them simply, without any
thing added. And this distribution of power named in this world, and in that to
come, Ephesians. 1. 20. (...), principatus dicuntur. Romans 8 38. Luke 12 ^^.
Significat etiam turmas. 1 Samuel 11. 11. Ephesians 3. 10 Sept. Job 1. 17. and 6. 1^.
Sept (...), Aq. (...) Tit. 3 ^. Col. 1. 16. Dr^s. praeter. in Romans 8. 38. Deod
ibid.
respects something in this enumeration forenamed, the former these two
first named, the latter the couple following.

Fourthly, Christ not only as God, but as man has power above Heb. 1. 2.
every creature: As Mediator he has received a power imperial over every
creature: which is apparent in this, that the Apostle says, Christ is so
placed above all, that all are subject under Ephesians. 1. 21. Heb. 2. 8, 9. Matthew.
28. 19. Duplex est Christi dominium. 1. Essentiale, quod ab aeterno habet
commune cum Patre. 2. Vicarium seu Mediatorium quod habet a Patre, in cujus
locum quasi succedit. Camer. in Heb. 1. 2.
his feet. To me is given all power in Heaven and earth: that is, power
whereunto every creature is subject. He speaks of it as done, because it was
immediately to be performed. This person as God, receiving by voluntary
dispensation this honor from the Father, that he should in an immediate and
appropriate manner execute government over all creatures in heaven and earth;
the same person as man participating in this Kingly divine authority, so far
that he should instrumentally concur in executing all that judgment which
Christ according to his divine nature did principally effect. Though the Father
and the Spirit have a right and sovereignty over the creature, yet they do not
immediately execute this in such manner as the Son does, who has received a
right of executing immediately and in a manner appropriat to his person, the
sovereign dominion of God over every creature. The Son by voluntary
dispensation sent by the Father, did empty himself of exercising and showing
forth his right and dominion over every creature: and the Father by voluntary
dispensation does resign to the Son the immediate execution of all power
over every creature, till that time that all things be subdued under him. This
the Scripture does lay down, as in regard of earthly powers Rev. 1. 5.
they are subject; for he is ruler of the Kings of the earth. He has this
royal state written on his thigh, as it were King of Kings, Lord of Lords,
Rev. 19. 16. That he has power over the Heb. 1. 4, 6. col. 2. 10.
Angels is plain, both by the reverence they do him, and their obedience
toward him. Every knee boweth unto him, the evil Angels yield signs of
subjection, either deceitfully to wrong ends, or by force compelled, though
their state is such they cannot do it religiously as the other. And if Christ
have power to send forth, dispose of, and employ the Angels, he has power to
take account how that he sets them about is dischardged. The evil Angels
could not enter the Swine without his leave, and they are subject to his
judgment: when the Saints shall judge the Angels, what power has Christ
himself this way? And as for the excellencies on earth, they all receive their
power from Christ, and are at his dispose: yea the Apostle says, He is crowned
with glory and honor, and all things are put under his feet: Heb. 2. 7, 8.
Joh. 17. 2. Camer in Heb. 7, 8. Par Ibid. Antithesis est inter Christi statu^
sedentis a^ dextram Patris, and expientu in cruce peccata nostra.
The Apostle speaks of that dominion which Christ received over all the
creatures of God, none excepted: but if all things be subjected to the feet of
Christ, is not the humane nature every where? No: for the phrase in Scripture
is not to be understood of subjection local or corporal, but imperial; sc.
that the man Christ is King of heaven and earth, having all things subjected to
his command. This power and glory which Christ as man received is not infinite
simply, for then it should be the deity it self, which he should not have had
in the state of humiliation: but the deity he had before, not by habitual
infusion, but by personal union. And if Christ by virtue of the hypostaticall
union had received all fullness of the Godhead, that is, all divine
Properties, as some interpret it, it is not possible he should have received
greater or more ample glory: for greater then that which is infinite cannot be
bestowed. But the Scripture speaks expressly, that Christ as man was truly
and really glorified, or that he obtained that glory and Majesty which before
he had not, sc. as man. And if the humane nature be infinite or eternal of
necessity the Incarnation of Christ, and sitting at the right hand of the
Father must be really the same, if they be not abolished, and the humane nature
made equal unto, if not the same with the divine.

The right hand of God absolutely considered must not so be interpreted, as if
it was all one with the phrase of sitting at the right hand of God. For by the
right hand of God is signified his power, wisdom, protection, providence,
etc. but by the other, the exaltation of Christ, and communication of Majesty
and rule, which he may exercise and show forth every where, without the
omnipresence of his humane nature. Neither are we to imagine that Christ has
all things or places or times so subjected to himself, that he does forthwith
change their natures by this subjection, Col. 1. 19. and ^. ^. Vorst. Deo
placuerit in Christo (^.) per Christum, i^habitare totam pleni^udinem, be totam
ecclesiam.
much less that he does make them to be and not to be at the same time; as to
make all places to be one indivisible title, or all times to be one point: for
so it should be divisible and indivisible, the same and not the same together.

It is objected, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in Christ,
that is, the whole essence, Majesty and glory of God dwells in the humane
nature. And we are to conceive the person there spoken of, sc. the beloved
Son as man, as incarnate. The reason is, because the second person in
Trinity, the Son of Tota Dei plenitudo est universa Dei voluntas and
Majestas, quatenus a nobis cognosci and potest and debet. Id. Vrsin Vbi supra
Page 601. Omnis plenitudo Deitatis inhabitat in Christo homine, non sicut in
alijs sanctu, gratia tantum in habitationis seu assistentiae, nec reali
communicatione seu confirmatione, se^ reali un^one cum humanitare; sic ut
unitae sint duae naturae inseperabiliter and personaliter. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
God absolutely considered, has all fullness, not by voluntary dispensation,
but by natural necessity, in as much as the eternal Father never was, nor
could be without his eternal Son, God with himself. In Christ his person
there is a threefold fullness: the first fundamental, sc. the fullness of the
divine nature, which does personally dwell with that manhood in Christ, whence
it comes to pass, that this man is truly called God, that is, the manhood
taken into fellowship of the self perfect and eternal person of the Son of
God, so that it is become as a part of his person. The second is the fullness
of office, to which even Christ man is called. For in regard of his humane
nature now united to the second person, he is man called to be the Christ of
God, that is, anointed our Prophet, Priest and King. The third the fullness of
created or habitual graces, wherewith the soul of Christ is filled, which are
not divine properties, (for no created gift can be a Property divine) but
effects which the Godhead works distinct from it, as the soul gives life
to the body. Now for the dwelling of all fullness in Christ man, the latter two
are in him subjectively: the former, that as the Godhead does dwell in Christ
man, not as in the Saints by relation of love and communion of the effects of
it in grace; nor as in the glorified Saints in regard of abundant love
manifested in the gift of glory; nor any such simple cohabitation: but it
dwells in the manhood as with a nature which is taken to unity of person in
the Son of God, and so is through grace become of the substance of the second
person. So that Christ as man has the second person of Trinity, God with the
Father and Spirit dwelling personally in it: so that this manhood is
essentially and substantially coupled with the deity in unity of one
self^-perfect and eternal person. Christ man is fitly called God, and
therefore in Christ man the Godhead is said to dwell properly: but Christ his
humane nature may not be said to be God, and therefore the Godhead is not so
fitly said to dwell in the humane nature as in the person denominated after it,
that is, in Christ man

It will be said, if Christ rule in the midst of his enemies, then it must
follow that he is every where present.

But that is spoken of the person, and not of the manhood alone, Psalm. 120. 2*
and what is said of the person does not necessarily belong to both natures.
And Christ's dominion over all things does not require his corporal presence
with all things. According to his divine nature, he is every Joh. 8. 58. Christ
in respect of his divine nature is every where present without addition: and by
the spiritual and effectual presence of his body, he enters the souls, and
strengthens the hearts of all the faithful, by the power of his grace and
truth of his promise, Ephesians. 1. 22. Col. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 3. Christ is the
firstborn. Col. 1. 18. Heb. 1. 2, 4. and heir of all things. 2 Cor. 4. 5.
where present according to the effects of his providence, wisdom, power,
grace, etc. according to his humane nature he is essentially in heaven, and now
only in heaven, but his dominion is over all things: which does not denote
sovereignty, power or omnipresence essentially divine, but glory and Majesty
next to divine, as was said before.

The fifth thing implied in Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father is,
that in special he is the head of his Church. The word Head is used sometime
for one who in any kind is before or above other: and in this large sense,
Christ is the Head of the Angels, that is, their ruler or governor, one that
is above them; man is the Head of the woman, Christ of man, God of Christ. But
here it signifies that Christ is so over his Church, that he is in a more
near and communicative sort conjoined with it, as the head is with the body
and members. Look as the King has a more intimate and aimiable superiority
over his Queen than over any other subjects, so it is here in Christ our King,
whose dominion toward his Church, who is his Spouse and Queen, is more
aimiably tempered and nearly affected, then is his government over any other.
Christ has taken the self same holy and spiritual nature with his Church,
standing as well of that which is outward and sensitive, as of that which is
inward and intellectual. The faithful are united to him here by knowledge of
faith and love, such as Christ himself by his Spirit begettet^ in them, as
hereafter by glorious light and love. He does communicate unto them that whole
life of grace and glory, which they have or shall receive; direct and move them
outwardly by his signifying will, and inwardly by sending his Spirit, which
moves with efficacy to that which he shows; and follows them with aides
inward and outward, least their faith should be prevailed against. Though
betwixt the faithful and Christ's natural body there be a bodily distance, yet
the Spirit which comes from Christ does so join them with him, that nothing
comes twixt him and them. The same life of grace for kind, which is in
Christ, is in every faithful soul, as fire Caro Christi no^ vivificare
dicitur, quatenus pro mundi vit^ data est, and fide a nobis manducatur: hoc
est, per modum merit simul and ejusmodi efficaciae, quae Mediatoris personae
proprie conveniat. Regnat ubique Deus and homo, divina and humana volunta^e ac
nutu. Filius vivit prop^^r Patrem. Joh 6. 57. F^lius a Patre habet aeternam and
increatam vitam; ut homo quoque ab codem beatam cre^tam v^^am habetiut Mediator
vitam beatam nobis carnis suae troditione in mortem acquisivit, and divina sua
virtue in nobis effccit. Gal. 3. 14. See Field of the Church. 1^ 5. cap. 16.
Sobin. art. 3. de person Christ. p. 316. Petimus ut Christus nobis velit dare
spiritam, idque ^am humana quam divina sua voluatate; and tamen non petimus ut
secundum humanam naturam ab ipso procedat incorda nostra Sp S seu ut humana per
ipsum operetur, nam etiam processio Sp. S. and operatio per^psum est proprium
Dei talis opus: alterum ad intra, alterum ad extra: sed ut etiam humana
voluntate velit hanc operationem Dei tatis suae in nobis Heb. 1. 6. Ps 9. 7.
Phil. 2. 10. To 14. 11. Isa 45. 23 Joh. 5. 22. Psalm 2. 12. Joh. 3. 15, 16, 17
18, 36. Joh. 6 29 and 12. 36. Joh. 14. 1. Romans 15. 12. Mat. 12. 21. Act 7. 50,
60. 2 John 3. Rev. 1. 4, 5. To. 1. 7. Sir. 1 Co. 1. 3. 2 Co. 1, 2. Gal. 1. 3.
Ephesians. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. ^.
kindled and fire kindling is of the same nature. And Christ having fullness of
grace and glory for all his, he cannot be but most ready to communicate with
them every thing for their good. Christ is the Head of his Church, both as God
and man our Mediator. For did not the divine nature, which is the fountain of
all life natural and supernatural dwell with this man or humane nature, we
could not be enlightened or quickened by it. He that eats my flesh (says
Christ) has life in him; not that this nature of it self can do these
things, but because the Deity dwells with it, and by it as by an instrument
joined personally with it, does properly and efficiently work these things.
The omnipotent power of creating spiritual graces is not in the humane nature,
nor the omnipotent actions which does produce them, do or can proceed from the
humane nature: but they are in God only, and from God in and with the humane
nature, working to the same effects, according to its property. Christ's humane
nature has both understanding and will whereby he works, and is an internal
instrument united within the person of God the Son, as a part of his person in
a sort, yea more nearly: but these divine works, which Christ the Mediator
works, the chief virtue and action, which properly effects them is in God,
not communicated really with the other nature, though it does work them in
this humane nature with it, yea and by it, as a most nearly conjoined
instrument, which within the person of God the Son has his proper actions
concurring in an inferior degree of efficiency to that which the divine nature
properly and principally works. God works graces, Christ man works the
same: the divine nature creates them and infuseth them into this or that man,
through Christ man being as a common conceptacle or conduit-pipe. The humane
nature works them not by powerful creating them, but by taking away sin and
the cause, that so way might be made for this promised Spirit; by interceding
Mediator-like for them; and by willing the going of such graces from him, as
who is with God the Son but one worker, though a distinct principle of working,
that is, though distinct in nature, yet the same person. He therefore works
them as his own works, from his own power: for Gods power is by unity of
person made his, the divine power not being without him, as the power of
another person then he is but being personally with him. And those things which
his humane nature works, which are wrought after his humane nature, the
works not of an humane, but a divine person: for though the nature, according
to which they are wrought, be humane, yet the person working is the person of
the Son of God. Hence it is that Christ-man does give graces authoritative
and effective, yea according to humane action does effect them in the highest
degree that an isntrumental operation can effect any thing.

St Paul gives graces by laying on of hands with prayer, ministerialiter, not
as his work, but as entreating it from God in Christ, and signifying what God
does in Christ; not from any power any way within his person, but the power of
another; not as conjoined with God, as the body with the soul, but as an
instrument with God. Christ the Head of his Church is over all, to whom all
things are subject. He who must be a saving head to us, there is great need he
should be over all. Could he not bind that strong one, and cause him re-deliver
his possession, how should we ever be set at liberty? Could he not dissolve the
work of Satan, swallow up death, create life and quickening in us, our case
were lamentable?

The sixth thing implied is, That Christ God and man is the object of divine
odoration. Let all the Angels of heaven worship him. All knees shall bow unto
him. All shall honor the Son, as they honor the Father. Ye believe in God,
believe also in me, says our Savior. In him shall the Gentiles trust. So
Steven called upon the Lord Jesus saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And the
Apostles in the entrance of their Epistles desire grace and peace from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, not the Lord of Jesus Christ, as some
Heretics would corrupt the text: and so in the shutting up of their Epistles;
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 23. Gal. 6. 18. 2 Cor. 13. 13.
Phil. 4. 23. 1 Thessalonians 5. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 18. Philem. v. 25. 2 Timothy 4 22.

But some object that if adoration be due to Christ God and man, then it will
follow, that the humane nature is omniscient and almighty: which follows not,
because that which is spoken of the concrete or whole person, is restrained to
the one nature, which should not be. The person adored or called upon is man,
but the humanity it self only or solely, or in it self properly taken, is not
the proper subject or object of that worship. Albeit we may and should adore
the man Christ with divine worship, yet may we not adore his manhood, or his
flesh and blood. Because though the man Christ be God, yet his manhood is not
God, and by consequence not to be worshipped with that worship which is
properly and essentially divine. Again, if adoration agree to the humanity of
Christ, then may his humanity help and save us. But the humanity of Christ
cannot help and save us: because omnis actio est suppositi, whereas the humane
nature of Christ is not suppositum. None of those who defend the adoring of the
humanity of Christ with divine worship, do well and warrantably express their
opinion.

First, Some of the Schoolmen have found none other respect Aquin. 3. q. 25.
Art. 2.
wherefore the manhood of Christ can be said to be adored, except this, that
the flesh of Christ is adored by him who adoreth the word incarnate, even as
the Kings clothes are adored by him who adoreth the King. And thus they make
the flesh of Christ to be adored only by accident. Ego vero (says the
Archbishop of De Rep. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 12. n. 43.
Spalato) non puto a quoquam Regis vestimenta, quibus est indutus, adorari. And
why does he that worshippeth the King, worship his clothes more then any other
thing that is about him, or beside him, perhaps a Hawke upon his hand? etc.
There is no more but the Kings own person set by the worshipper to have any
state in the worship, and therefore no more worshipped by him. Others devise
another respect wherefore the manhood of Christ may be said to be worshipped,
namely, that as the divine worship agrees only to the Godhead, and not
personis praecise sumptis, i. Fr. S. Clara Expos. art confess. Angl. art. 28.
sub ratione formali constitutiva personarum quae est relatio, but only as
these relations identificantur with the essence of the Godhead: so the manhood
of Christ is to be adored, Non per se praecise, sed prout suppositatur a Deo.
But if by suppositatur they mean (as they must mean) that the manhood is
assumed into the unity of the person of the Son of God (for otherwise if they
mean, that the manhood is made a person, they are Nestorians) that which they
say cannot warrant the worshipping of the manhood with divine worship: because
the manhood, even after this assumption and hypostaticall union, is still for
all that a creature, and a distinct nature from the Godhead, so that it cannot
yet be said to be worshipped with divine worship.

Dr Field lays out a third way: for whiles he admits the phrase of the
Lutherans, who say not only concretively, that the Of the Church lib. 5. cap.
15.
man Christ is omnipotent, but the humanity also: he thus distinguishes; when
we speak, says he, of the humanity of Christ, sometimes we understand only
that humane created essence of a man that was in him, sometimes all that that
is implied in the being of a man, as well subsistence as essence. But this
distinction is as if a man should say, sometimes by blackness I understand
blackness, and sometimes the subject wherein it is together with the
blackness it self. An abstract is no more an abstract if it have a
subsistence. It is the tenet of the School, that though in God Aqu. ^qu 13.
art. 1.
the concrete and the abstract differ not, because Deus and Deitas are the
same, yet in creatures (whereof the manhood of Christ is one) they are really
different. For the concrete signifies something complete subsisting, but the
abstract (such as humanity) signifies something not as subsisting, but as that
whereby something is. Wherefore when some say, the flesh of Christ is to be
adored, the speech is not proper, but figurative: because properly Polan.
Syntag. lib. 6. cap 16.
the flesh, secundum se, is not adored, because it is a creature, but God
manifested in the flesh. But here it is to be noted, that the Scripture
speaks of worship which is graciously communicated of the Father to Christ as
Mediator, and not simply of that which is given unto him as the only begotten
Son of God. As God Phil. 2. 9. J^h. 5. 26.
has exalted him, so he has graciously communicated this honor and dignity
of worship unto him as God and man. The adoration of Christ may be considered
two ways: either as it does respect Chemnit. harm. cap. 46.
the essential properties of the Godhead alone, or the properties of both
natures and the office of Christ. If it respect the properties of the Godhead
alone, adoration is pred^cated of the person denominated from either, or both
natures, and is understood to be true of that person according to the divine
nature, as the essential properties themselves are understood to be true of
that person according to the divine nature. But if adoration respect the
properties of both natures, and the office of Christ, it is spoken of the
person according Solmius. art. 3. de person. Christ. page 3. 6.
to both natures, and is understood to be true, but the difference of both
natures being kept. For we ask blessings of Christ God and man, in performing
whereof, we desire and understand that he do what is proper to the Deity
according to the Divine, and proper to the humanity according to the humane
nature. For as the office, so adoration respecting the office, does not take
away the difference of natures, that is, does not confound or equal the
natures, or the properties of the natures. So we crave of God, that he would
intercede for us, which he does according to both natures, because Intercession
is the office of the whole person: which parts in this office he performs one
way according to his Deity, another according to his humanity, and so of the
rest.

CHAP. IIII. How Christ does bring his people into Covenant, or fellowship with
himself.
CHrist being appointed of the Father the King and Head of his Church, and
after a most excellent manner thereunto anointed and advanced of the Father,
and having subjects given unto him, it cannot be but he must have his Kingdom
and subjects. He is a King as in personal right, so in act: He has his
Kingdom and territories wherein he exercises his regal power. He is a King
as to punish enemies, so to feed and govern his people, Joh. 17. 6.
which are given unto him to be made obedient unto his Scepter.

The way whereby Christ enters upon his kingdom, is ever by Conquest. For
though the souls of the Elect are his, given by free donation, purchased with
a great price, yet his enemies have Psalm. 68. 28. Romans 8. 7, 8, 10. Joh. 3. 5,
6. As for the works of the Spirit, the fruits of faith, etc. if he have any at
all in him, they proceed only of the holy Ghost. Hom. 2. part for W(...)s.
the first possession, which must be cast out by strong hand; and his people
themselves by nature rebellious, unwise, disobedient, until they be subdued
and brought into subjection. High imaginations must be abated, and proud
rebellious lusts battered and beaten down, before Christ come to rule and
reign in the soul. The conversion of the nations to the faith of Christ is
made by an holy war, destruction, and desolation; wherein the King of kings
fights against, subdueth, and brings under the disobedient, which formerly
did rise up against him. But this wasting or desolation is not the loss of
temporal life, or spoiling of corporal goods, or any outward desolation which
is seen with the eyes, or heard with the ears; but a most happy desolation,
whereby pride and haughtiness of mind is depressed, and the mind lifted up
to things above; the power of the flesh is quelled, and the Spirit does gather
strength; the edge of vices is dulled, and all kind of virtue does bud and
blossom: and where the flesh did rule, the Spirit does rule.

But what then, does Christ compel men to subject themselves unto him? In no
sort, but of unwilling he makes them willing, totally or thoroughly willing. The
people of Christ are free and Psalm. 110. 2. Exodus 35. 21. 2 Chro. 30. 8. Joh.
6. 45. Isai. 55 5. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
voluntary, who offer themselves willingly unto the Lord, and yield themselves
unto his service. Therefore they are said to come unto Christ, to run unto
him, to serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind.

Men are gathered into the Kingdom of Christ by effectual holy vocation,
whereby Christ does not only invite them by his Word to repent and believe, but
by his Spirit does assuredly bring 2 Timothy 1. 9.
them unto himself, or unto the participation of the Covenant of mercy.
Vocation according to the purpose of God is free, not Romans 8. 28.
depending upon any precedent condition on our part required, or whereby we are
fitted or prepared to receive grace offered, nor upon the good use of any
natural gift vouchsafed. Justification is of grace by faith in Christ, and so
is Salvation: but Vocation is of free grace without any condition at all. It is
not of him that Romans 9. 16.
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, who of his
rich mercy quickneth them that are dead in sin, and Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. Isai. 65.
1, 2. Mat. 11. 25, 26.
says, Behold me, to them that inquire not after him; and hides the great
things of the Gospel from the wise and prudent, but reveals them unto babes,
according to that good pleasure of his will. Thus Abraham was called, when he
served other gods: Josh. 24. 2. Act. 9. 6. Matt. 9. 9.
and Paul when he breathed out threatenings against the Saints: and Matthew when
he sat at the receipt of custom.

The persons called into fellowship with Christ, are all and only they that are
given unto him of the Father. To these Christ Mat. 11. 27. Rev. 3. 20. Joh. 10.
11, 15, 16. Joh. 17. 9, 20. Joh. 10. 28. and 17. 2.
reveals the Father; these open unto Christ, and he comes unto them: for
them he has laid down his life; they shall hear his voice; for them he has
prayed that they might believe through the Word, and unto them he will give
eternal life.

The Subjects called in the Kingdom of grace, or under the new Covenant, are
Jews and Gentiles, both near and far off, but specially the Gentiles, when
the Jews were broken off Matt. 8. 11, 12. Act. 2. 39. (...), idem est quod
(...). Constat enim praep^sitionem (...) ejusmodi adverbiis adjunctam saepe
vacare, tali^ junt (...), sta^^, subito, (...), adbuc, (...), semel. Act. 17.
30. and 28. 28. and 13. 46, 47. Rev. 5. 9.
for a time. Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and the children of
the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness. The promise is made to
you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the
Lord your God shall call. To all that are afar off, that is, to the Gentiles,
at that time removed from the Covenant, but in time to be brought back, or
gathered to Christ's fold. The time of ignorance God regarded not, or was highly
displeased with, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. Be it
known therefore unto you, that this Salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles.
Christ therefore is said to be the light of the Gentiles, that he should be the
Salvation unto the end of the world. In this sense is that of the Apostle to be
understood, Who will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge
of the truth: for there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the
man Christ Jesus. Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.

The term or point from which they are called, is Satan, sin, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
and the world; Satan as a Tyrant holds men captive at his will, until Christ
that is stronger then he, bind him, and cast him out. Satan holds them captive
through ignorance; having put out Act. 26. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. Romans 6.
13, 14, 17.
their eyes of understanding, and through their inordinate affections, and
lusts, whereby they are drawn aside: whilst we are under the Law, sin has
dominion over us, that we obey it in the lusts, and give up our members as
weapons of unrighteousness to commit wickedness.

The subject or matter of Vocation, are men natural, worldly Tit. 2. 12. 2
Pet. 1. 4. Ephesians. 8. 11, 12, and 5. 14. Joh. 5. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 10. Gal. 1. 4. Ephesians.
4. 17, 18.
animal, carnal sinners, strangers from the life of God, dead in sins, and
therefore unworthy to be called, and not only unable to make answer, but
wilful and rebellious to resist and refuse the call and invitation of the
Gospel; Men walking in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitations
darkened, serving dumb idols.

If it be said, the Scripture mentions some that were worthy Mat. 10. 11, 12,
13.
of their calling or of peace that was offered. That is not to be understood of
any worthiness of gracious acceptance that can be in a natural man, upon the
good use of natural abilities and endowments, but of a further measure of
light, which the Lord imparteth to them that are in part enlightened already.
He speaks of the Jews, amongst whom many were godly, but to whom greater
light was to be granted, the Messiah being exhibited. He speaks not of the
difference betwixt these to be called, and others not to be called effectually,
but of the difference between some called already, and such as were of the
number of them that were not called. The godly will not deny himself to be a
lost sheep, as he had need to be converted more and more* If then the subject
of Vocation be man a sinner, captive, dead in 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Romans 6. 17, 18.
trespasses, then the bound or term from which he is called is the state of
life animal, and of sin and misery, because of sin, scil. from guilt and
condemnation, from the power and servitude of sin. The term unto which he is
called is God, or Christ, righteousness, and Salvation, or eternal life. God
the Father in his Son is both the author and the term of Vocation; he of his
2 Timothy 1. 9. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
Joh. 1. 14, 16. 1 These. 2. 12. Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
rich grace and mercy in Jesus Christ calls us to come unto himself, from
whom we had strayed and departed. Christ also is the author of Vocation, and
the term whereunto the called do come. They are called unto the state of grace
and supernatural good, and all spiritual blessings in this life, communion
with Christ in whom is the fullness of grace and truth, and the state of glory
and consummate fruition of God.

Vocation is partly external, partly internal. External, by the Ministry of
the Word, ordinarily propounded by men, extraordinarily propounded immediately
of God to the mind and will without the help of man. God does sometimes use
the ministry of private persons to bring men unto faith and repentance, Jam.
5. 20.
and he is pleased to bless the word of Exhortation or admonition spoken by
them: but ordinarily he makes use of his messengers and servants to that
purpose. Therefore our Savior sent Mat. 28. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2
Cor. 6. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 3, 6. 1 Cor. 3. 5. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
forth his Disciples to preach unto all nations: and the Ministers are called
Gods Fellow-helpers or Laborers, Planters, Waterers, Ministers by whom the
Church believes. I deny not but in some cases men may be converted by reading,
or studying the Scriptures, seeing it is the matter and not the manner which
does convert: and it cannot be showed that God will not work by reading, when
the preaching of the Word is not neglected. The knowledge of arts and tongues
may be acquired by good books, but most ordinary by instruction by lively
voice: and best, when both are exercised with diligence and care: and so by the
reading of the Scriptures a man may obtain faith, but most commonly it comes
by the hearing of faith, though they profit most that join both together.

The instrument of Vocation is the Word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ:
I mean, the whole doctrine of the Covenant, 2 These 2. 13. Gal. 3. 2. Heb. 2.
1. Romans 10. 17. Isai. 53. 1. Gal. 1. 22. Romans 15. 19. and 2. 16. and 16. 25. 2
Cor. 5. 18, 20. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Act. 8. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 23, 24. 2 These. 2. 13, 14.
and not simply the promises of forgiveness and eternal life in Jesus Christ;
which is called the hearing of faith, and the word of faith, and the preaching
of faith, the Gospel of Christ, the preaching of Jesus Christ, the word of
reconciliation. So life and immortality is brought unto light through the
Gospel: and the Apostles wherever they came preached Jesus, who unto them
that are called both Jews and Gentiles, is the power and wisdom of God. God
from the beginning (says the Apostle to the Thessalonians) has chosen you to
Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and the faith of truth,
whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If the sight of misery be necessary to effectual calling, that is
manifested by the Gospel: for it teaches, that without faith it is impossible
to please God; And if man stand in need of a Savior, he is lost in himself;
so the prescribing of the remedy does discover the malady. Without hope of
pardon there is no true turning unto God: but the Gospel propounds mercy to
them that humble their souls and con^esse their sins. If men may be
persuaded and drawn to come unto Christ, allured and enticed by fair and sweet
promises, then the Gospel is the sole instrument of Hos. 2. 14. Ep^. 2. 17.
conversion: but conversion is a fair or slattering persuasion, if I may so
call it. Terrors drive no man unto God of themselves, but rather from him,
unless he be pleased to work by them: and gentle persuasions may prevail, if
God vouchsafe to put in with them.

God does freely give his Word to whom he please, as long as he please, and in
what manner it seems best unto him in his infinite wisdom. He gave his Law
unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with
every Nation. The Psalm. 147. Act. 17. 30.
times of ignorance God regarded not. Greater things were done in Capernaum,
Chorazin, and Bethsaida, then were done in Mat. 11. 23, 24.
Tire and Sidon, Sodom or Gomorrah. Paul was forbidden to preach the word in
Asia: and the Disciples, to enter into the Act. 16. 6. Mat. 10. 5.
ways of Samaria. Greater means God does vouchsafe to them that are worse,
and more means to them that be more obdurate Ezekiel. 2. 7. and 3. 7, 8, 11. Act.
13. 46.
in their sins; like to them that are unlike, and lesser to them that be not
so deeply plunged into profaneness. For God does exhort them, that they might
be inexcusable, that they might know a Prophet had been amongst them; that it
might be for Ezekiel. 2. 5. Matt. 24. 14. Isai. 6. 9, 10. Mat. 13. 14, 15, 16.
Romans 9. 23. Luke 2. 34.
a testimony against them, that they might be hardened, and that the glory of
God might be manifested in the vessels of wrath. Thus Christ is set up for a
sign, that shall be spoken against, and for a rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
The Word is a moral instrument of conversion, which God is pleased to use,
without which he does not ordinarily work, but it has no power of it self to
work: and therefore conversion is the immediate work of the holy Ghost,
notwithstanding the means which God uses in the turning of a sinner. Natural
instruments being moved have some power to work of themselves, or by their own
faculty; moral not so. The Word is a fit instrument, though of it self it
have no power to produce the effect. For though conversion be not a bare moral
persuasion, yet it is effected by persuasion, or at least not without
persuasion. In the change God deals with man as a reasonable creature or
instrument, which is to be renewed by grace, and allured by promises, sweet,
pleasant, profitable, firm and sure. Now the Word is very fit to convey those
admirable and most forcible persuasions from the ear unto the soul.

The Word is more generally published in the times of the Gospel and Kingdom
of the Messiah, then it had been in former ages. God is in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation: the Gospel which has
been preached unto every creature under Heaven, Col. 1. 23.
that is, to all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, and to all sorts, and sexes,
noble, base, learned or unlearned, bond or free. And thus Col. 1. 6. Mat. 28.
19, 20. Romans 10. 21.
it did come unto them, they not minding it, or having it once in their
thoughts. And hereof this is an argument, that it comes, not where it is
sought, but where it is gainsaid. The Spirit was more abundantly poured forth
upon the Church after the Resurrection of Christ: The Pastors of the Primitive
Churches were faithful and diligent: the primitive Christians did 1 These. 1. 8.
not hide their candle under a bushel, but did shine as lights to others, and
labor their conversion: and the Gospel like the Sun for clearness, did
spread forth the beams of light more abundantly.

The Gospel is more glorious then the Law or truth of God manifested in the
old Testament: that was as a Candle, that could not spread it light far, this
as the Sun disperseth his 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
beams far and nigh. It is the ministration of life, a quickening spirit, the
ministration of righteousness, which shall endure for ever, and in this
respect it does exceed in glory, it is a Gospel full of glory. If the types of
Evangelicall things were glorious, how much more glorious must the Gospel it
self needs Gal. 1. 27. Jam. 2. 8. 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9. 1 These. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
be? The Gospel is called a glorious Mystery, a royal Law, a ministration of
glory, nay, glory it self; a glory which draws the study and amazement of the
most glorious creatures unto it.

The publisher of the Gospel, is Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God,
who being in the bosom of the Father, the truth Joh. 1. 18.
it self, and most familiarly acquainted with all his Counsels, has revealed
and brought it to light.

The matter it self, is great Salvation, such as eye has not seen, Heb. 2. 3.
1 Cor. 2. 9.
care has not heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive: News
from heaven touching righteousness and life eternal, through faith in Jesus
Christ. Gods wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, grace, longsuffering, etc. are
gloriously set forth in the Gospel.

The maine subject, is Christ, the brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1. 1,
2, 3. Col. 1. 19.
the Image of the invisible God.

This word propounded by the ministry of man is not only preparatory, as if an
other word, which may be called consummatory, must be suggested by the Spirit
unto the mind. For the holy Ghost does not inlighten the soul by his
internal action into any other acknowledgement of Christ, then that which is
contained in the Word externally proposed, or affect the heart with other
senses, then which are proposed out of the same Word. Faith is Romans 10. 14, 15,
16. 17.
by hearing, that is, by preaching, and preaching by the Word of God, that is,
by commission or edict from God. But this preaching did perfectly contain all
things consummatory for the sanctification Joh. 17 17, 20. Joh. 14. 16. Joh.
15. 15. and 17. 8. Joh. 1. 18. and 3. ^2. Joh. 16. 13.
of the Church, even all things which Christ taught to his disciples, which he
had heard of the Father, and were delivered unto him, who was in the bosom of
the Father; all truth, whereby not the Apostles only, but the whole Church,
even to the end of the world, shall be sanctified. The wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hid wisdom, which God had determined before the world, unto
our glory, the glory of the universal catholic Church: the wisdom which
none of the Princes of this world has known: which contains those things
which 1 Cor. 2. 7. verse. 8. verse. 9. verse. 10. verse. 12. Ephesians. 3. 8, 16. 1
Cor. 2. 16. 1 Cor. 2. 14. verse. 6. Joh. 7. ^9. Act 2. 33. Joel 2. 28. Act. 1.
16, 17. Joh. 16. 7, 8. Joh. 26. 13, 14, 15. He shall receive of me: Chrysostom
(...) Theoph (...), e scientia mea, ijsque quae ipse novi. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Gal. 3
15. Heb. 8 13. 2 Cor. 3. 8. and 3. 9.
God has prepared for those that love him, all that love him, and not only
them that were in the Apostles time. The wisdom containing the deep things
of God, even the things which God has freely given to his Church, called, the
unsearchable riches of Christ, the riches of his glory. The wisdom which is
the very mind of Christ, and the knowledge whereof is called, the very
knowledge of the mind of Christ: of which the spiritual and perfect men are
only capable.

The plentiful pouring forth of the holy Spirit was differed until the
glorification of Christ, and he being glorified, it was to be differed no
longer. Christ being exalted at the right hand of the Father, he obtained the
promised Spirit above measure, and powered it forth in such plentiful measure,
as had not formerly been bestowed upon the Church, so that then was fulfilled
what was foretold by the Prophet Joel, I will power my Spirit upon all flesh.
That Spirit is the Spirit of the Father alone, and of Christ, and will plead
the cause of none but of Christ, in all this age of the world, as the Advocate
of Christ against the world: He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak, and shall show it unto you. So that after
the Apostles there shall be no new inspiration necessary to Salvation, unless
we shall say, there shall be another Christ, or another Comforter. The Apostles
in respect of their office were able Ministers of the new Testament, of the
Spirit, not of the letter, of righteousness, and not of condemnation: Able
Ministers furnished with sufficient gifts, and so with sufficient knowledge: of
the Testament, which is not to be abrogated, whereunto nothing must be added:
of the new Testament, which shall not be antiquated, or disan^lled: Of the
Spirit, and by inspiration taught those things, which agree to the most perfect
and spiritual: and of righteousness, which is the last, immediately conjoined
with life eternal.

The Prophets speak of the times of the Messiah as the times Joh. 4. 25. Isa.
2. 1, 2. Heb. 1. 1. Act. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5. 17,
18. Col. 1. 19. and 2. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 10. 2 Cor. ^. 11. Mat. 24. 14. Romans 8 7, 8,
9. 1 Cor 1. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 9. Act. 13. 26. Romans 1. 17. Heb. 2. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 23,
25. Col 2. 2, 3. Col. 1. 25, 26. 1 John 1. 3. Non enim novis revelationibus
nunc regitur ecclesia Bellar. de verb Dei l. 4. cap. 9.
of clear light and revelation, after which no new inspiration is to be
expected. When the Messiah comes, he will teach us all things. The times of
the Messiah are called, the last times, which are the times wherein that Doctor
of righteousness is promissed, after whose coming we are to look for no
clearer or fuller revelation of divine mysteries. So the Apostle says, Christ
was manifested in the last days, to wit, in the times of the Gospel. The time
of the Messiah was that time appointed of the Father, wherein the heir was no
longer to be an infant under tutours and governors, but as of ripe age he
should live under the guidance of the Spirit: of whom, as by the Spirit of
liberty, being enlightened, he should with open face, as in a glass, behold
the glory of God. The Doctrine of the Gospel inspired into and preached by the
Apostles, is most glorious, the Gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the
Image of God, and the brightness of his glory, in whom it pleased the Father,
that all fullness should dwell: in comparison whereof the Law is not glorious:
which shall be preached in all the world until the end come, and shall
continue without abolition. The Apostles preached the word of faith,
righteousness and life, the word of salvation, and power of God unto
salvation, even great salvation, and the immortal seed which does endure for
ever, even Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, that the whole Church might have communion with the Father and with
the Son: But the Word of faith, righteousness and life, the immortal seed,
the Word that does reveal the ministry of Christ fully and entirely, is a
word consummatory and not preparatory: in communion does consist perfection or
consummation. And Titus Bostorum Episc. ad Luc. 10. In Hospitium duxit, hoc
est, in ecciesiam, quae omnes capit, omnes complectitur.
in these respects the calling of Christians to the state of grace, is more
excellent then the calling of the Jews; as the instrument of their calling is
more excellent. The same Word for substance was delivered to both, but not for
full and clear manifestation. In the Gospel, Christ, the promises, heaven and
life is more distinctly revealed and fully propounded. God dealt with the Jews
as with children young and tender; with Christians, as with men grown to age,
and come to some ripeness. The Neque hic amplius secundum legalis umbrae,
tipicique cultus a^gustias audiemus, Non intrabit Ammonita in ecclesian Dei,
aut Moabita. Audimus autem, I^e, and docete omnes gentes. Isai. 54. 13. Jer.
31, 34. Heb. 8. 11. 1 John 20. 1 John 2. 21, 24.
bounds of the Church are now extended to all nations, and all men are invited
to repentance, that they might live.

It may be questioned, whether the word be not fruitless and unprofitable,
seeing the Lord promises in Covenant, that men should not teach every man his
neighbor, but they should be all taught of God. But the internal teaching of
the holy Ghost, is not to be severed from external instruction by the holy
Scripture: for then it should follow, that the Scriptures were written in vain,
that in vain we were exhorted to read the Scriptures, yea to give attendance
to reading, exhortation and doctrine; and that the ministry of the Word was
altogether fruitless. But the Apostles themselves plainly declare, that the
reading of the Scriptures, and ministry of the Word, and writing to them that
were anointed by the spirit, was not useless and unprofitable. Such passages
of Scripture then are to be understood comparatively, and not as simple
negations, and show what plenty of knowledge Isa. 11. 9. and 54. 13. 1 Cor. 1.
7. and 2. 10. Joh. 6. 45. (...) for (...). Genesis 32. 28. 1 Samuel 8. 7. Ephesians. 6.
12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, i. only. Act. 16. 14. 2 Cor. 3. 3.
1 Pet. 1. 22.
God would pour upon his Church in the times of the new Testament, leading the
true children of the Church by his blessed Spirit into all truth necessary to
Salvation. The like phrases are often found in the Scriptures, and the
adversitive particle [but] is not put as exceptive: But the anointing, i. e.
except as.

Internal Vocation is by the operation of the holy Spirit effectually inabling
and drawing us unto Christ; enlightening the mind, and affecting the heart,
seriously to attend unto those things which are spoken, and by faith to receive
and embrace them. The principal effectual help which makes us come to God by
belief, is the efficacy of Gods Almighty power put forth to such a purpose. It
is the effectual working of Gods Almighty Col. 2. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
power, which works faith in us to Salvation. For the creating us anew in
Christ, is a greater work, then giving us our natural being in Adam, and
therefore may not be ascribed to any power Ephesians. 2. 1, ^. Luke 11. 20, 21. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
that is not almighty. We are by nature dead in trespasses, held in bondage by
strong powers, whom none but the strongest can over-master; and by believing we
are lifted up to an estate without comparison more excellent then that we
formerly received. Now to bring us from death, under which so mighty ones held
us captive, to such a life so unutterably glorious, must needs be the working
of a power almighty. Besides, so far as God does intend to work, so far he
puts forth his omnipotent power to accomplish: but God does intend to make
some before other some come unto him: and therefore he does stretch out the
arm of his power to effect this.

A second help is the inward illumination and inspiration wrought in us, by
which as the internal Word God speaks in the mind. The conversion of
sinners is called, a conviction, because it is ever wrought in us as we are
reasonable and intelligent creatures, the judgment going before is a directour
what to choose. And if the mind of man were once thoroughly and in a spiritual
manner (as it becomes such objects as are altogether spiritual) Saepe fit,
and intellectus haefitanter suadeat, and langu^de tractet habenas, aut sero se
ad judicandum applicet. Ex adverso autem app^titus sensitivi saepe tam subito
and tam ve^ementer concitantur, ut voluntas ab apperitu impulsa jubeat
intellectum judicare ex appetitus imperio.
possessed of the adequate goodness and truth, which is in grace and glory,
and did consider it deliberately, both simply and in comparison, with all
circumstances and occurrences, and did apply it self to the serious study and
thought thereof, the heart could not utterly reject them. For humane liberty is
not a brutish, but a reasonable thing: it consists not in contumacy and
head-strongnesse, but in such a manner of working, as is apt to be regulated,
varied, or suspended by the dictates of right reason and sound judgment, if
things be distinctly and certainly apprehended, seriously weighed and pondered,
and the thought thereof preserved and kept in mind. The only cause why men are
not willing to submit unto Christ, is, because they are not thoroughly, and in a
manner suitable to the excellency of the things, enlightened in their mind, or
they do not keep in mind and thought that which they are taught in the Word of
God, and cannot but know in some sort. Sinners in Scripture are said to be
blind, simple, fools, brutish, inconsiderate, that remember not that God
sees them, consider not their latter end. Sin is natural, not as nature is
opposed to liberty, but as nature is opposed to grace: 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 5,
6. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 14.
And so without Christ and the holy Spirit, miserable, natural or mortal men
would sin necessarily. The first sin of our first parents was an error:
for whatsoever a man does will, that he does will being led by certain reason,
true, or in appearance. The act of willing has in it power whatsoever is
subject to it, but it self is not in it own power, but in the power of reason,
whose prescript it does follow, whether right or corrupt. Necessarily good is
preferred before evil, and the greater good certainly and distinctly known
before the lesser, but not known it is not preferred with equal necessity.
The will is not enforced of it self, either of it self resting, or forcing it
self: for then it should be in act and not in act, at one and the same time:
The will cannot bend into the direct contrary: for then it might most willingly
desire that condition which it certainly knew to be most miserable, and refuse
that condition which it most certainly and distinctly knew to be most blessed:
Nor suspend of it self, without the intervention of the understanding, because
the will is not the mistress of it self, but of the act, which depends upon
the inferior faculties. They that know the gift of God, they desire and ask
it. They that know God, they will trust in him, and keep his Commandments.
They that are taught of God, they will come unto Christ: and faith is lively
and operative to draw men to the love of God, and obedience to his precepts.

The act of judgment is twofold: 1. Natural, which arises from the
sharpness or dullness of the wit. 2. Moral, according to which we are said to
be good or evil. There be two degrees of light. 1. Directing and warning what
is to be done. 2. Persuading and effectually moving forward the will. This
persuasion is, when with such force the holy Spirit does accompany the Gospel,
that it does not only move the will, but move it effectually or thoroughly, and
beget faith lively and well rooted. What the mind judges best, the will
follows as best; what less good the mind judges, the will less follows.
What the In singulis quidem actionibus vo^unt as regitur ab intellectu: in
genere tamen volu^tas i^ aperat intellectui, nec intellectus fe applicat ad
intelligendum, nisi jussut a voluntate. 1 Cor. 8. 2. Joh. 17. 3.
mind judges the greatest evil, the will does specially avoid: what it
judges a less evil, it does less flee from. Unless the mind should either
wax idle, or loose the reins to the affections (which must needs proceed from
a most grievous and most perverse error of the mind) right reason would
obtain not only by right, but in deed and fact, the command and rule.

Knowledge is either prescribing or persuading, true, and solid: either of the
thing simply considered, or of the thing considered with all his circumstances,
certain, just, profitable and pleasant, answerable in some sort to the nature,
excellency and use of the thing known: And in this case, the heart is not
overruled, contrary to the full, spiritual, and infallible evidence of divine
truth, seriously thought upon, unto a practical judgment. This is the
learning of Christ, the teaching of the Father, the knowing of things which
pass knowledge. Christ is not known* if he be not acknowledged as he is
propounded; what perfect Si ignorare accipitur pro non attendere, dici potest
voluntatem humanam vix unquam peccare sine aliqua ignoratione: quia quando
vo^untas peccat, intellectus ut plurimum aliud agit, nec attendit ad regimen
voluntatis.
knowledge does perfectly, that imperfect knowledge does imperfectly: As the
end acknowledged cannot be refused, by like right, neither can the means
acknowledged, the means, I say, necessary, only necessary, and without which
there is no possibility or likelihood to obtain the end. For will is a
reasonable appetite, and therefore does not stir from such a good as is fully
and spiritually represented unto it with evidence, certainty, profit, and
delight, as the most universal, adequate, and unquestionable object of the
desires and capacities of an humane soul, and that both simply and in
comparison: for the freedom, and willing consent of the heart is not lawless,
or without rules to moderate it, but it is therefore said to be free, because
whether out of a true judgment, it move one way, or out of a false another,
yet in both it moves naturally in a manner suitable to its own condition.

If it be objected, the heart being unregenerate is utterly averse unto any
good.

The answer is, that it is true, the will must not only be moved, but renewed
and changed, before it can yield to Christ. But withal, God does never so
fully and spiritually convince the judgment in that manner, without a special
work of grace upon the soul, whereby the will is framed and fashioned to
accept, embrace, and love those good things of which the mind is thus
prepossessed.

The third help is a formal cause, a free gracious disposition or Scimus non
impetrari remissionem ante prece: ^ed dic^, decretam esse ante preces, and eam
peti precibus, quamvis sit decreta. P. Malin. de e^ect. ex fide page 316.
habit of faith, by which the will is inclined agreeable to the disposition of
it, to come unto God. This habit is necessary, because without it the will
being in bondage, stained and defiled, it is altogether unable to will or
desire that which is spiritually good. If there could be a will without such
habit, man might perform the act of a man spiritually alive, before he was
made alive. So that the full answer to this question, viz. what is that
effectual help, whereby I come to God? is this: It is a mixed thing, standing
partly of that almighty power of his, put forth for my good, partly of that
inward Word and inspiration by and with which his power is put forth; partly in
that spirit of faith and supernatural life, which his almighty power through
his Word brings forth in my soul. What was that help whereby Christ made
Lazarus able to come to him out of the grave of natural death? The principal,
was Christ's power; the isntrumental, his voice; the formal cause immediately
helping to it, or working it, was the spirit of natural life, which the power
of Christ by his Word restored to this dead corpse, which now was fallen. And
thus we have the effectual help or grace, by which we come actually to
convert, which are all given from Gods free grace and favor toward us. And
when God does infuse the habit of faith into the mind of one of ripe age, he
does cause him actually to believe, as the nature of the thing it self and
condition does manifest. For if the Spirit by inlightening the mind and
renewing the heart do persuade and move the soul effectually to embrace,
adhere unto, and love the Lord Jesus Christ, then the condition of the thing
will not bear, that grace should be given effectually, but the act and motion
of the soul must necessarily follow. But though the connection of these two be
indivisible, yet the flexion or turning it self is not indivisible, or in a
point or moment, but it may be sooner or slower, more speedy in one, more
remiss in another. The will is necessarily bowed or bended, but more
vehemently in one, more slackly in another, freely or willingly in all that are
turned, and yet necessarily. And this first thing is well to be noted, for from
hence we may gather in what stands the efficacy of grace, effectual to
Conversion, viz. In Gods effectual power put forth to execute his intention,
which he has of converting some actually before other some. It Quaestio non
est de irresistibilitate, sed de insuperabilitate finali. Nam quomodo
traberemur gratia irresistibili, cum id ipsum quod nolumus Deo resistere, ^it
ipsa Deigratia? Illud ipsum velle resistere, nihil ali^d est quam resistere.
does not stand in any congruity or temperature of grace, correspondent to our
nature. For this does argue there is inward, an incorrupted, connaturall
disposition to receive grace. This makes the effect of Conversion as much, if
not more to depend on the active capacity of the will, as on the grace of God:
For it makes the grace of God work it morally and externally by persuasion
only, and the will of man from a power within it self, which does more
inwardly enter the effect of Conversion then the other.

It may be questioned, in what order does the Spirit make us come unto God,
whether immediately, or by some preparation going before? wherein it is further
to be considered, what that preparation is, or wherein it consists?

To the first branch of the Question it is truly answered, that God does use so
to work our coming to him by belief, that he does first, for the most part
prepare us thereunto. As before we engraffe a Sciens we cut it and set it for
incision: and if a Timberlogg lie sunk in mudd, men set to their tacklings,
first to draw it out of the mire, before they lay it on a Cart to carry it
away. Thus God does by his power often work some preparative change in a
sinner, before he does by his power and word work the spirit of faith in them,
and make them come unto him. So God by afflictions is said to boar the ear,
and prepare to conversion. 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12. Act 2. 37.
When Manasseh was humbled in great misery, he sought the Lord. Thus by
conviction of sin, others were pricked in heart, and said, What shall we do to
be saved? and then speedily they received the Gospel believing. Sometimes by
extraordinary terrors rising from external accidents, yea hidden natural
causes, God is pleased to bring men nearer unto him. Thus the Jailer Act. 16.
26, 27.
was prepared to receive the Gospel by the shaking of the Castle, and that
fear he fell into, supposing the prisoners had been fled. And Paul himself by
an extraordinary vision was brought to Act 9. 6.
great astonishment. Sometimes by restraining grace or common gifts, which make
men for degree nearer, that is, in their kind and state not so much removed,
as others in the same kind and state with them: God does prepare men thus:
Christ said to the young man, who was nigh and unconverted, Thou art not far
Mar. 12. 34. and 10. 21.
from the Kingdom of God. Nay God may by giving a man up to the height of some
sin, or sins, prepare him to conversion; as Paul and Manasseh, the one left to
persecuting, the other to those horrible outrages. And God in wisdom knew it
best for Peter, to give him up to be tempted of Satan and left to himself to
deny his Master, for the curing of his self-confidence. Physicians by ripening
diseases make way to cure them; for sick matter is never more easily brought
away, then when in ripeness and quantity it exceeds.

Concerning this matter let these conclusions be remembered.

First, These preparations are not absolutely necessary: for we see God does
give sanctifying grace to Infants, in whom none of these preparatory operations
can take place.

Secondly, We do not find that they have been always used, though perhaps it
be a thing most commonly falling forth. How was Matthew called? even at his
custom: and he followed presently* Mat. 9. 9. Luke 19. 6.
not as Judas, but as a true convert of Christ. So Zacheus upon the very call,
came down hastily, and received Christ joyfully. So it is said of Lydia, God
opened her heart, that she attended Act. 16. 14.
unto those things which Paul spoke. For life and death being such contraries,
as have no third thing between them, which does partake in them both, the one
may be changed into the other without any thing preparatory. The entering of
grace does expel corruption, and spiritual quickness in newness of life is
the mortification of sin. Terrors do not drive men to Christ of themselves,
nor stir men up to embrace the promises: and God is able to draw men unto
Christ by the allurements of the Gospel. By Evangelicall enticements men may
be allured, as well as driven Hos. 2. 14.
by the convictions and comminations of the Law.

Thirdly, All things which God does prepare to the receiving of grace and
coming to him, they make not of themselves any thing to the introducing of
grace, farther then God intends this effect by them. Fear of hell,
conscience of sin, never such afflictions, moral parts, and all gifts, which
may be without sanctifying grace and true belief; many have all these, who yet
never turn unfainedly unto God. When the sickness is grown greater in
quantity, this absolutely taken makes the patient further off health. The
feeling of the disease is no part of the recovery, though the Physician may
work by it. Frenzy in it self is no preparation to health, but to the
Physician, who can work on the patient more fitly in this taking then in a
deadly Palsy, it may be a preparative to health. Thus to be like an aguish man
on his good days, or like to some madmen in the time of their intermissions,
is in it self as fa^re from state of health, as otherwise: but yet the
Physician may use such a state, as a way to health, choosing rather to deal
wit^ him in this taking, then in the fit. And so it is not the height of sin,
nor the fear of hell, nor a moral course of life, that of themselves can make
nearer the state of grace, but only in regard of God, who does intend to turn
them hereunto. Afflictions of themselves profit not, if God open not the ear:
fear and horror drive to despair, if God support not: virtuous life,
according to the light of nature, turns a man further from God, if he add
not thereunto the effectual work of his Spirit. And all, or any of these in
regard of Gods intention, may prepare man to receive the Gospel or the grace
of effectual vocation.

Fourthly, A man that is sunk deeper into sin may be converted with less
sorrow or legal terror, as the Thief upon the Cross, and he that has not
so grievously offended may be kept longer under: for the ripeness and
abundance of the humor may make way for the more speedy removal thereof,
when it is for the safety of others, that have not gathered so much corruption,
to be kept under for a season.

Fifthly, A Christian must not quarrel his conversion, because he has not
been terrified or brought so low as others, or kept under so long: for it
matters not how deeply thou have been wounded, but how soundly thou have been
cured: It is not material what pain thou have felt, but whether thou be
brought unto Christ.

Sixthly, Ch^^stians in temptations or distress must not desire or pray, that
God would terrify them, or humble them with deep apprehensions of his
indignation: for they know not their own strength, whether they be able to
bear it, if God should deal severely; they forget that it is God that must
make all afflictions profitable, and that of themselves these things tend to
despair and hardness of heart: and it is no small unthankfulness to complain
of the Physicians care, because he is inclined to deal tenderly with you.
Godly sorrow is to be cherished, and so is the desire of, and prayer for more
tenderness of heart: but when we pray for more horror, we rely too much upon
our selves, and yet consider not our own weakness.

Seventhly, This preparation is neither saving grace, nor a thing between
nature and grace, done by the external aid of the Spirit. It is not saving
grace, because it is that, whereby God is pleased to bring us to Christ, and
not that, whereby we are renewed to believe, or engraffed into Christ. Nor a
thing between nature and grace; as if the Spirit without any habit of grace,
did lift us up to the supernatural acts of belief, hope, love: for then we
should be-lifted up to acts of life without the habit, which is to make a
blind man see without sight, and to make us bear good fruit without sap, or
before we be good trees.

Eighthly, These things may dispose us to faith, but not to justification
immediately: because the smart of the wound may provoke to seek a plaster,
but serves not to the curing of it. Justification is of the free grace of God
through the blood of Jesus Christ, and not through any habit of grace infused
into us: much less through fear of hell, or initiall hope, or desire, or such
like.

Ninthly, Where the effectual raising up of the heart to faith begins,
there Gods preparative works take an end: for as that which prepares the
ground for seed now cease, when the seed is to be sown: So all these, which
as they are preparations fit the soul for Gods effectual calling to be given,
they have their end, when this immortal seed com^th to be sown in us.

The second Question is, whether the efficacy of grace depend upon the liberty
of will; not whether grace has its intrinsecall virtue to work after the
manner of grace, or a supernatural agent from the liberty of the will; which
all men deny. Though if grace incline the will to a vital and internal ac^ it
takes away some degrees of indifferency, and adds some weight of disposition
rather to will, then to nill. But the Question is, whether grace effectual do
leave the will at liberty actually to resist it or no; or whether it be from
grace, or the liberty of will that this man does assent, and not another, why
grace in the second act is Motion^ efficacis conceptu quidditativo includitur
actuale obsequiumillius qui efficaciter movetur: alioqui motio illa esset
sufficiens, non efficax. Eze. 36. 24, 26. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Col. 2. 11. Ezekiel. 11.
17. Jer. 24. 7. and 31 33, 37. Isa. 54. 10. and 50. 20, 21. Phil. 4 13. 1 John
4. 4, Ephesians. 3. 16. Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Isa. 44. 3.
effectual to the producing of conversion in Peter, and not in Judas. If grace
take away the stony heart, then it removes in us whatsoever should resist or
make head against the Spirit: for the will cannot resist when corruption is
removed, and to resist the application of grace sufficient, is no small part of
a stony heart. A cause in power only, is not a cause, but a cause in act
applied, which is then sufficient, and not potent only to do somewhat, when
applied in act it brings forth effect; sufficient I say, not physically, but
morally, presupposing the actual application of it to that purpose. And on the
other side, if the heart of stone be not taken away, sufficient grace was not
actually applied of God for that special effect: for a fleshie heart cannot be
received by a stony, but the stony is removed by the fleshie: There is the same
reason of that grace of conversion, and of the grace that follows after
conversion: but the grace following conversion borrows not its efficacy from
the liberty of the will. That which God promises to do, cannot be the
condition of the thing promised, because the promise is precedent: but God
promises to give a new heart, and to put his Spirit into the inner man, and
that not for their sakes, but of his free grace. And this promise God did Ezekiel.
36. 32.
fulfill daily in the Church of the Jews, but more sparingly according Isa 40.
40. Luke 3. 6. J^^l 2. 28. Act. 2. 16, 17. Ephesians. 1. 19. 1 Pet 1. 5.
to the measure of grace, the fullness whereof was reserved unto the times of
the Messiah. That which the omnipotency of God is put forth to work in the
creature, that the creature cannot resist. But God puts forth his
omnipotency, that by the effectual working thereof, he may bring us to
believe. To say that notwithstanding Gods helping grace man may resist, is to
put grace in man's power, not to put man's will under the power of grace: to make
man able to frustrate Gods counsel touching his conversion, and make God a
liar in that which he has sworn touching the gathering of his people.

The work of conversion is wrought in the will, not from any natural power of
suffering, but from the obedience in which it is to Gods almighty power, which
it cannot but obey, and come to any thing whereunto he will bring it. For the
will has no natural inclination to suffer any thing, both for the being and
manner of it above nature, as in the eye now blind there is no natural power
to receive sight. And if there were a power natural to receive conversion,
then there must be some agent in nature able to work conversion: for there is
not found a power natural of suffering in any thing, but there is found a
power correspondent working upon it. But to leave the efficacy of grace to the
liberty Servas beri instrumentum est, sed non necesse est ^erus determinet
singulos actus servi. A^ omnis causa subordinata ita Deo, ut quodlibet
instrumentum passivum agenti libero, etc.
of man's will to choose or refuse, that does make the will no instrument subject
to Gods power, but gives it power to do as it will, when God has done all he
may unto it. If God do not apply and determine the creature to will and work
that which he works in the creature, then the creature is the cause why God
works, and consequently why he wills the conversion of man. For Gods
concourse working this or that, must either go before the will, and so cause
it to will, or else it must follow accomplishing that which man wills. But
the will of man has no causall force on God himself, nor does his will follow
or attend upon the will of man. If the efficacy of grace depend upon the
liberty of man's will, then God does not certainly foreknow the conversion of
man. For God cannot know this or that man's conversion certainly from eternity,
but he must see it certain in himself, willing it, or in the causes of it, or
he must see it from all eternity, as being present to himself out of the
causes. But if the efficacy of grace depend upon the liberty of man's will, God
does not certainly will and determine the conversion of man, Certitudo mentis
absque omni entis certitudine and necessitate est impossibilis. Quis Deo
determinationem tribuerit, au^ rationi a Deo moraliter ad^ibitae, quando tota
causalitas determinativa, quanta quanta est, nec a Deo, nec a ratione
proficiscatur? Joh. 6 37. Jer. 31. 34. Isa. 54. 13. 1 Cor 4 7. Effectus
producti in ^ec objecto and non in illo non sunt tribuendi causae communiter
agenti. 1 These. 2. 3. Ephesians. 2. 2.
nor is it determined in its causes or circumstances: and that he has these
things, as existing forth of their causes from eternity to eternity,
co-existent with him, is an unconceiveable absurdity. God does see what a free
creature will do, being set in such and such circumstances, because he does
see how his power would determine him in such and such occasions: but to make
him see determination, when neither himself has any way determined, when the
circumstances do it not, when nothing in the free creature does determine him,
is to make him see that, which neither in the creature, nor in himself is to
be seen.

They that are given unto Christ of the Father, and taught of the Father, they
come unto Christ freely, but necessarily withal, not in respect of the liberty
of will, for necessity flows not there from, but the efficacy of grace: they
come unto Christ, they are not so disposed, that they might come or not come.

A common cause does not distinguish: but if grace be common to them that
believe, and them that believe not, it is only the common cause of conversion,
and does not separate the believer from the unbeliever. Men are said to
sanctify, purge and free themselves, as the instruments of God, and free
agents subordinate to grace predetermining: but the Scripture never says that
man is the cause, separating himself from the number of reprobates externally
called in like manner with himself. Conversion, as it is an act supernatural
in us, should be the effect of divine vocation: but the cause of comparative
vocation should be the mere will or pleasure of the creature. Grace and
liberty cannot be mixed together in the partiality of the cause, because
liberty (as the Patrons of that opinion hold) is a free, indifferent, elective
cause: but grace, a cause determinate to produce one effect. The use of grace
is the application of actual grace to act. But if the efficacy of grace
depend upon the liberty of man's will, neither grace preventing nor cooperating
does apply grace to it work: not preventing grace, because no mere power, as
such, does actuate it self: nor cooperating, because in order of causality it
goes not before the efficiency of the will. If God give to believe, and not
only power Phil. 1. 19.
to believe, to believe, and not only to believe, when we will to believe; then
by grace he determines the will to believe, suffer, will; and the efficacy of
grace is reduced unto God, willing and determining. And if he work in us both
to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. Mat. 11. 27.
not according to the liberty of our will, but his own good pleasure: if to
will and do, inclinably, rightly and well, and not so as we may resist, then
he determines the will to will and do by his grace.

To what end do the promises and threatenings tend (may some man say) if God
do work all things by his effectual power in them that believe? To what end,
but that men might be saved? But God does that which pertains to a King and
Lawgiver toward many, when that which pertains to the secret and
unutterable dispensation of his grace, he does not do: that is, he invites
many in the Ministry of his Word, and external administration of the
Covenant, whom he does not inwardly instruct and draw, taking away the
blindness and hardness of the heart. But then the invitation is a giftlesse
gift. Not so neither, but rather he is a most unthankful servant, of a
perverse mind that he Deus sic movet hominem ad bona opera, ut homo cognoscat
and vetit, and Deo monenti and moventi ultro morem gerat Nec tantum Deus agit
cum voluntatibus nostris, sed etiam per voluntates. Isa 53. 10. Isa. 45. ^, 12.
Psalm. 8. 8. Ps. 72. 8, ^, 10 Ps. 100. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 23. 5, 6.
cannot obey: For this inability is no cause of disobedience, proceeds from
no fault of the faculties subject to the mind and will, from no natural
quality of the matter necessitating, but the mere wilfulness and perverseness
of the soul. The invitation of God is not so hard, that man cannot fulfill it,
if he would; nor wicked, that we cannot will to do it without sin: but
lawful, just, honest, and such as if man would he could not but execute, so
far as he truly judges it ought to be willed and executed. If the efficacy
of grace depend upon the liberty of man's will to things opposite, then the
promises of God the Father made to his Son might all be frustrate; That he
should see his seed: that the people should come unto him from the North, and
the West, and from the Isles: that he should possess the Gentiles as his
inheritance: that his dominion should be from Sea to Sea: that a willing people
should come unto him, etc. But the Covenant of God with his Son cannot be
made void and of none effect.

If (some may object) conversion be so the Determinatio Dei est externa,
aequiv^ca, no^ vitalis, principalis. Humana vero, interna, univoca, vitalis,
and subordi^ata. Deus ita utitur voluntate, ut ipsa voluntas sese elective,
vitaliter, and ex practico rationis judicio agat. Deus pr^mo. principaliter and
ab aeterno actum liberum, ut futurum, and libere ponendum determinat, sed non
ad alium sed ad ^undem numero actum, ad quem voluntas in tempore determinavit
^ese. Causa actus liberi est potentia determinata non simpliciter potentia.
Deus sic movet res necessarias, ut non fiant contingentes: and sic movet res
co^tingentes ut voluntarias, ut non adimit eis contingentiam and voluntatem.
Quando superior causa est physica and a legesoluta, and inferier mora^is, and
legi subdita, esto quod superior physica influit in inseriorem, tamen si
in^erior est libera, rea esse potest in^erior, and non superior. Virg. Aeneid.
8. and fati^ egere volentem.
work of God, then man does not repent and believe, but God. But this
follows not: for repentance is the gift of God, but the act of man. God is
the cause of willing, efficient, but not formal: the cause external and
effective, but not vitally efficient. The determination of God external, and
vital volition differ as cause and effect: for he works in us to will: but
volition does not work to will: the determination of God as efficient is
external, and respects the will in the first act of its influx, but vital
determination is internal, and respects good to be chosen or to be desired.

In man not converted two things are to be considered; native contumacy, and
the not curing of that native contumacy. The native contumacy, is of
themselves, as darkness from the earth: the not curing of this co^tumacy is of
God, as a cause physical, because he can cure it, but does not; but not as a
Moral cause, because he is not bound to heal or cure it. The effect of God
not curing this native contumacy, is only a negative non-conversion physical
or not culpable, as a moral effect. The absence of the sun is the cause why
the darkness of the night is not removed, but the darkness it self is not
from the sun. Fault is a moral defect, and cannot arise but from a moral
cause and deficient. Culpable non-conversion is a consequent of Gods not curing
our native contumacy, but no effect thereof, as of a moral cause: because God
is not bound to remove it either by Law, debt, justice, promise, or Covenant,
and betwixt the resistance of the Spirit, and Gods not-conversion, the free
willing of the corrupt will, and voluntary love of native contumacy does
intercede. Not only ability to believe, but belief it self is merited by the
death of Christ, and for Christ vouchsafed to them, who are called according to
his purpose.

In this vocation of a sinner God does so administer both his Word and Spirit,
as he knows it becomes both his justice Romans 9. 24, 25, 26. and 10. 17, 18,
19, 20. Romans 11. 25, 29, 30, 32, 33.
and mercy in Christ, always reserving to himself full and free power to call
whom he please, according to the good pleasure of his will, But this
distribution of vocation into external and internal, is not a distribution of
the kind into its specialls, but shows rather what does concur to that
work of vocation, 1 Cor. 3 5, 6. Romans 1. 5.
whereunto obedience is willing and freely yielded.

This vocation is instituted and administered according to the eternal decree
and purpose of God: for known unto God are all Act. 15. 18.
his works from eternity: and God does nothing in time, which he decreed not
to do from all eternity. Whosoever therefore is Ephesians. 3. 5, 6, 9, 11. Jam. 1.
18. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
called in time, he was predestined from eternity, that he should be called,
and in what state, place, time, manner, means soever a man is called, he was
predestined to be called in that state, at that time, by those means, and
neither sooner, nor later, nor otherwise: for the execution cannot vary from
the decree, but the note of changeableness must be ascribed unto God.

The company of them that are called effectually is the Church, which is
visible and invisible, as this vocation is inward and outward; Romans 10. 10.
visible, which does profess with the mouth, and invisible, which does believe
with the heart: as man is distinguished 1 Cor. 4. 16.
into inward and outward. And as vocation inward and outward are not two
callings, but one and the same: so the Church visible and invisible are not two
Churches, but the same Church differently considered. Christ has not two
Kingdoms, but There is but one Lord, one Temple, one Ministry. Hieron. ad
Nepotian. de vit. Cler. Bilson. Perpet. govern. cap. 11.
one Kingdom, one body, one Church, whereof every one that is savingly called
is a living member.

The work of grace and heavenly calling is that which gives being to the
Church, and make it a different society from all other companies of men
whatsoever. By effectual calling and the answer of the soul unto God calling,
men are admitted into the Kingdom of Christ or Church of God; every one that
is thus called is of the Church; and every one of the Church is thus called. He
that is not thus called is not of the Church, and he that is not of the Church
is not thus called. He cannot be out of the Church, who is in Covenant with
God: nor can he be a member of the Church, who is not in Covenant.

The sheep of Christ by predestination and eternal purpose are gathered into
this fold, some sooner, others later, some after one Joh. 10. 16. Mat. 20 3. 5.
Act. 11. 18. Gal. 3. 28. Rev. 5. 9. Psalm. 68. 18.
manner, some after another, of all nations, kinreds and ongues, Jews and
Gentiles, bond and free, male and female, near and far off; such as have
lain longer and ^^^ke deeper into sin; and such as have been preserved from
the pollutions of the world.

The end of this vocation as it is the work of God calling, is, that they who
are given unto Christ of the Father, should freely and willingly answer to God
and Christ calling, and so become the confederates of God by Christ the
Mediator of the New Testament, and being faithful and confederate, they
should love, fear, honor, worship and obey God in Jesus Christ. In respect
Pro. 1. 24. Heb. 3. 7, 8. Rev. 3. 20. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13. Jer. 32. 38, 39. Luke
1. 74, 75. Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Phil. 2. 12. Ephesians. 1. 6. Act. 13. 47, 48.
of the outward invitation, it is their office and duty to answer to the call:
In respect of the inward and powerful work of the holy Ghost, they are
certainly enabled and drawn to come unto Christ, and give up themselves unto
him.

Another end remote, is the Salvation of the elect, and the glory of God, in
which respect calling to grace is a means ordained of God, and according to
the ordinance of God necessary to the communication of Salvation: and the
answer of the called, is a condition requisite and necessary for the obtaining
of that end, according to the ordinance and appointment of God. The glory of
God, most wife, good, merciful* just and powerful does so Rev. 4, 8, 9, 10.
and 5. 8. 9, 10.
brightly shine forth in the communication both of grace and glory, that it
does worthily draw the minds of men and Angels into admiration, and loose
their tongues into the praise and magnifying of God. E^ si respect^ singulorum
qui pe^e^nt, optabile esset ut homo non peccasset, respectu tamen universalis
boni, c^jus potius habenda fuit ratio, non debuit Deus potentiam suam ex^rere
ad impediendum ne peccaretur.


Opposite unto this vocation, is, 1. That God does suffer some to walk after
the vanity of their own hearts, and blindness of their minds, and does not
invite them to come unto him, or exhort them to repent. Thus God regarded not
the Gentiles in the days of their ignorance, but gave them up to the lusts of
their own hearts. And at this day, many nations are shut up in ignorance, and
have not heard so much as the sound of the Gospel for many generations. It is
true, the Lord calls them in a sort by his long-suffering and patience, and
by the works of providence, in that he fills their hearts with food and
gladness, but by the promise of mercy he is not pleased to speak unto them.

2. Some that be outwardly called, they contemn the counsel Luke 7. 30. Act.
^3* 46. Act. 7. 51. Psalm. 81 12, 13. Isai. 63. 10. and 6. 9, 10. Joh. 12. 37,
38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 20. 25. Per statuta m^la intelligi possunt leges Ethnicorum,
vel lex Dei, quae ipsis in perniciemcessit.
of God, put away from them the Word of grace, resist the Spirit of God
speaking unto them in the mouth of his Prophet, whence follows blindness of
mind, hardness of heart, efficaciousness of error that men should believe
lies, a reprobate sense, and delivering into the power of Satan. Jer. 4. 20.
Thou have seduced this people; scil. by false prophets promising them peace,
which God promised not; and giving them up to the efficacy of error, as a
punishment of former transgression.

3. God does call some by the Gospel, and bestow upon them diverse spiritual
good things, though not such as accompany Salvation. And thus some do hear,
and receive, and rejoice in the Word, and bring forth some fruit, but not to
ripeness or perfection.

CHAP. V. How Christians answer to the call of Christ, and so come to have
Fellowship with him.
IN the matter of Salvation it pleased God to deal with man by way of
stipulation and promise, and so likewise in his calling to the participation of
the Covenant. For though this Vocation be every way free, gracious and
absolute, as the Spirit works where he lists, yet in the Gospel, which is
the instrument of Vocation, it pleases God to propound both the condition,
which he requires, and the promise which he has made. The promise, as an
argument to move us the rather to give our selves unto Christ, and to do what
is required. The prescription of what he requires, as that condition, without
which we cannot obtain, and by which most certainly we shall obtain what good
is promised. Effectual Vocation on Gods part is the powerful invitation and
assured drawing of the weary and thirsty soul unto Christ, that in him it
might find refreshing and comfort.

The answer on our part, is a free and willing coming unto Mat. 11. 28, 29.
Joh. 6. 44. and 6. 35, 37.
Christ, that in him we might be satisfied; the embracing of Jesus Christ, and
lodging him in our bosom. And therefore that which first of all receives that
Vocation, is faith, whereby we believe, that if a man perform the condition,
he shall possess the promise, if he come unto Christ, he shall be satisfied:
but if he perform not the thing required, he shall not enjoy the promise; he
shall not be satisfied, if he drink not the water of life. And not only so,
but he shall continue poor, naked, blind, miserable, captive, a prisoner, an
alien from the Covenant, and without God in the world: nay, he shall be
punished with contrary evils, according to the nature of the Covenant divine,
where there is no promise without a commination contrary to it. This faith is
grounded upon the free and gracious Covenant, whereby God is pleased to bind
himself first unto us, before he bind us unto himself, that his promise
might be apprehended as the ground of our faith, upon which we should firmly
believe: And upon the Isai. 55. 1, 2. Joh. 7. 37. Rev. 22. 17.
free and gracious invitation of Christ generally made to all and every poor,
thirsty, languishing, faintie soul, parched with the sense of wrath, and
withered for lack of the sap or fruit of grace, to come unto him for ease and
sweet refreshing, to the contentation and satisfying of their souls: to come
and drink of the waters of life freely. Where let it be observed, that Thirst
and Dryness, in phrase of Scripture, does note the want of good things, as
Isai. 29. 8. Psalm. 42. 1. Isai. 32. 2. and 55. 1. Psalm. 143. 6.
on the contrary, absolute good, whereby the desire of soul and body may be
satisfied, is usually compared to waters. To thirst, is from a total defect of
the Spirit of Grace, or a defect of the whole Spirit of Grace tormenting the
soul, to desire it. And so not to thirst for ever, and the graces of the
Spirit to remain Joh. 4. 14. and 7. 38.
in us for ever, or that water, to be in us a fountain of water springing up to
life eternal, is one and the same. In Heathen authors, to thirst, is
exceedingly to desire, but for the most part that desire comes from some
tormenting want. Artemidorus, (...). And Cyrus willing to declare his ardent
desire of doing good to others, says, (...), i. Sitio aliis gratificari. In
which signification it is used by the Latins also. Cic. pro Planc. Deinde
sitientem me virtutis tuae deseruisti. Apud Horat. Sitis argenti. Apud Juvenal.
Sitis famae. Apud Claudian. Sitis praed^. And the opposition that is betwixt
thirst and water will evidence the same. For water, if we respect the use which
it affords to the earth and to bodies, does make fruitful barren fields,
purify things polluted, q^ench or water them that are dry, and sweetly
refresh them that boil with heat: And therefore if water metaphorically
signify comfort and refreshing, wherewith the soul is recreated and rejoiced:
Thirst, which is opposite to water, does denote a soul dried up with grief,
spent with the heat of Gods indignation, and tormented with the vexing or
molesting want of grace and consolation. To be weary and heavy laden, is to be
faint or tired under some burden, labor, Deuteronomy. 25. 18. ^ Sam. 17. 2. and 23.
10. Psalm. 6. 7. See there.
journey, disease or work. But tirednesse and fainting, weariness and trouble
are no parts of health or ^ase; no more then the sight, feeling, or knowledge
of the disease is any part of the cure: weariness and fainting is neither
part, degree, nor preparative to refreshing, if in it self considered.

And here the doubt touching the precedence of faith and repentance may easily
be determined. For if faith be taken largely or generally for a belief of the
promise, if we repent and receive it, then faith is before repentance: for
there can be no turning without hope of pardon, nor coming home by hearty
sorrow, without some expectation of mercy. Thus the Exhortations run, Turn unto
the Lord, for he is merciful and gracious. Repent, for the Kingdom of God is
at hand. But if faith be taken more strictly, for that faith or belief whereby
we receive, embrace, or rest upon the promise of God in Christ Jesus for pardon
and forgiveness, then repentance goes before pardon: for no remission is
promised to Mark ^. 4. Luke 24. 47.
be enjoyed but upon condition of repentance; and if the penitent only be
immediately capable of pardon, then pardon is received by a penitential faith.
If repentance be necessary to Justification, of necessity it must go before
justifying faith; because faith and justification are immediately coupled
together. It is impossible to come unto Christ without repentance, but to come
unto Christ is to embrace or receive him soundly and effectually to the
refreshing of the soul. Coming unto Christ is a lively motion of the soul,
wherein arising from sin, it draws nigh or approaches unto Christ, that in
him it might be satisfied. The motion is one, but the points are two. For in
drawing nigh unto Christ, the soul arises from sin: which may be called
repentance. Of the signification of the word, I will move no question at this
time: but take repentance for a coming unto Christ by true, godly sorrow, from
whom we had formerly departed by sin and wickedness, to the extreme hazard of
our souls.

The Author of repentance, is God in Jesus Christ. Repentance 2 Timothy 2. 25.
Jer. 31. 18.
is the gift of God, but the act of man. It is man that repents and not God:
but it is God that gives repentance, inableth, and moves man to repent.
Regeneration is the act of God: repentance the act of man. In subject they both
agree; for he that is Ezekiel. 36. 25.
regenerate does also repent, and so on the contrary: but in their formal
consideration and peculiar nature they are distinct. Christ also as Mediator
is the principal cause of repentance: for him has God exalted to give
repentance unto Israel. And seeing repentance Act. 5. 31. Act. ^1. 18.
is not to desperation, but to life and Salvation, it cannot be without all
respect of Christ, in whom only we have deliverance from the condemnation and
dominion of sin. Repentance is the effect of Christ's death and intercession. As
he has purchased pardon of sin for us, so repentance also, otherwise we should
be Isai. 53. 5.
partakers of some saving grace, or blessing, which Christ did not purchase for
us.

The Spirit of God is not undeservedly called the Spirit of Christ as
Mediator, convincing the Conscience of sin and unrighteousness, and
discovering unto the heart the grace of the Gospel. The Word of the Kingdom
or Covenant is the instrument of repentance, as that which discovers sin, and
holds forth hope of pardon, and entreats, persuades, and encourages the
weary and burdened to draw nigh to God by Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A Table directing to some principal things in the foregoing Discourse.
A
ABraham, how the father of the faithful, page 50. who meant by Abraham's seed,
ibid. and p. 51 Adam, whether to be translated into heaven if he had stood, p.
10 Though he had been rewarded in justice, yet not of merit. ib. A double
obedience required of Adam, viz. natural, and symbolicall, p. 10 why God
forbade Adam the eating of the tree of knowledge, ibid. whether Adams
perfection in Innocence were natural or supernatural. p. 11. Gods Covenant
with Adam a Covenant of friendship, not of reconciliation. ib. Adam how he
could be secure, seeing his condition was mutable p. 13. Adam in Innocence,
whether he had power to believe, p. 44 Adoption, the Jews partakers of it, yet
had it tempered with servitude. p. 35 Acceptilation, whether Christ satisfied
not Gods justice fully, but by divine Acceptilation only, seeing he suffered
but for a time. 291 Affiance, the ground of particular affiance, is some word
or promise made to a man not yet believing. p. 229 Agony of Christ without any
sinful distemper. 282. the effects of it. 283, 284. Betwixt his desires in his
agony, a diversity, but no contrariety. ib. All in Scripture sometime signifies
neither all precisely, nor the most part. 208
B
BEcause what it signifies. p. 57 The phrase from the beginning, or the
beginning, what it imports. p. 42 Believe, whether every man be bound to
believe that Christ died for him in particular, p. 222, 223. etc. He that goes
on in an evil way is not immediately called to believe in Christ. 223. Things
that are true as promised, it is not necessary that they be, unless we believe.
225. That man cannot believe, is not through impotency of weakness, but
impotency of wilfulness. 226. Belief that Christ died for all men cannot be
the ground of justifying faith, 228. what sign God gives of his willingness
to have men believe, when he gives them not power 245 Believers and Christ's
sheep, how they differ. 255 Bellarmine confuted, who says, the faith whereby
Abraham was justified, was justice. p. 72 But, not ever an exceptive, but often
an adversative. 302
C
CAnaan, how said to be an everlasting possession. p. 55 Caphar, what it
signifies. 279 Carnal Christians their privilege. 55 Carnal reasonings: to
be avoided in divinity. 249 Cause, an immediate or next cause what. p. 70. A
moral cause, though not present in act, yet if supposed future, may have
effects. p. 31 Circumcision, why with blood, and why ordained, seeing both
sexes not capable of it. p. 90. what it was a seal of. ibid. Circumcision not
unprofitable to those that were not partakers of the spiritual blessings. 91
Christ more darkly revealed in the Covenant of promise, and why. p. 32. Christ
Mediator, and Testatour both, 203. for whom he died and rose again, whether for
all and every man with a purpose to save, or for all in respect of the
sufficiency of the price, not efficiency. 204, 205, 206, etc. No man hindered
from coming to him by any cause efficient, or deficient out of himself. 244.
Both natures concur in him necessarily as a formal beginning in the works of
Mediation. 269. How he is inferior to the Father, 271. our sins laid upon him.
276, 277. and he substituted for the sins of the faithful. 279. Satisfaction
made by him, and that real, and not by acceptilation, ib. and 280, 281. How
the Church is said to have Christ, 287. His appearing before his Father for us,
what it imports, 296. How he is King. 306. In Christ's person a threefold
fullness. 317. How Christ was Mediator before his Incarnation. p. 27. Christ
the common storehouse, in which every thing is first placed, that is to be
imparted to believers. p. 38 Church- members, the Covenant externally made with
every one, parents and their children. p. 24. and 29 Church of the elect only
one. p. 30. sometimes the bounds of it narrower, sometimes larger. 203. In the
latter days, it is probable, the bounds of it will be larger then heretofore.
ib. Commandment, Gods Commandments show whatour duty is, not what God will work
in every man. 134 Conditions of two sorts. 133 Conversion, though not a bare
moral persuasion, yet not effected without persuasion, 328. Conversion of a
sinner called conviction, and why. 333. what is that effectual help whereby a
man comes to God. 335. wherein stands the efficacy of grace effectual to
conversion. 336. whether God a cause of man's non-conversion. 344 Covenant,
several derivations of the original word, p. 1. Covenant of salt, what. p. 2.
Acceptions of the word Covenant. p. 3, 4. The essence of the Covenant, wherein
it consists. 4. Covenant and law how differ. ib. There may be a Covenant
without verbal expressions, p. 5. yet there have been always expressions in
the Covenant with the reasonable creature, ibid. The Covenant is one thing, and
the name of the Covenant is another, p. 5. Causes why God is pleased to deal
with the reasonable creature in a Covenant- way, p. 6. A Covenant with man in
Innocence, though the word Covenant not to be found. p. 6. The Covenant betwixt
God and man in general described. p. 7. The Author of the Covenant, God, not
God and man, ib. The Covenant is of grace, even where reward is promised of
justice, ib. and p. 9. The subject of the Covenant is man, and how. 8. Covenant
of works and grace no where in Scripture totidem syllabis, 9. Covenant of God
with man, not one, but manifold and sundry ways whereby they are
distinguished, 8. Of the Covenant with man in Innocence, p. 9. Covenant of
works whether still on foot in the posterity of Adam, in respect of temporal
good things, p. 13. Covenant of grace, what. 14. Impossible to be under the
Covenant of works and grace at once. 15. Covenant of grace diverse in
administrations, one in substance. 23. Covenant of nature and grace how they
agree and differ. ib. Covenant of grace to be considered as promised, and as
established, p. 27. Covenant of promise, what. 28. Covenant of promise and the
new Covenant, how they differ, viz. eight ways, p. 32. Christ more darkly
revealed in the Covenant of promise, and why, ib. Covenant of promise when it
began, and how long it continued. 36. The degrees of it. ib. the parts of it.
43. who contained under it. 45. the Covenant of promise, whether made in Adam
with every infant that should be born into the world. p 46. Covenant of grace
as manifested to Abraham, p. 47. what peculiarly to be observed therein, ib.
the grand promises of it. 53. the temporal promises. 54. Covenants personal,
family-Covenants and national. p. 52. Covenant with Abraham how confirmed. p.
90. All are not in Covenant in one manner. p. 91. Covenant of grace under Moses
till the return out of the Captivity. p. 92. Covenant of works whether made
with man fallen. 93. Obscurity among Divines in differencing the old Covenant
and new 95. Covenant made with Israel particularly explicated, and what Moses
brought to the further expressure of the Covenant of grace, 122. Gods Covenant
with David. 143. etc. In this Covenant Christ more clearly manifested then
before. 144. The things promised in this Covenant. 146, 147. The condition of
it. 149. The execution of this Covenant. 150, 151. etc. In this Covenant some
things promised absolutely, some conditionally, 152, 153. Two things to be
considered in this Covenant, 154. Covenant made with Israel, after the
Babylonish Captivity, 156. etc. The promises of this Covenant, 158, 159. etc.
In what sense this Covenant may be called new, 161. Wherein this Covenant
exceeded the former, which God made when he brought them out of Egypt, 161,
162, 163. Of the new Covenant or Testament, and how God has revealed himself
therein. 194. See New Testament.
D
DOubting, what the right course to take with him that doubts, whether he
should believe, because of his former transgressions. 226 Dead, to what purpose
invitations made to them that are dead in sins. 244 Death inflicted on none but
sinners, or him that bears the person of a sinner. 276 Debt, a twofold
paying of a debt. 290 Decree of God to punish sin, the reason of it. 276
E
ELect are in grace with God, in respect of Ordination and appointment, though
after brought into grace by Christ, by actual collation and communication. 292
Examination of our selves necessary. p. 87. a means to attain and preserve
uprightness. 188 Exhortations to all import not a general purchase of
salvation for all. 208, 209. they are useful both to them that have received
the truth, and to them that have not. 209. to what purpose exhortations and
invitations are to persuade men to believe that have no power. 247 External
blessings more esteemed of under the Covenant of promise, and why, p. 34
F
FAith, why not expressly required in the Covenant of nature, p. 12. Faith
which the righteousness of nature presupposes, how it differs from the faith
required in the Covenant of grace, p. 12. Faith the alone cause on our part
required of justification and salvation. 18. In what sense it is imputed for
righteousness. 63. Three diverse opinions of orthodox Divines about the
imputation of Faith. 64. 65, 66 Faith has not the place of our righteousness,
but does answer in our participation of Christ, to that which is the ground of
our being partakers of Adams sin. 67, 68. Though faith be commanded in the
law, it follows not, that being justified by faith, we are justified by the
works of the law. 114. Faith, whether that Christ as be died to impetrate
remission of sin for me in particular, be the object of justifying faith, 227.
Faith justifying is not without an apprehension of mercy in Christ to be
obtained, but implies not an apprehension of mercy in the pardon of sin
already obtained, 227 Faithful, all of the same faith with Abraham, 91 Father,
though the same work be done by Father and Son, yet a difference in the manner
of working, 268 Fathers, before Christ and Christians in the time of the
Gospel, under the same Covenant for substance. 26 Fellows, how the faithful
are called Christ's fellows. 311 Fellowship with the Saints a sign and means
of uprightness. 188 Fullness of grace of two sorts. 311
G
GIving does not always import an act of grace, p. 61 Gospel, why meet that
the promise should go before it. 32. Grace bestowed more plentifully under the
Gospel, how to be understood. 35. Gospel, in what sense called everlasting,
37. How faith is said to come by the Gospel, seeing it was commanded in the
law, 113. The law, as given to the Jews, not opposite to the Gospel, ib.
Gospel strictly taken, or the new Testament, when it took its beginning. 197,
198. Good, that the intellectual nature is capable of, is double, 313 Graces
how given by the hand of the Apostles, how by Christ, 320 Guile of our spirits,
how to find it out, 187. etc. how to take up our selves for it, 192
H
HAnd, right hand what it signifies in Scripture. 303 Head, how Christ is the
head to his body, 318 Heart, a double heart what, 185. signs of a good heart.
ibid. Heathens, some remainders of Gods Image in them, and many temporal
blessings vouchsafed them, whence it comes to pass. 13 Heaven, The fathers
that died before Christ, had not that perfect state in heaven, that now they
have, and we are presently possessed of, and in heaven they did expect their
redeemer, 35 36. The Kingdom of Heaven not expressly mentioned in the old
Testament, 132 Heavenly things wrapped up under earthly in the old Testament. 33
Humane nature of Christ most highly exalted, 305. Christ as man has a
prerogative above every creature, 214. He is set above all principality, and
power, and dominion, and what signified hereby. 214. He has a power above
every creature. 215. The man Christ is King of heaven and earth, 216. yet this
power is not infinite simply, ibid. Humanity of Christ whether to be adored.
321
I
Jehovah, what it denotes. 123 Jews, why made a national Church, 92. they
had a double vail ^ver their eyes, 120. An illustrious type of election in
them, 33 Incarnation of Christ, whether necessary to go before its effects,
and benefits, 28. Incarnation of Christ the day of his coronation, and
espousals, 294 Impute, what it signifies in Scripture, 60, 61. Imputation of a
good thing three ways. 62. Imputation and reputation how differ, ib. Certain
corollaries about imputation. See Faith. 62 Infants holy by Covenant, 52
Integrity, see Uprightness, the necessity of it, 80, 81, 82, 83. It sets a
fair gloss upon the meanest actions, 83. The effects and fruits of it. 85.
Means to attain it. 86, 87, 88. How a Christian is to stir up himself to
attain Integrity. 88, 89, etc. Impotency of man such that he can neither move
to any thing of himself that is good, nor manage grace, when vouchsafed. 199.
Impossible, how that which is impossible may be an object of Gods desire and
approbation, 245. Innocent, whether an Innocent person ought to suffer for a
nocent, the question largely handled, 284, 285, etc. It is not universally
against equity for one to suffer the punishment of another sin, ib. That an
innocent person may justly suffer for a nocent, what is required, 286.
Intercession of Christ, whether well distinguished into general, and special,
258. Intercession of Christ, what it is, 296. It is general, and particular,
heavenly and glorious, 297. It is founded upon his satisfactory merits, ibid.
It implies three things, 298. It is not reciprocal. ibid. The benefits of it
to the Church, ibid. and 299. How the faithful come to be subject to evil and
misery. Christ interceding for them, ibid. Whether Christ prays for the
absolute perseverance of believers, or only upon condition, 301. Invitations of
God, man's perverseness only the cause, why he answers them not, 343. Israel,
why called Iesurun. 180. Judgment, whether the will follow it, 333, 334. 335.
the act of Judgment twofold, ibid. Justice of God cleared in requiring that,
of man fallen, which he has no power to do. 44. Justification cannot be by
faith and works, as concauses, ^o. Justification is by faith alone, not by
that faith which is alone. 73.
K
KIngs why specially to be prayed for, 231. Kingdom of Christ, he enters
always on it, by conquest, 323. yet uses no compulsion, 324. men are gathered
into this Kingdom by vocation, ibid. Knowledge of God begets in us a
similitude of God, 86. Christ saves not as clearly known, but as sincerely
acknowledged, 33.
L
LAW called fiery, why, 101. and 124 The Law as given upon mount Sinai was a
Covenant of grace, proved at large, 102, 103, 110. The Law never given without
the Gospel, nor the Gospel without the Law, 102. The Law requires faith, as
well as love and obedience, 105. 106. etc. The Law to be expounded according to
the sense the prophets give of it. 110. In the Law frequent mention of the
Messiah, 111. Faith in Christ commanded in the Law, though more obscurely, 113.
Law and Gospel in what respects opposed. 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, etc.
Law, a double use of it, 120. How it is said that the Law entered that sin
might abound, 139. Whether the Law be abolished to them that are under the
Covenant of grace, p. 15. Learning of Christ, what, 334. Limbus patrum, no such
thing, p. 30. yet the fathers before Christ had not that perfect state, which
now they have, and we are presently possessed of, p 35. Love of God toward the
creature, a double distinction of it, 4.
M
MAny sometimes put for all, 250. Mediator, the necessity of one, 264. What an
one the Mediator must be, ib. Why the second person was Mediator, rather then
the first or third, 266. According to which nature Christ was Mediator, ib. A
Mediator, what, 270. Whether Christ a Mediator to himself, ib. whether, if
Christ be a Mediator according to his divine nature, all the three persons be
not Mediators, 271. Mediation of Christ, three things to be considered in the
acts of it, p 28. How Christ has performed the office of mediatio^, 271.
Means not vouchsafed to all, and therefore neither the rest of the effects of
Christ's death, 233. Measure, what to do a thing in Measure, 310. Ministry of
the Jews, and the end of it, 138. Misery in man the occasion, but no cause of
Gods mercy toward him. Messiah, the times of the Messiah times of greater
light, 331. Moon, a fit resemblance of the Church, 147. Moses, whether the
Covenant of grace were manifested by him, 93. The shining of his face, what it
signified, 94. How and in what sense he was a mediator, 127, 128, 165.
N
NAtural gifts, whether they may be so used, that God will bestow
supernatural, 237. Negations in Scripture imply not always an absolute
denial, p. 5 New, what it signifies in Scripture, 194. A new song, what. ib.
A new commandment, what, 195. New man, what. ib. New Testament abolisheth not
the former, but the former was fulfilled by the latter, 29. Covenant of grace,
in what respect called a new Covenant, or Testament, 195. Why it is called a
Covenant, and why a Testament, 196. New Covenant when properly it began, 196.
New Testament published on a solemn day, in the Assembly almost of all nations,
197. New Testament, the nature of it stands in three things, 198. A description
of it, ib. The authority of it, reason why God made it, 199. New Covenant
preferred much before the old, though both of the same nature, and from the
same fountain, 200. The promises in it assured by Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
201. was stricken with all nations in opposition to the Jews, ib. made with
some externally, others internally, 202, 203. The prerogative of the new
Covenant above the old, 293, 294, etc.
O
OAth, when the Saints bound themselves by oath to walk in all the statutes of
the law, what they meant, 135. why God confirmed his promise to Abraham by
oath, 58 Obedience, under what notion required in the Covenant, 19. It is
twofold, perfect and sincere, 20. Obedience perfect is commanded, though not
rigidly exacted, and why, 21. It is in vain to think of entering into Covenant,
if not resolved to obey in all things, ib. Obscurity in the knowledge of Christ
under the Covenant of promise, and the degrees of it, and reasons, p. 32 Old
Testament what, 92. difference betwixt the old Testament and new. Old Testament
abolished by the death of Christ, in right, not in act. 196
P
Passover, when and to what purpose instituted, 142 Peculiar people, who, 103
The Pedagogy of the Jews illustrated largely by comparison of a Schoolmasters
dealing with his Scholars, 138, 139, 140. Perfection, what it imports in
Scripture phrase, 75. A thing is said to be perfect three ways, 76, 77, 78,
79. Prayers not to be made for all men, 231. Christ's praying for those that
crucified him, was of private duty, not out of his office of Mediator, 259.
some prayers suppose a condition in him for whom we pray, some none, 301
Personal union, the end of it, 269 To prepare the heart to seek God what, 179
Preparations, whether the spirit makes us come to God immediately, or by some
preparations going before. 336. Nine conclusions concerning such preparations,
337. etc. This preparation is neither saving grace, nor a thing betwixt nature
and grace, 339 Priesthood, the end and use of it, 138, 141
R
REading, God may work by it, when that preaching is not slighted, 327
Reconciliation, imports no change in God, 293 Redemption; universal
redemption, the controversy concerning it largely discussed, 204. through the
chapter, and objections answered. The deliverance we obtain by Christ is called
Redemption, and was made by the paying of a price, 279 Religion, for substance
ever one and unchangeable, 27 Remission of sin, though certain, yet less felt
in the old Testament, 35. Remission, what. 290. It is not repugnant to
antecedent satisfaction. ibid. Repentance, how called for in the Covenant of
grace, 18. Necessary, and must accompany faith, yet no cause of salvation, 19
Revelation, a double cleernesse of revelation, 33 Reward, how taken in
Scripture, 57 Right, or upright, by what words expressed in the original. 177
Righteousness diversely taken. 62. Righteousness imputative, is not putative.
63. Righteousness of the fact, and of the person. 66
S
SAcraments of the old Testament no types of the Sacraments of the new, 30.
Sacraments of the old and new Testament how they differ, 35 Satan, Gods
indignation against him, some cause of the Covenant of grace, 17 Sacramental
phrases, wherein the thing signified is given to the sign, are ancient and
familiar, 91 Sacrifices, what typified by the blood of them, 40. the fathers
before the law that offered them, had commandment from God for them, 45. sin
expiated in them by substitution. 279 Satisfaction, why God would not pardon
sin without it, 288, 289. How free remission stands with satisfaction, ib. How
it could be necessary for those, which were beloved of God, 292. The word
satisfaction not to be found in Scripture, but the thing is, 272. whether God
could not have pardoned sin without satisfaction, 273, 274, etc. Seed, how
variously taken in Scripture, 36 Segullah, what it imports. 103 Serpents head,
how bruised by Christ and his members. 39, 40 Servitude double, 141 Sheep of
Christ spoken of two ways in Scripture, 257 Sin, the discovery of it sweetens
mercy, and hence the law was more fully discovered by Christ then it had been
before. 272. Though it has an outward disagreement, such as may be in a
creature from the Creator, yet it has no inward positive repugnancy to Gods
nature, such as is betwixt fire and water, 275. Three things to be considered
in sin, 291 Sincerity, and Truth, and Uprightness. It is a comfort to a man
in his greatest distress, 172. It puts an heroic all spirit into the people of
God, ib. The service of the sound Christian is acceptable. ib. The degrees and
nature of soundness or sincerity, ib. etc. The effects of a sincere heart,
174. Nine signs of sincerity, 174, 175, etc. Sit, To sit, what it imports in
Scripture, and what it is to sit at the right hand of God, 303, 304. Christ's
sitting at the right hand of God, what, 305. The place where he sits, 308. Six
things employed in Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, 310. 321 Socinus,
the ground why he denied the prescience of God, 248 Spirit, The plentiful
pouring of it, deferred till the glorification of Christ, 330 Spiritual good
things of two sorts, 155 Sufferings of Christ, two things to be considered in
them, viz. the substance, and circumstances; for substance they were what the
law required, but for the circumstances, they were more, 281. His sufferings
were beyond measure grievous, 281. punishments of sin of two sorts, and which
of them Christ suffered, 282
T
TAught of God, what it means, 332 Temporal blessings in a greater measure,
and spiritual in a less, given to the natural seed in the first ages, 55
Testament old and new, in what accidents they differ, being for substance the
same, 163, 164 165, etc. Of Truth and uprightness, 166. Truth, what it
imports, ib. It presup. poseth five things, 167, 168, 169. Truth, compared by
the Apostle to a girdle, in what respects, 169, 170, 171, etc. Time may be
served, 178 Trinity, the doctrine of it obscure in the Old Testament, 201.
V
Union, and communion with Christ, how distinguished, 43. Union, several sorts
of union and conjunction of one person with another, 286. Union of the two
natures in Christ cannot cause the humane to partake the properties of the
divine, 308. Vocation, by it men are called into Christ's kingdom. It is free,
not depending upon any precedent condition, persons called to fellowship with
Christ, who, 324. The subject or matter of vocation what, 325. How men are said
to be worthy of their Vocation or calling, ib. and 326. It is partly external,
and partly internal, ib. Sometime it is wrought by the ministry of private
persons, 326. The instrument of Vocation. 327. Internal Vocation, how wrought,
332. Vorstius confuted, who says, that faith and repentance and new obedience
is accounted for righteousness, 69. Uprightnes, necessary, 80, 81, 82, 83. See
Integrity. Uprightnes of heart and life, 179, 180. An upright heart is fixed in
regard of the object, 180. The effects of Uprightnes, 183, 184, 185, etc. The
means whereby it may be attained and strengthened, 186, 187.
W
TO Walk before God, what, 73, 74. To walk in Chr. what, 74. Wicked men, what
benefit they have by Christ, 13, 14. Will, whether the efficacy of grace depend
upon the liberty of the Will, 340. They that are given to Christ, comefreely
yet necessarily, 342. How men are said to sanctify and purge themselves, 342.
God determines the Will to will and do, by his grace, 343. Works and faith
cannot be joined as con-causes in justification, 70. What Works be opposed to
faith in justification, 137. Word a moral instrument of conversion, 328. It is
not only preparatory, as if there were another Word suggested by the spirit,
which might be called co^summatory, 329. Word signifies the second person, in
many places of the old Testament. 125, 126. World to come what, 207. world that
Christ come to save, what, 210. Whether the whole world be reconciled to God by
Christ, 216, and 217. etc. world is usually taken for men in the world
indefinitely, not every man in the world, nor yet the greatest part, 261.

