Landgartha.

A Tragie-Comedy, as it was presented in the new Theater in Dublin, with good
applause, being an Ancient story,

Written by H. B.

HORAT. Hunc socci cepere pedem, grandesque cothurni.

Printed at Dublin Anno 1641.

The persons of the Play.
Frollo King of Sweland and conqueror of Norway. Hasmond and Gotar, two
courtiers to Frollo. Landgartha, a Norwegian Lady. Scania, sister to
Landgartha. Elsinora Aunt to both. Fatyma, cousin to Land. and Scan. Marfisa,
an humorous gentlewoman, cousin to Fatyma. Frederick and Wermond, two noble
men of Norway. Reyner King of Denmark. Valdemar, near cousin to Reyner.
Inguar, a Danish noble man. Hubba, an humorous merry Danish Captain. Cowsell
and Radgee, two foolish Coxcombes. Rolfo, a Drawer. Harrold, a competitor for
Denmark. Eric, his brother. Lothaire, a German noble man. Vraca, daughter to
Frollo. Two posts, a Scout, and two Gentl, Phoebus, Pallas, Pryam, Hector.
Achylles, and Satyrs, in a mask: which may be Acted by the forenam'd persons.
THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie.
To all fair, indifferent fair, virtuous, that are not fair and magnanimous
Ladies.
I Have here placed a pattern, yea, more then one (Ladies) for you to imitate
Chastity and other virtues joined to beauty, virtue single and manly fortitude
in the female Sex, do here present themselves unto you. What you cannot reach
one way take another: and know that the form and faculties of the mind, do
far excel in worth those of the body. Yet, both joined (as in Landgartha) is
of all the most excellent: in regard that that external beauty allures (nay
commands) the mind of man (that affects visible objects) to the love of
virtue, which it self does possess, and suffers (as most coveted) greater
combats in the resisting of vice. Bodily force too in a woman (were it but to
defend it is own Fort) is a perfection; though it cannot be expected but from a
few of you, it will be sufficient, that you never fall willingly, but in the
way of honor. If I have not draw'n this fair visage, as a chief Arts man: I
hope yet (you will say) that I have made it indifferent handsome, and that my
good will to effect it after the best fashion for your sakes: will
notwithstanding my weakness, purchase an excuse at least for my boldness,
both in undertaking the work and in offering of it (in part a poor brain
borne Infant of mine, that covets to look at the light) to be cherished by
such hands as yours, to kneel at the feet of your piety. Whatsoever it be,
or whosoever got it: let it be yours, as is

The affectionate honourer of your perfections Henry Burnell.

Patri suo Charissimo operis Encomium.
MVltiplici rations, sator, mea carmina (quamvis
Non limata) tuis jungo; nempe ipse petisti,
Cui teneor parere libens; formosa virago
Huc me vestra movet, virtutis dotibus exors,
In fraecte potius carnis qua compede solvi
Certa fuit, foedat a foret quam crimine; cujus
Iactatis Pyrrhae decus immortale resurgit
Nobilitus gestis; ad quod praecordia magna
Laetitia diffufa mihi, quando auribus hausi
Arrectis (genitor) te (per quem essentia, and a quo
Impetrata mihi, fruor and quibus, omnia) culte,
Consulto, graviter, cum suavitate, venuste,
Praegnantem causam peragisse. Sed indere amoris
Non probo delicias: quod te fecisse sequntum
Histori^normam; belle, sciteque jocantem
Latificando alie^, non te, men's certa revolvit.
Aliud.
Melpomena tua tela (parens) contexta Thalia et,
judicio quamvis non trutinanda meo est:
Me tua sed certam solers facundia, verax
expertorum hominum and fama diurna facit,
Te nullis potuisse tuis errare, decorum
omnimodo Scenis, sed tennisse triplex;
Nempe modum retinendo (docent ut scripta sagacit
Flacci) personae, temporis, atque loci.
Ad te a Invernis flexit victoria vatem.
partibus his cedunt Brutiginaeque tibi.
Fama quidem tendet, quacunque auratus Apollo
se tua: tu vives dum vehet amnis aquas.
Tu pater Aenio deducens vertice musas,
gloria (non fallor) posteritatis eris.
Terra tuas certum est exhauriet extera lauds;
clarescet scriptis insula nostra tuis.
Eleonora Burnell.

To his worthy to be much honored Cousin Henry Burnell Esquire. on this his
Tragie-Comedy, etc.
THough my praise cannot add ought here: Yet, give
Me leave (Cousin) to raise my self, and live
Past time with thee; for, what thou writ'st is fine,
Pleasant, profound, chaste, moral, and divine;
Beyond the childish flashes of this age,
Affected nonsense, and Canarian rage;
Or Garagantuan soppery. Not one word
That Is immateriall do thou afford,
Vain, or superfiuous. Thy phrase is good;
Nay, strong, and elegant, though understood
Not by lightheaded ignorance that does admire
Strange language only. Wave, vote, flames, and fire,
Tempests and whirlewinds, Scorpions, and Hags,
Are stuff that take such, though indeed but rags,
Base rags that they patch on, and thou do scorn;
Or any dialect that is much worn,
Though by the best; thy words thou make to fit
(Not contrary) the Conceptions of thy wit.
And, though thou England never saw: Yet, this
(Let others boast of their own faculties,
Or being Son to Johnson) I dare say,
That thou art far more like to Ben* then they
That lay claim as heirs to him, wrongfully:
For he survives now only, but in thee
And his own lines; the rest degenerate.
Nay, I can more affirm (and truly) that
In some things thou do pass him: being more sweet,
More modest, mylde, less tedious; Thy own feer
Go thou on stoutly then: if thou proceed,
Him (though 't be much) in all points thou wilt exceed.
Io. Bermingham.

Ad nobilissimum ingeniosissimum, dissertissimumque suum amicum Dominum
Henricum Burnellum operis Elogium.
VEllera laturus signorum principis, anceps
Ausonides lecto milite cepit iter:
Mox longos tentare sinus, votoque potiri,
Aeolios cives, Ioniumque domans.
Mascula, casta, decens, suavisque, ( Henrice) virago
Sola tibi invicta pubis ad instar adest.
Ergo procellosae Niseidis, atque Charibdis
Securus turbae, carbasa pande Notis.
Pande palam cedro tua digna volumina, Meci,
Multorumque prius pensa bilance virum.
Pande nihil mancum: nil non laudabile: uil, quod
Sympathicum non est, symmetriaeque tenor.
Currum Phoebus equis sic, sic robusta Boots
Septem concordi plaustra Trione regit.
Magnes gnarorum: in rabiem Marpesia cautes,
Quorum Cerberea toxica fauce sluunt.
Carmine sublimi morum icon, stilus honesti,
Calcar virtuti es, criminibusque jugum.
Per^g Minervali tutus munimine: fiet
Nobilior studijs gens tua clara tuis.
Munera, vive, tibi fulvo mage grata metallo,
Aequora dum biberint proxima signa polo.
Philippus Patricius

Prologue delivered by an Amazon with a Battle-Axe in her hand.
THe best of English Poets for the Stage
(Such was the envy, niceness, and the rage
Of pettish weakelings, and detracting fools,
That could praise no man; and, IN the muddie pooles
Of their own vices, were o'rwhelm'd) was feign
An armed Prologue to produce, on pain
Of being tongue-strucke Therefore, marvel not
The present author (having not forgot
How in 's first Play, he met with too much spite)
Should send an armed Amazon, to invite
(If it be possible) all minds to affect
What of himself, he could not well expect
From his detractors: Or, to let those know,
He cares not each of them prove still a foe.
Yet, this his second (as that first) he made
To please you, not for Money; to invade
Your wills for your own profit. For, if his mind
He had sought by it to content, you 'd find
Another method in it; and not a word
Of any mirth or love would he afford
To make you laugh or languish. All, rich stuff
(Though not so pleasing) he would expose, to cuffe
(And generally too) the monster vice;
Which he performs but gently, in this piece.
Yet, it is believed 't will please the most and best,
In all the passages; and for the rest,
Let 'em (if they will needs) in pudles swim:
For, he sleights them more, then they can wrong him.
Landgartha.
The first Act.
Enter Frederick and Wermond. Fred. It Is a noble, noble act!

Were. And cannot
But vex the bloody usurper, let him put
Ever so good a face on it, though they were
But women only, that conspire against him.

Fred. It stirs him not: for since his conquest made
On us, and murdring of our lawful Prince,
Things have succeeded so to all his wishes,
That he is grow'n careless: nay blindly besotted
By security, and selfe-perswasion,
Locked by the tempest of his lust; so as
He fears no force of man; much less weak women,
As he is pleased to term 'em; he minds nothing
But whom to kill, or foulely ravish: and
The conversation of his Bawds, and Spintries.

Were. Is It possible, hesho'd be so secure,
And pass away in such a dying slumber?

Fred. He thinks the gods do slumber too, or wink
At what he does, or rather snore supinely;
Or that there are no gods, and what is spoke of 'em
Is but a mere foolish fable; He Will believe
No man's intelligence, not his own spies,
That this fleet of Denmark, now lanch'd forth, should move
Against him hither.

Were. It Is not all the power,
He for the present can command that will
Resist it, if it do; joined to the valiant
Landgartha, with her fair sock'd troop of Ladies: Music of Recorders.
But, let us be silent; here the wretch himself comes.

Enter Frollo leading a weeping Lady, Hasmond and Gotar. Fr. Come my pretty
sweetheart, dry up those pleasing
Eyes; this liquor's too precious to be spilt
In such a cause, for a lost Maydenhead,
And to a King that will become thy slave for it,
And for more of that sport: who to please thee
In that, and whatsoever else thou can conceive,
To raise content to thee, and varri'd to thought,
Will ransacke Kingdoms.

Lady, Leave me yet black Devil, Breaks from him
Thy words sound far worse than the voice of Hell.

Fr. Some kick the Spyder out at the Court gates;
An angry scratching Cat. We would not be
So vexed another night with such a fool. Exeunt Fred. and Were. with the Lady.

Got. She Will soon repent Sir, and turn back, to offer
Her dainty body to your mylder usage.

Hasm. I rather think, she^ll to the mad Langartha;
And there make one among her furious troop
Of Furies, that will yet endure no horsing,
Though they manage bravely.

Fr. There Is a Wench indeed,
What luck had I, never to lay my hands
On her? They say she is very fair and handsome.

Hasm. The clappers of men's tongues proclayme that; and
Speak strange things of her.

Fr. We shall finde'em (the best
Is of it) altogether, to make a royal
Choice. We mean to single forty at least,
Of the most buxome (of which she shall be
Chief general, as now she is) for our
Own private pallat.

Hasm. I may hope (Sir) you will grant
Me half the number, with her wise and modest
Aunt Elsinora, to precede: Or her fine
Valorous sister Scania, for I must
Imitate your manly virtue, Sir, as near
As I can.

Fr. Mark we will what I say now: for thy
Good service as my honest smock Attorney
(Though sometime, yet thou did begin to us, thou wilt say
For fear they would been diseased:) thou shall not have
One woman (were thou ever so willing) more
Or less than thirty.

Hasm. O Prodigious! Ieeringly.
I do beseech you, Sir, to hear me speak,
Like so many Basilisks (with angry shots
From their sharp venomed eyes) they would strike me dead:
Or (as the Porcupyne) send fether'd arrows
At me, for my slacknesse.

Fr. You must have thirty,
Or none.

Hasm. Nay, If I must, I shall: and that is
As bad.

Got. You will not (Sir) be altogether Solemnly.
Unmindefull of my good endeavors.

Fr. By no means, good Sir, thou shall possess for thy
Share, twenty five; with the pretty smugge Fatyma,
To leade'em.

Gotar. I humbly thank your grace, though I
Should not covet so many desperate femals:
Yet, with the assistance of my kindest friends,
I shall be strongly backed. Enter Wermond.

Wermond. May it please you, Sir,
Here are arrived two posts at once, all full
Of sweat and dirt; and bring bad news, it is feared.

Fr. Curse on thy fears, Go, send 'em hither to us; Exit.
It Is but these women that affright fools thus. Enter first post.
What news? be brief.

Gotar. He Is full of dirt, indeed!

1. Post. Landgartha with a mighty troop of women,
Gatherd to her from all the parts of Norway,
Make havocke of your soldiers, sir; and killing
All the Swed^ they light upon, they likewise threaten,
They will grant you (ere long) no better quarter.

Fr. My Sweds and I will make some, here in Norway,
Pay dearly for that vant. Come, do thou croake too Enter 2. post.
The worst tale thou can.

2. Post. You had need, Sir, make quick
Resistance, or shift for your self: for, the King
Of Denmark, with a mighty fleet, has now
Put in at Mastrand; and begins to land
His forces, to join with Landgartha's: who
With maine speed, marches to meet him thither.

Fr. Which he shall soon repent, and so shall that
Male-harted Traytresse, withal the curll'd knot
Of rebels that attend her; We are not
So unprovided, as they do suppose yet,
Fly therefore Hasmomd, gather thou our troops
Within and near the City. Gotar, thou
Haste to the quarters further of; and with
All possible speed draw unto us. Away
When need compels, men must use no delay. Exeunt omnes:

A march, then enter Landgartha, Scania, Elsinora, Fatyma, and one or two
Ladies more, all attyr'd like Amazons, wtih Battle-axes in their hands and
Swords on. Land. We now (sweet Ladies and dear sisters) march not
Against th'intemperate Frollo: but ascend
The milkie way, that leads to immortal fame,
Not to be ranked among the starre-made harlots:
But stated in the highest Empyrcall heaven,
To side the gods, where Pallas and chaste Phoebe
(Armed chiefly with the weapons of their virtues)
Keep all the Masculin deities in awe.
This our design may well exalt us thither,
As their good deeds did them: that in defense
Of that all should hold dearest, our honors, Ladies,
Do now expose our selves to death, and what
A cruel, vicious, revengefull Tyrant
May inflict on us, if vanquished. Yet, this act
Of ours we must not vainly boast of: for,
The little birds will (with their beaks and wings)
Offend the ravishers of their young issue.
What then should we perform think you, that far
Pass these? yield up your bodies basely to
Foul rape and lust, and so to infamy
For ever? No, no: far be this from us
Honored virgins, that have such arms to wield
These cutting weapons, being (too) to fight authorized,
By the examples of the noblest women,
Semiramis, Zenobia, fair Cinana
Sister unto great Macedon, stout Alvilda,
Cumilla, and the Amazonian Queens,
Great Mithridates Queen, and several others,
Are patterns now for us to imitate;
O most brave patterns! Yet this we may say,
That our chaste glories shall pass theirs, as far
As the worth of our intentions does exceed
The cause they undertook: nor ought you doubt it.
Let then the King of Denmark fight where he list:
We will pursue no other than our worst
And strongest adversary in's own squadron;
Where I, as first, will loose my life, or give
A sudden end to his black purposes,
That fought a conquest on our chastities.

Elsinor. Thy virtues and example, Niece: that are not
To be reached by any imitation
(At least of our endeavors) do far more
Excite our courages, then Hermes could,
Were he now here, to play the Orator:
Lead on then; you shall find us no bad seconds.

Scania. I have more than a woman's longing to begin.

Land. I know Fatyma, though she be not great,
Has not the least desire to fight among us.

Fatyma. Stay till you see me knock some great ones down;
Until when, I shall well remit your praises.

Land. Then follow me; and as you see me woo
The Swedish King, to his do you so too. Exeunt. A march.

Enter Reyner, Valdemar, Inguar, Hubba, and one or two or more Soldiers with
Axes. Reyner. It Is my chief comfort, noble Cymbrians,
Subjects and friends, to be your guide to day,
Against a valiant, wicked adversary;
And for our right, the inheritance of this kingdom,
To show that virtue and the cause, do more
Prevayle than any humane fortitude,
Or settled Councels, when they are joined to vice;
And by injustice seek to advance their states:
Which wisely our forefathers masked beneath
The fables of the Titans against the gods.
But it should seem the virtue of our foes
(Wisdom and valor) has forsooke'em, by
Their palliardise, by ease, and hourly riot;
This kingdom being more fatal unto them,
Then Capua was to Hannibal: and therefore,
Not worth your meanest fears: I must not then
Enlarge my self in words too far, because
You need 'em not; nor need you be beholding,
Unto the fames of your brave Ancestors,
Those valiant Cymbrians, that almost gave
An end to Rome, the Mistress of the world,
And not in her declyning days, when her
Own vices had confounded her; as when
The Goths and Vandals (now our enemies)
Did trample on her, being down before.
She lived full man, when great King Beleus
Did (on the borders of rich Jtaly)
Vanquish three of her bravest Generals,
Sylanus, Coepio, and Manilius.
This (if you please) you may consider; and
That our foes are more famous for their whoredoms,
Than conquering of Norway. Reflect also
How for this cause, we are assisted by
An Angel troop, of chaste and noble Ladies:
Whom neither loss of life, or other evils
Can fright, from seeking to revenge the wrongs
Done to their Sex, their parents, and their friends.
Then, let us not shame our selves now in their presence,
Or to posterity: by being out-gone
By women in a battle. Lastly, consider
The everlasting honor due to virtue;
Of which we now shall make a glorious purchase.

Hub. I am afraid you will consider (sir,)
So long of these women; until you forget
What you applaud so feelingly, your virtue.

Rey. Thou 'rt always merry, Hubba, honest withal;
And from my heart I wish, that each man here
Perform a Soldiers parts, no worse than thou;
We shall not then be beaten.

Vald. Let Us march on, sir:
And you shall quickly find the meanest of 'em,
Valiant and strong to purchase what is your birthright.

Rey. Then let us move; and prosper too, as we
Affect injustice, or impiety. Exeunt. A march

Enter Frollo, Hasmond, Gotar, and two or three more with Axes. Frollo. We must
not loose our confidence, brave Warriors,
Though we be taken somewhat tardy, by
A sort of raw fresh water soldiers, weak
Unmartiall women fitter for night encounters,
And some poor fugitive Norwegian rebels,
Conquered and beaten often by us before.
What then although our numbers be the less?
Yet not by much: the glory of the adventure,
Would not be worth the pains we under took else.
Besides, if we consider what our Ancestors
Have (by their never-equall'd valors) often
Performed against the noblest nations of
The world, this our design is nothing: nothing
To what they did: What we have done our selves,
And mean to do hereafter. Notwithstanding,
Let me commend unto your memories,
After a general fashion (for now
The time exacts deeds more than words) what some
Of their large conquests were, not only in
Europe, Which was all theirs a most: but in
Affricke, a third and richest part of the world;
Which from the Ocean unto Nyle they won;
And from the Mid-land Sea, to the torrid Zone.
Great Rome her self (that wisdom boasted most,
And next her valor) was by our fathers taken,
Pillaged, and burnt four times at least; and her
Large Empire brought to nothing. She mastered all:
We mastered her;
And will not now degenerate first of ours.
What though men say, we are not religious?
Religion is but a toy, and first invented
By politic States, to keep fools in awe;
And of all men observed least by themselves,
If she but thwart the least of their intendments.
They glorify her much for their own ends;
And that is even almost all: and so may we.
Yet, honor by war, riches, and our pleasure,
Shall be the Altars, and the gods we'll bow to
In our free minds; and what we gain we will keep.
King Reyner therefore was not wise, in seeking
To dispossess the bravest Nation breathing,
Of what they have achieved by the right of conquest;
And shall (I hope) in snatching at our Crown,
By your more powerful arms, soon miss his own. Ex. Allarums.

A good while after the allarums are begun, Enter Frolle and a gentleman. Frol.
Furies and plagues: these wild, wild bloody whores,
Fight like so many Tigers: without the least
Apprehension of fear, or any kind
Of mercy: the pursie Danes come nothing near 'em.
Having cut off our vauntgard, and right wing,
They press on our maine battle too; and force
It to give ground. Go, fly thou: and charge Hasmond
To fetch the rear with speed up; that we may Exit gentl.
(There being no other hope for safety left us)
Upon one desperate onslaught hazard all. Enter Scania.

Scan. I am glad I Have met you, sir.

Frol. A pretty fine piece, aside.
I would feign save this. I should prefer
Thy beauty, unto ought that is ours; prove kind
And gentle unto thee, sweetheart: if thou 'lt
But yield --

Scania. To thy embraces, that must 'a' had
My sister, me and forty more. We now
Shall see what you can do against one. Come quickly
Then, unto your guard sir: or I shall soon send forth
Your too hot blood, to cool your lustful heart.

Frol. Plague on you for a company of spiteful,
Venomous tong'd bitches. Ye had rather lie
With the worst Hynde of your own, than the best of us.

Scan. Villain, I Will answer thee another way. Offers to fight on which Land.
enters.

Land. Hold sister. This must only be my mate:
Go, seek you out another somewhere else? Exit Scania.

Frol. Art thou Landgartha? or some supernall goddess,
Descended in her fairer shape, to make
A conquest now on Frollo, that must yield
Himself thy captive?

Land. Thou once call'dst me subject;
And I am come to tender my allegiance,
To your ungracious wickedness, thus -- stricks at him.

Frol. Hold, for heavens sake hold, and patiently
But take my faithful vow. Do thou withdraw
Thy troops from our defeat: and by the Olympian
Gods, I shall no sooner
Have struck King Reyner with his punie Danes,
But I Will make thee my Queen.

Land. Thy Concubyne.

Frol. All miseries light on me then for ever;
Or if I ever mix with woman but
Thy self: for thou art worthy of a Mars.
A Hercules, or Jupiter.

Land. And have
Fully resolved never to kiss any man,
But him that shall first master me in fight:
You are best therefore look well to your self, sir;
Or I shall quickly marry your hearts blood
To this weapon. They fight and he is hurt.

Frol. I bleed you see: let which
Serve as an offering, to appease thy wrath
Conceived against a wretch, that now repents Here Rey. Vald. Inguar. and Hubb.
are discovered.
(Unfainedly) his former evil life.
May the gods chief attribute then (mercy)
Find room for me (a Convertite) in thy
Noble and virtuous soul: and I shall still
Become thy pious imitator: be
Governed by thee in all thing, and thy husband,
By heaven and all, I will.

Land. But I hope you shall not:
For I must try your manhood once again. They fight, and she strikes him down.

Reyn. O brave maid!

Frol. Fair Fury, thou have killed me,
Hell take thee for 't my love is now cooled indeed.
But I will be revenged. I cannot, cannot rise:
The loss of blood, and pain, strike faint my powers:
That I were now on high transformed Atlas:
This being no fable, but a truth: that I
Might cut the axle-tree of heaven in two:
And tumble down the gods, and break their necks,
Proud gods, if such there be. Then, like Enceladus
(Laden with flaming Etna) I should turn,
And shake out all the stars: The sun, and with
That fire, burn all to cinders. Thus I Would turn:
O devils, I cannot: but do feel a pitchy
Cloud (darker than night) hang o'r my drowsy temples:
And must (there is no remedy) descend, to stalk
A long the infernal waves, or wafted over,
Grapple with the damned Furies, receive my soul
You beastly Hags, then: that shall torment you more,
Than you can any. Dies.

Land. The gods are now revenged
On thee, by me, libidinous Woolfe, foul Tyrant.

Rey. And rid me (worthy Lady,) of a dangerous
Adversary.

Land. I do beseech, sir: Kneels on one knee.
As my duty only to receive that,
Unto them and your grace, though a woman.

Rey. This to me (Madame) is too great an honor.
Pray stand up. I should rather kneel to you,
Whose beauty and incomparable virtues,
Exact no slender adoration,
From all those that love goodness; or the image
Of heaven in your face. We must acknowledge,
Notwithstanding our right to the crown of Norway,
What power soe'r we have in it, gained and confirmed
Chiefly by you, that are our strongest friend.

Land. Your poor and humble vassal, that desires
No other recompense for her small service,
Than your Kingly license, to remain
(When your foes are wholly vanquished) from all
Employment severed: to lead a solitary
Quiet life, being compelled (in the defense
Of what I ever most esteemed) to match
Thus amongst men; which I did not covet, but
The contrary.

Rey. You will not wrong the world
(The race of man, sweet Lady,) so to robb it
Of such luster: nay of all light, by
Dedicating of what is only good in it,
Your self, to solitude.

Land. I must no be
Compelled to any state of life, sir.

Rey. You cannot
Madame, I see that; and (by your force my foes
Now put to flight) I shall continue always,
Not only a mere servant, but for ever
Your bondsman; not to offend you in the least thought. Enter Scania, Elsinora,
and Fat.

Vald. Here be other noble friends (sir) to whom you
Stand bound in no small sums.

Elsinor. Of Princely favor
Only.

Rey. Rise fair Ladies, you shall command
Us, being your creature. Hub. they are delicate fine wenches, pretty youths.

Land. You are now, sir
To consider, how to use your victory.

Scania. For us, we shall hereafter (we doubt not)
Partake the fruits of your most Royal bounty,
Which we shall beg more, for the general
Good, than our particular interests, sir.

Rey. You shall be the Lawmakers, to your selves:
For those, by whom we reign, shall be our guides:
In the mean time, thou Valdemar and Inguar,
Pursue the flying foe, but most with mercy,
Not of circumspection; yet, least the Van
Turn by some accident, by us not thought on;
Save all that yield, whom we do mean to send
Home ransomelesse; to see if that benefit
May work a peace betwixt us. If it do not,
We shall the next time be the more excused,
In our extending of severitie.
Come Ladies, we'll to counsel to conclude
Concerning what we have (by you) subdued.

The second Act.
Enter Valdemar, and Jnguar. Vald. It Is a strange humor that has seaz'd upon
him;
whatsoever the cause be.

Inguar. When you are
Ignorant of it, all others must be so.

Vald. He discovers nothing to me save only
That he is full (and that he often says)
Of grief and heaviness; and sometimes sick.

Ing. His sickness may (in time) prove dangerous,
If some fit remedy be not applied.

Vald. He Will hear of none; I urged his Physicians,
At which he stormed, and bad me leave him to
Himself; and since I dare not come in sight.

Ingar. It Is a deadly malady, that will admit
Of no cure We are best put Captain Hubba,
Or the wise Cowsell on him: for the wit
Of the one and the others folly may remove
More of that grief he speaks on, than good counsel. Enter Rey.

Vald. Here comes the man himself, in his usual
Meditation: and therefore let us away. Exeunt ambo,

Reyn. She is divinely fair, and in her mind
The noblest virtues keep their residence,
As in their loveli'st habitation,
Being all in love with her, I think, as I am,
From my sad heart warm tears (tears of affliction)
The fire of my affection does send up
Into my eyes, that thence distill in streams,
Which yet to me, are torrents of sweet joys,
Joys, that this is for her, my grief proceeds
From a profound fear I shall never gain her,
Enjoy that unpeer'd model of perfection.
There is no way but one to pull the fruit
Jove would turn Goose, taste: she is so reserved
To the least vicious acts; Wretch, that hope
Is not (yet) left thee: For, being nobly borne
(Though she no fit match be for us, in lieu
Of worldly substance, being in her self
An ample dowry for a richer Prince)
We should (and gladly) sue to be her husband.
But a report goes, she will join with no man,
In such an obligation, which (that she
Will not at all have me) is that which striks
A black despair into my soul, and will
(Unless I meet some comfort) quickly kill me;
Being sick in body, as in mind already. Enter Hub and Cowsell.

Hub. See, where he stalks. Do you but put him out
Of his sad humor; and thou shall have --

Cow. O Captain,
I am afraid, for he looks sour upon it.

Hub. No matter: fear you nothing, but proceed;
And care not what you say, so you say something;
It Is your fools fashion, and you now must seem one.

Cow. But hark, you, Captain. How should I begin?

Hub. Say that you come from the Ladies: so I leave you. Exit Hub. and peeps.

Rey. Sir, what make you here?

Cow. Come from the Ladies.

Rey. Well said, speak that again.

Cow. Come from the Ladies.

Rey. Very good, and what of them?

Cow. Come from the Ladies.

Rey. What, again. Pray tell me, what did occasion
Your so kind friendly visit to the Ladies?

Cow. I went thither (being some two mile of)
To be joviall with a new acquaintance
Of mine, my brother Radger.

Rey. Some such wise man,
As thou art.

Cow. He Is a very honest man.

Rey. And takes his cup soundly, I warrant.

Cowsell. So
Do many honest men beside him; and
Keep wenches too, that is more.

Rey. And yet are honest.

Cow. 's honest and faire-condition'd gentlemen,
As live, I know several of 'em, my self.

Rey. The Ladies are well. How did they use thee? tell.

Cow. They Are all exceeding well: and used me kindly
For your sake; gave me a banquet, strawberries
And cream; we drunk helter-skelter too; the Ladies
Took your health themselves, and asked me how you did;
Landgartha said, you were a good man, and that
She loved you with all her heart.

Rey. Let me embrace Jmbraces him.
Thee from my heart for that good news.

Hub. Sweet King,
Have I found your malady?

Cow. O kind Prince! Aside.

Rey. What say? are they not delicate fine creatures?

Cow. Indifferent handsome, passable, and so forth --

Hub. You 'll with a knock be sent forth, I see that.

Rey. I was not from thy want of wit, to expect
Any true censure. But yet, tell me truly:
Which of 'em all do thou think is the fairest?

Cow. The Lady Elsinora in my opinion,
Is the rich Pearl amongst 'em; Landgartha to her
Is but a mere milkemayde.

Rey. He makes me sick,
A dunce to wrong the worlds chief ornament. Kicks, and beats him.

Cow. Oh, oh my bum! my bum! Exit, and enter Hubba.

Hub. I perceive I must
Venture a beating too.

Rey. Thou mett'st a fool
Going out that way.

Hub. And he complains of something
Under favor.

Rey. We gave some cause for 't, but
Do now repent it. Prithee Hubba call him;
He said some at of the Ladies.

Hub. I can tell
You more of 'em than he: for, I was lately too
Where they (like a company of fine ducklings)
Wag together.

Rey. Thy words are base.

Hub. What would
You have me say? they are all very valiant;
And made King Frollo pay for seeking (and
But in's good will) to domineere a little
Over 'em; he lost his life and kingdoms by 't.

Rey. We therefore ought the better to love them.

Hub. As your subjects only, sir, but not to cast
Under you on a bed, couch, or clean mat;
You know what fine Furies they are, if you vex 'em.

Rey. We are not so unwise, as to consult
Of their dishonor.

Hub. Nor so far (I hope)
Mistaken to marry any of 'em.

Rey. Why Hubba? are they not fair and virtuous,
Think thou?

Hub. I do admire, sir you should talk
So much of virtue: a thing th'arrantest Ass
Will scorn, if Money be not joined to it;
And then (although he hate it, and the possessor
Of it) he will praise 't.

Rey. Thou 'rt now in thy old humors.

Hub. Besides, you think Landgartha fair: but I say,
The Emperors daughter's worth a thousand of her.

Rey. I 'de loathly beat thee Hubba: yet, I tell thee;
Were Charlemaine (the Emperors father) now
Alive, and in his Pryme of youth and glory,
Landgartha (being his Parallel in valor;
By virtue much more) were a wise enough good
For him; were she not near so fair as she is.
But all, all being joined Hubba; I suppose
He would esteem her his chief eat thy blessing.
I, I, and more, a Paradise on earth.

Hub. Were she ten times better: you cannot have her.

Rey. Thou shoot'st a sudden fear (colder then death)
Into me; You were best give no bad reason,
For what you say.

Hub. She has vowed Chastity,
Unto the gods: which bond though you should be
Content to forfeyt, it is sure she will not.

Rey. The strongest poison could not sincke me deader,
Then thy sad tongue has. Exit.

Hub. Flunge away in a rage:
Well; I was to blame to tell him, what I was not
Sure on: For now I truly do conceive
There is no plaster but one, that can cure him;
And that the fair Landgartha must apply too;
No garden herbs will do it, any one
That has as much brain as a Wood-cocke, may now
Find that, that knows what his disease is. He Is worse
Then horne-mad already; I 'll therefore after him,
And what betwixt lies and true tales, I shall go very near
To fetch him to himself, and hope again. Exit.
Enter Inguar in the middle. The King stretched on his Couch, strangely
distempered,
And most unlike himself (his courage lost)
He pules and whynes most pitifully: Good heaven,
What strange disease should render so devicted
Such a man? So valiant? So each way noble?
We see no outward cause, that should distract him;
Should it be love? Enter Vald. to Inguar.

Vald. Lord Inguar, I have news
For you.

Ing. I long to heare'em: For your countenance
(Showing alacrity) speaks comfort to the King.

Vald. Did you never hear of a little blind
Boy, that wounded many a proper man?

Ing. Has Cupid shot his Highness?

Vald. No mortal man,
Nor god so deep, 't will be proclaym'd in open
Market shortly.

Inguar. Who should the object be?

Vald. Who but Volsca de gente Camilla?
Th'fairest and best of women, brave, Landgartha
Hubba is sent (on pain of his best joint)
To fetch her hither: from whence ere she part,
Her duty and th'Kings gracious affection
Considered, she may be glad to yield to his
Commands; as I hope her sister will, to my
Entreaties to serve her.

Inguar. I believe, you 'ill find
Your self mistaken in thosse virtuous Ladies.
Enter the four Ladies in woman's apparel with Swords on, and Hubba.
Land. The gods defend so good, and merciful
A Prince; I know it is but a cold that troubles
His grace.

Hub. Not so (Madame) I can assure you;
His disease proceeds rather of heat. He burns
Extremely; and its thought by some, that his
Physicians cannot cure him.

Land. I hope
They are deceived that think so.

Vald. Welcome to Court,
Fair Ladies, Which, till now (that you lighten it
With the divine splendour of your beauties)
Was darker than a dungeon: and but a Hell
Compared unto the Paradise of the Camp,
Where in the fruition of your pleasing'st
Conversations, being rapt beyond our selves
With hope of future favors, we in you
Placed the whole sum of our felicities.

Land. You are merrily dispos' itd seems, sir,
Which (to be plain) becomes you but most foulely,
The King being sick, when all (and chiefly you)
Should (and not for ceremony only) put
A dark face of sorrow on; and contain
Their slippery tongues, from talking over-idlely;
Some may conceive your mirth proceeds, from being
Next heir to him in blood.

Vald. It rather springs
(Sweet Lady) from your coming now to cure him

Land. Which, with a joyful heart, I should perform
If I knew how: Pray you therefore, kind sir,
Be somewhat cleerer in what you conceive.

Vald. 'ts quickly learnt; nature will teach you Madame,
His grace will show you too; you will not prove Ieeringly.
Perverse.

Land. Are you so blind a Goat, to forget Gives him a box, on which all draw,
and Scania steps in.
Frollo so soon? to open your eyes take that.

Scan. Pray sister hold. What do you mean to quarrel
On a surmise? I know the Lord Valdemars
Intents are noble, and much more the Kings.

Elsin. Y' are to blame, Niece, to be so sudden in such
A fond conceit.

Land. Do we come to be abused?
I Will back again. For your part sir, you shall Exit, and the other three follow
her.
Not fail to meet me, when and where you list.

Hub. His grace will now run mad indeed.

Vald. Lord Inguar,
As you love me, follow that severe Lady;
And reduce her (if ever you did ought for
A friend) to mildness, and this way back; or I
Am lost for ever to the King and people: Exit Inguar
Captain, go thou too once more, for my sake.

Hub. And as you mean to do, forswear my self
That you meant no hurt. I have already told her
A hundred lies at least; and am now of the faith,
That double the number will scarce serve to quiet her;
It Is such another untoward piece of flesh Exit Hub.

Vald. She is an excellent Mistress, and has taught Ieeringly.
Me such a Lesson, I have cause to thank her:
For she has given me patience, and wisdom;
Honesty too I think. The flat truth is
She has wrought strangely with me, very strangely,
The ravishing notes of a Cycilian Cyren,
Could not so have taken my Ear (and from thence
My heart) with a most alluring kind of
Delight, as the smart-touch of her white hand has:
It struck into me such a love,
To her sister I mean, that came so kindly
Betwixt us, as I do now account my self,
A gainer by the blow; in hope to gain
What I now love so much, and nobly too.
Well, they will come back this way again, I know;
And I must sing a very doleful ditty,
A Palinode; or pray, where they may see me,
Being a thing I 've only done but twice
These seven years: once, that I went to sea:
Secondly and lastly, before the last battle. Exit.

Reyner is discovered on a Couch, and a gentleman with him. Rey. Are the Ladies
come yet to Court?

Gent. They are sir,
And will soon be here. Enter Inguar and Hubb.

Rey. Whose that?

Gent. My Lord Inguar.

Rey. Where have you left the Ladies?

Ing. Coming after (Sir,)
Sad and much troubled for your want of health. Enter the 4. Ladies.

Scan. You Will be extremely hated, if you use
So much exception, on so little cause.

Land. If he accost me any more, with his
Base jeering countenance, and whorish language;
My sword shall (for such kindness) kiss his middrisse.

Fat. Pray pacify your mind, you need not stand
At so much distance.

Rey. Are not they come yet?

Hub. They now are here, by much ado.

Rey. Good Inguar,
Entreat 'em to approach.

Inguar. Madame, the King
Desires you would be pleased to draw nearer.

Rey. You honor me, sweet Ladies, in this visit:
Which, beyond expression adds comfort
Unto a wretched sickely man. Chayres there,
Pray you sit down; y' are all exceeding welcome.

Land. Our duty charged us (sir,) to obey your summons:
Yet, our affection to your grac's welfare,
And to that depends of it (the general good
Of the republicke) were the chief motives
To our journey.

Scan. And being able (sir,) to stead you
In loving wishes only, we must expect
(With grief to see his weakness, whose good health
We most desire) your highness royal pleasure.

Rey. Thanks worthy Ladies. We must also pay
You in good wishes; being otherwise
Too indigent to cancel what we are
Engaged to you for many ways.
We have been still oppressed since your departure
From us (whose virtuous presence, was all
The comfort we had) with a heavy sadness,
Nourished by grief; nor do we ever hope
To see the Sun again, but at a window.

Land. The gods defend you (sir,) from giving way
To such despair. Enter Vald.

Vald. I follow after (like
A Thief) aloof, to see what good success
The King has in his love suite; and to venture
For my particular, as he makes his voyage.

Scan. Your Majesty must never entertayne
Dark melancholy thoughts, but quite cashire 'em.

Vald. Her voice founds sweeter, then the celestial spheres,
In their harmonious motion. I am more
Then ravished when I hear it; and think I shall
Fall sick too, or run frantic, ere 't belong.

Fat. I heard no mean Physician often say, Sir,
That Music and mirth were good for sickely men.

Rey. Bid the Boy sing the Song we made of Love.

Song.
Love's far more powerful than a King,
And wiser then most Statesmen are:
For it commands him, and does spring
In them strange thoughts; in both much care
(Beside the affairs of the Commonwealth)
To crouch and to obey. Nay more;
It makes 'em loose all joy and health,
And not be the men they were before;
Until wise love, all powerful love,
The gracious Physician prove.
Land. This is a very loving song,
Your grace made: but the contents of it, not
To be applied to you sir, that may command
(If power and person can compel) the best
And fairest Lady in the world to be yours,
In a noble way; and otherwise your virtue forbids it.

Rey. It does indeed forbid us what is vicious.
And seeing we do not hope for life, we must
Crave your kind pardon now, to hear us tell
The Occasion of our sickness, briefly thus:
You are the only cause on it.

Land. How? I my liege?
My knowledge says not so.

Rey. Your beauty, valor,
And all the perfections (parted to others,
But) in you conjoined, protest it: and I
For one can swear it. But, being repelled
By a severely-awing rigor from your brow
(Yet sweet withal, though killing) and being told
Of a sad purpose y' have, never to marry;
We now are fallen thus low, beneath the Center
Of deep despair and sorrow: and desire,
You will say something, either to hasten our death,
Or to recall it by a loving sentence.

Land. I must take sometime then to deliberate
Aside.

Rey. Being yours, in that you may command us. She goes aside and the Ladies
with her.

Land. We expected no such entertaynment.

Elsin. My mind foretold me still of some disaster.

Scan. Notwithstanding your resolution,
Not to marry: you have not vowed against
Obedience to a man, in that friendly
Yoke of Wedlock. The Kings sound affection
Is not then to be rejected, if you ever
Take any.

Land. If I do, he shall be the man.

Fatyma. You must not study now long for some answer.

Elsin. He Is desperately ill: and if you should
Give him a flat denial, we might be
All seized on here at Court, and some villainy
Committed on us; being to defend our selves,
Too few by many.

Scan. They shall take our lives,
Ere we'll endure to be defiled.

Fatyma. And with
The loss of some of theirs.

Rey. Have you considered
Yet, of the doom y' are to pronounce?

Elsinora. All stand
Warily on their guard.

Land. Your poor subjects (sir)
Must rather expect (in duty) your commands.

Rey. Nay sweet Lady. Do not increase my torment,
By adding affliction to misery,
With a complement: but something say, that
May appertain to the matter, to rid me
Quickly of my pain.

Land. It Is sure; I have not
(Although I ever meant it) bound my self,
Unto a single life.

Rey. Then dearest Lady,
Consider who I am; and what I now am,
Lodged thus: for though I claim you not as by desert,
Or duty: Yet, being your Prince, you owe me
Some regard; and all, I ever must glory in,
Shall be to make you Queen of what is ours.

Land. May it please you, Sir.

Rey. Pray you sit and speak;
Or I must rise, if weakness will permit. She sits, and the rest stand.

Land. Had I been ambitious, when you were not
Crowned King of Norway: I could then perchance
Have written Queen, unto your prejudice.
But, for that Frollo once intended foulely,
I (that could not affect vice) did refuse
What he with earnestness, and many Oaths
Sought to confirm; and was his bane at last,
Though I believed that what he said, he meant.
Now therefore (Sir,) your affection (grounded
In way of honor, without taint of baseness;
With such exterior signs too, of deep love
To me, unworthy of so great a Prince:)
I cannot (nor will my heart permit it) but
In way of gratefulness, reciprocally
Requite with love again, as duty binds;
Nay, more then so. But yet, gracious Sir,
I (that am mean and poor to be your Consort;
And that things of this kind are often repented)
Do now beseech you, to decline a while
The vehemency of your fleet desires;
And take full time to think on what you do:
Were 't but to take a nearer view of me,
And that in all points. For know sir, the honor
You now afford me, compared to th'infamie
That would redound to both of us, and to others
(By whom you are to be advised) if ought
Should chance amiss, when things were consumate,
Is nothing: would but heighten your disgrace.
Your wise demurre too, I shall take as full payment
For all my services; and rest devoted
More deeply yours: and evermore continue
Your loyal subject only, sir.

Rey. I was sure
(Noblest and best of Ladies:) That your words
(Being such as now they are) could not but work
A cure upon me. See, I can stand up:
Nay, go; I 'll throw my Cap off too. Some of you
Give me a Hat; I will walk with you forth
Into the Gallery, and tell you there,
I have considered so much what you are,
Though not to your full value this being
Impossible: that if you think me not
Unworthy (as indeed I am for you)
We shall soon be Man and Wife. To morrow
I 'll wait on you further, into the Garden.

Hub. And there (in one of the little bawdy houses) Aside.
Seal the Covenant, if it be received,
Though he were sure to die in an hour after.

Elsin. I see she does affect him in good earnest. Aside.
But wisdom bids be silent; This poor kingdom
Being already torn too much, by tyranny and troubles.
Things past our help, with patience must be borne,
Until a fit time.

Rey. Lady Elsinora,
Me thinks you do not sign our loving motion,
With a friendly countenance.

Elsin. I hope, great Sir,
You will be pleas^d to entertayne far better thoughts
Of your humblest hand-mayd.

Rey. I hope we shall.

Land. In licensing our departure, for some small time
(Days five or six, and for a private Cause:)
You will for ever bind us (sir) to your commands;
And to return with all convenient speed,
To obey your Highness pleasure in all points.

Rey. That asked again, would throw me on my Couch;
Never to rise.

Vald. Madame, I should make bold
To stop your journey, though the King were pleased
To grant his license: for you (I must say
Somewhat roughly) saluted my left ear
With your right hand, as these can witness for me.

Land. For which, you are resolved to challenge me:
But not to be your wife; I gave you no
Such promise.

Vald. I must have satisfaction.

Land. You may declare what that is, when you list.

Vald. Nay, you shall know it now; and thus it sounds:
That you persuade this Lady, to become Takes Scan. by the hand.
My second. For, love has struck me too, so sore
A cuffe (caused by her beauty, and what else
Is good in her, in my opinion
Superlatively:) that I shall never be rid
OF the pain on it; unless you that are like to be
My Cossen, advance me higher, to the honor
To be your brother. We shall then be kind friends.

Land. She is not my ward; and may take whom she fancies;
I may my self repent, to be persuaded.

Rey. Speak Lady, do you like the man? He is
As good a Gentleman as We are: Say,
Will you have him?

Scan. You make me blush (sir,) to ask
Me such a question.

Vald. Nay then, it is granted.

Scan. I will not grant at first; nor shall you say
Hereafter I deceived you.

Fat. You deceive
Your self. Well Madame, I perceive we two To Elsin.
Must matelesse home to prove the Vestals.

Ing. Not, sweet Lady, if you will daigne to grace me, with
The title husband.

Fat. For your good will, sir,
I thank you: but will hear of no more coupling.

Ing. I yet must love you still.

Rey. Then let us from hence,
To entertayne heavens happy influence. Exeunt.

The third Act.
Enter Frederick and a Servant at the door. Fred. Let 'em not press so fast
in, to behold
A semi-maske; for now 't can be no more,
For want of fitting Actors here at Court;
The War and want of Money, is the cause on it.

Serve. Stand further off, my masters, or I shall --

Fred. Let fly amongst 'em.

Vald. Pray you my Lord, have a care Enter Vald. and Lady.
(For my sake) of this Lady; a kins-woman
Of my wives.

Fred. (I know you are Vxorious.)

Land. He shall not need: for I will have a care
Of my self.

Fred. I should gladly serve your Highness:
But can hardly yet from hence.

Vald. Come Cousin,
I will be your Gentleman usher my self. Exeunt ambo.
Cowsell within, make room I say there, for me and my brother.

Fred. What kind Cossens are those?

Serve. A pair of Coxcombes,
So individual by the littleness
Of their understandings, they cannot be parted. Enter Cow. and Rad.

Cow. Come away brother Radgar, we'd need make haste,
To take our places.

Rad. I shall be proud brother,
To be seated after you.

Cow. And I fortunate
To sit next before you.

Rad. It shall be my ambition brother, to
Be still (as now) your most humble servant,

Cow. It must be all my study then, brother; To
Command things only pleasing: for mark you
Dear brother. I must strive chiefly to precede,
But -- in my affection.

Fred. A pretty Antimasque:
I will sit down, and hear what it concludes.

Rad. But hark you now, brother. Shall we have any
Drink, Banquets, or so --

Cow. Not a drop betwixt meals, brother,
That Is but a simple Country fashion.

Fred. Are they already fallen from complement?

Rad. Yet, me thinks brother, 't were n't amiss to lay
The pots hard by; and let him drink that would.

Cow. I should a part keep with you, in that Catch
brother, but now (with grief enough) I say 't
(Would I co'd not say 't:) I cannot now (being puffed
Up here for want of air) drink nere as much,
As when I lived abroad in the Country; nor eat
The quarter quantity.

Rad. That must be believed
Generally, as a Maxim infallible:
For to day brother, the stink of your perfumed
And stuffing meats, took my stomach quite away
From me. Yet, we drunk pretty well you know.

Cow. It Is certain (brother,) those that cannot eat,
Must drink, and I can drink indifferent well still
But, time there was I could 'a' paid it soundly.

Rad. As, how much? Pray sweet brother.

Cow. It is scarce
Credible, I now shall tell you: at one short
Sitting, I Would a drunk you of Wine six Flaggons,
And two dozen of Beer at least, all at eight draughts;
And never 'a' seen the color of my face,
In a Chamber pot; or sought ease, by visiting
My kind friend Ajax.

Rad. That Is more by a little,
Then I ever could vent the right way. But yet,
I dare speak it brother, we are very near
As good drinkers, as you be here in the City:
For you see, when we come to Town, we do
Nothing but run from Tavern, to Tavern;
Often to blind Alehouses, to visit the fine
Wenches, of purpose there placed, to draw custom;
Now and then to see a Play, when we want
Other exercise; and once a week (upon
A holy day, when all doors are shut up)
To a godly exhortation, and sleep out
(At least) three parts on it.

Cow. Especially if you
Take your liquor before hand.

Rad. Right brother, but
To morrow we will both from hence, to the Country.

Cow. Would this night were over once.

Rad. We Have excellent Mayds with us,
And while my Ladies dance and feast it here,
Both night and day: We both will keep Court there;
Throw out the house at the windows, and fetch in
All our Towne-fidlers, with all the young fellows
In fifteen villages about us; is 't not good?

Fred. O rare!

Fred. IN the mean time Sir, let me persuade you
To conduct your brother to a place: For I
Am weary of your company. Cow, 'thanke your Lordship. Exeunt ambo.
Hubba within, give way there.

Fred. What lusty Gentleman's that?

Serve. Mad Captain Hubba, and as lusty a
Virago with him.

Enter Hubba and Marfisa in an Irish Gown tucked up to mid-legge, with a broad
basket-hilt Sword on, hanging in a great Belt, Broags on her feet, her hair
dishevelled, and a pair of long neck'd big-rowll'd Spurs on her heels. Hub.
Come my brave Marfisa,
You are but just now come to Town you say?

Mar. That you may well perceive sir, by my spurs.

Fr. Here Is handsome Cheese and Butter, and a Sword.

Hub. They Are a pair of excellent ginglers, but pray
Tell me: Did you ride sideling, or like a man?

Mar. Howsoever, there shall never a Dane ride in my Saddle.

Hub. What? not in the way of honesty? as you love me,
Say not so; I hope you will be pleased to think of my service.

Mar. I should rejoice to be well pleased in the way
Of honesty: Yet, your fair words shall not
Deceive me. As first try, then take on liking.

Hub. But, with your favor I think 't were better try:
Least you should chance repent too late hereafter.

Mar. You will not put me sir, to use my Sword: Puts hand to her sword.
If you do, you must first begin at that.

Fr. I think she means to make him marry her
Perforce; I shall have my part of the Mask here.

Hub. Pray Lady, take patience along with you;
I am fairly yours.

Fr. You had (on my knowledge)
But need to say so, if she be in earnest.

Mar. Then lead me to some honest place, where I may
Unspurre, untucke my Gowue, wash, and so forth --

Hub. Most willingly, my fair Marfisa, thou shall
Have a looking-glass too; I ever took
A strange liking to thee, since first I saw
Thee fight in the battle like a Lioness.
Y' are Coffen-german to the Lady Fatyma?

Mar. Her self dare not deny it, sir.

Hub. I do not Goes about her.
Only mark your sweet face, but all things else
About you. Y' have a fine leg. The fashion
Of this Gown, likes me well too; I think you had
The pattern on it from us, as we from Ireland.

Mar. That I know not, but am sure a handsome woman
Looks as well in 't, as in any dress, or habit
Whatsoever.

Hub. So it seems by thee, my
Beautiful Mistress: For by that name, I must
Style you henceforth. Come, let your loving squire
Conduct you. Mar, on before, I Will follow. Exeunt ambo.
Loud Music. Enter Reyner, Landgartha, Valdemar, Scania, Elsinora, Inguar,
and Fatyma. The Ladies attired like women only

Rey. My Queen and I, Valdemar, are much bound
To thy free Genius, for this thy second Mask
After our nuptials; She more: but most
Of all, thy own Lady. For, it is for her sake
Thou so affect'st both us.

Scan. I could not wish
To 'a' met a kinder man.

Land. His kindness makes
You often ashamed, you say; nor would I have
The King so over fond of me.

Vald. You stand
Confirmed, Madame, in the power your merits
Hold, to charm his faculties to your obeisance.

Land. You deliver that, sir, to pick a thank from
My Sister; at whom you point in that language.

Scan. I do believe he does: which yet, must be
Conceived only to proceed, from his ill-plac'd
Affection; not my desert to answer
His; much less your perfections: being
But a poor Pigmie, compared to the greatness
Of the worth in you.

Rey. This friendly Complement
We will pass over: and now Valdemar, Here they take their places, but the
King and the Queen under a Canopie.

To apt our apprehensions the more
To the true understanding of your Mask:
You may tell us somewhat of your scope in 't.

Vald. That is sufficiently informed in the thing
It self; though lame it be. The matter (being
All prophetical) I found in an old
Worme-eaten Book, in the Lady Elsinora's
Library. And I should wrong your judgment;
And my own labor, though of little value,
By staling of it before hand.

Fr. It Is a fine tale;
And cannot but please, unless it meet such minds,
As are not to be pleased.

Elsin. There is no Fustian,
Non sense, Wind, or fopperie in it.

Rey. It matters not
What some odd envious fool says; that grieves most
At the goodness of what he disprayses: and would
Be glad 't were worse. We despise affected stuff;
Or a strayn'd kind of Eloquence; being the smoke
And fruits or a vaineglorious, and an empty brain,
No flattery dwells we know in this. Let it begin.
The Mask. First enter six Satyrs and dance a short nimble anticke to no
Music, or at most to a single Violine: at the end of which enter Phoebus with
Bow and Arrows.

Phoeb. A way unmanner'd deities, though hope
Raise you unto this mirth, for Troy: Your scope
In 't (formed at the counsel of the higher gods)
Makes not the issue of their Periods,
So fortunate as you do now suppose
(In your inferior knowledges) to dispose
For Hectors safety: whom Aracides
(Madded for his loved Menetiades)
Flies to destroy. Nor can the Fates divert,
But that fierce horrid man, will soon convert
All unto sad destruction; unless
We the pryme gods and demigods suppress
His force, not otherwise to be resisted.
Get you away from hence then* and in stead
Of friskings, in these pleasant vales of I Would,
Expose your aids (to the utmost can be tried)
For Pryam and his issue, never till now
In danger of an utter overthrow.
And my own labor, though of little value,
By staling of it before hand.

Fr. It Is a fine tale;
And cannot but please, unless it meet such minds,
As are not to be pleased.

Elsin. There is no Fustian,
Non sense, Wind, or fopperie in it.

Rey. It matters not
What some odd envious fool says; that grieves most
At the goodness of what he disprayses: and would
Be glad 't were worse. We despise affected st^ffe;
Or astrayn'd kind of Eloquence; being the smoke
And fruits of a vaineglorious, and an empty brain,
No flattery dwells we know in this. Let it begin.

The Mask. First enter six Satyrs and dance a short nimble anticke to no
Music, or at most to a single Violine* at the end of which enter Phoebus with
Bow and Arrows. Phoeb. Away unmanner'd deities though hope
Raise you unto this mirth, for Troy: Your scope
In 't (formed at the counsel of the higher gods)
Makes not the issue of their Periods,
So fortunate as you do now suppose
(In your inferior knowledges) to dispose
For Hectors safety: whom Aracides
(Madded for his loved Menetiades)
Flies to destroy. Nor can the Fates divert,
But that fierce horrid man, will soon convert
All unto sad destruction; unless
We the pryme gods and demigods suppress
His force, not otherwise to be resisted.
Get you away from hence then. and instead
Of friskings, in these pleasant vales of I Would,
Expose your aids (to the utmost can be tried)
For Pryam and his issue, never till now
In danger of an utter overthrow.

Song.
Though Hector now be dead, his name
And memory shall last, while fame
Sounds her lowed Trumpet, loved, admired;
By his example shall be fired
To acts heroicke, future ages:
And Prophets (sacred in their rages)
Shall by his virtues be installed;
And he by all a worthy called.
Hectors body is taken away about the middle of the Song: after the end of it,
Enter Phoebus and Pryam. Phoeb. Much honored and dear old man, did not
hear,
How the Jdalian deities forbear
Not (sacred loving Nymphs, and grieved like thee)
To chant a mirthfull pleasing melody?
Glad for the future glory of thy son,
Reason should govern: and a fair fame won,
Is of man's humane life the chiefest part,
Chiefest in Hector, and shall not depart
From thy for-ever-most-fam'd house: For, know
The gods on thy line (of Dardunus) will bestow
The largest Empyres; which to thee I Will now
Show for thy comfort: that thou sho'dst not bow
(Too much dejected in thy mind) to what
They in their Counsels do predestinat.

Pry. Heavens brightest eye, I 'll do what lies in me,
To obey thy will, and my sour destiny.

Phoeb. My tale in two parts, I do thus impart:
A Prince from Troy hereafter shall depart,
When Troy takes end (as all dominion.
Of mortals must:) whose chance will fetch him on
The Lybian shores, and upon Latium next.
Before which time and after, though often vexed
By the high-minded Juno, for her hates
Conceived against the Trojans: Yet, the Fates
Have destined him that throne of Latium,
Marrying the daughter of its King. From him
(The Royal seat first changed to Alba) shall
Descend two Princes, twins; for which, a fall
Their mother takes from Mars, a votresse she,
Compelled unto that state. Impiety
In an ambitious kinsman, to be drowned
Sends both the Infants: who (saved by chance) are found
Of a she-woolfe, and nourished with her Teats;
Till by a shepherd found, and by brave feats
Made known to be themselves, they build a Town
Which shall be called Rome; and shall wear the Crown
Of the worlds Monarchy, hundreds of years.
This is the first part of my tale.

Pry. My fears
And sorrow (which till now I did suppose
Could not be done) the have healed. Disclose
The other part (dear god) that is left untould.

Phoeb. Which (in no obscure terms) I do unfould:
A Prince called Brutus (of the Trojan race)
Third to the first spoke of, being in the chase
Of wild beasts, by unlucky fate he kills
Sylvius his Father, with the shaft he drils
At other game: Which fact, so much does bend
The Latins against Brutus, him they send
To sad exile. Who (after a time) arrives
At a brave spacious Island (that derives
Her name from white rocks, being a little world)
With other Trojans before met, and hurled
Too on misfortunes. A town called new Troy
He builds here the Land calls Brutaine: does enjoy
The whole as King; and his posterity
For many ages, shall reign there, as he.
Sometimes (in power and plenty) conquering
The neighbor Nations: sometimes these (for nothing
But 's subject unto change on earth) afflict
Again Troy's Brutaines, in their own district.
Of which a certain people, and called Danes
( Cymbrians by some) will prove their worst of banes.
But shall be beaten back; not without pain.
At length (in process of much time) shall reign
In this fair I Will, a Prince (one way descended
Of Trojan race: IN the other side extended
Up by the Royal blood of Danes, unto
A warlike King called Reyner, that shall woo
And wed a Lady Amazonian,
Landgartha named) which Prince shall be the man
(Having his subjects in their loves combyn'd;
Who shall to evils only be confined
By their own sad dissentions, being of all
Earths men, the properest and most martial)
To exalt thy blood. He shall (by 's right) enjoy
The Land of Danes; and in this place where Troy
Now stands, shall Conquer, and build it again.
Will also Conquer Greece, and there restrain
The impieties of wicked men. Thus, Fate
I have laid ope' to thee, to consolate
Thy self and sad Queen; Now I must away:
For, from the gods I Have made too long a stay. Exeunt amb^.

Vald. Your Majesty's have now seen all; even as
I found recorded in the foresaid Book:
How true heaven only knows. Yet, all may prove true
(Being not impossible) if men be wise.

Rey. And not destroy themselves, as it is there spoke.
Our part on it has hit right; and so may that.
And now ( Valdemar) to requite thy love, All rise.
My Queen and I will make your Mask complete,
By being your dancers. Enter Hub. and Marf. without her sword, and her Gown
untuck'd.

Hub. I must first beg your
Pardon, to lead the measure, sir, for I have
Brought a fine friendly dancer with me; and
We will so foot it --

Rey. Hubba, thou always comm'st in pudding time.

Land. Let Us stand; I long to see Marfisa dance. Here Hubba and Marfisa Dance
the whip of Donboyne merrily.

Rey. This was excellent. We shall but shame ourselves,
In following of you; Come let us begin.

Here they dance the grand Dance in four Couple, Reyner and Landgartha,
Valdemar and Scania, Frederick and Elsinora, Inguar and Fatyma. Rey. So
Cousin, we have made you some amends,
For your part of the Mask: and now you shall
(Being so kind a husband) conduct your Lady
Unto her Chamber; and there use her kindly
Too as she deserves. Our Aunt and Cousin may
(After all this noise) also retire; and say
(In solitude and silence) the many prayers
They have omitted all the day. As for
The Queens grace: she must give me leave,
To usher her to bed.

Land. Must That, in such
A servant, were too peremptory. But
If you plead your title King; I Will answer
That I know how to fight: and have ere now
Stooped a too hasty Prince. Therefore, good sir,
You are best speak me fair; or I may put you
Beside your sweet hopes;
And give you some what of the sour to taste.

Rey. That, and to kill me, were all one: For which,
I now (and ever will) humbly entreat,
As a poor suppliant with you to treat. Exeunt omnes.

The fourth Act.
Enter Reyner musing at one door, and Hubba to him at the other. Rey. Is
Jnguar yet returned from the Fleet?

Hub. Not yet sir.

Rey. Let him be quickly sent for then: be gone. Exit Hubba.
A poor gentlewoman, an ordinary
Noble man's daughter, to have caught me thus;
Whom Caesar would rejoice, to have made his son,
Some horrid plague confound her modesty,
And her for me, for now I care not for her;
Though I dissemble it: because I dare not
(She is so damned valiant) do otherwise
Till I have got from hence: For she (being
So beloved too of the Norwegians) might
Cut short my life and passage. But yet, Reyner,
Think how exceeding worthy she is of love;
And of a Prince: think of her virtue, do:
Think of her beauty, myldnesse, valor, and
What else: no, no, I will not; will not love her:
For I have took enough of what I most loved;
Which, I confess could not but please my Palate Enter Vald.
But here comes Valdemar, who like an Ass
Still dotes on his wife, I 'll not therefore trust him.

Vald. Your resolution to be gone for Denmark,
Men do admire; and I must tell you, sir,
(Seeing you will needs be constant, in so bad
A purpose) some do fear your projects are
Ignoble. I then (as one that loved you once;
And will do still, unless you forfeyte your self)
Would be your adviser, if you dare take advice.

Rey. Y' are too saucy; and what I have resolved on,
I will not alter. Must we be curbed by you,
In tendering the welfare of our subjects?
Shall Denmark be still forgotten?

Vald. That color
Dies but very poorly; though you stalk with it.
The fall of your obstreperous passion, to
Your Queen (sir) people take notice of: though she,
Poor Lady, (a sliam'd to be deceived or scorned)
Say nothing of it; restrayn'd too, by her love
To you. But, we that are your Countriemen
(Whom you mainely dishonor in it) can have
No such patience.

Rey. Our affection to our
Loved fair Consort (though you be pleased to doubt it)
Will not be questioned, but by your slanderous tongue

Vald. You cannot, sir. Nay shall not, mask your black
Intentions so from me; they do appear
Too many. And she whom you most wrong, is more
Then worthy of you; had you but the wisdom
And grace to think so still. But be assured
(When she is rid of the burden she now carries)
She 'll be revenged at full for her dishonor;
And snatch the Crowns you wear from of your trech'rous Temples.

Rey. You will not play the Traitor, in
Conspiring with her?

Vald. Though I should not, sir,
You need not doubt but Harrolld will; who thinks
His right to Denmark, as good as yours to Norway.

Rey. That Christian dog-shead and yours too, had been
chopped off ere this, had I not been a fool.

Vald. If you durst (you make me now believe) that had
Been so. But I Will make shift to save one of 's; Enter Ing. and Hubba.
And think you 'll hardly save your self from to other.

Rey. You may do what you lift; and so will I,
Are all the Shipping ready?

Ing. They are sir, but --

Rey. Come, spare your breath; I know what you would say.

Hub. Would all the Cables and Sails were burnt:
You brought us hither with the hazard of our lives,
To gain this kingdom for you; and now you have it,
You 'll wisely gi' 't away; and fetch 'em all
Upon our backs.

Rey. Who made you a Counselor?
There Is your reward. strikes him.

Hub. I shall take more then this
Ere long if I stick to you.

Vald. You do well
To practice before hand. Offers to draw, so does Vald. and Ing. steps in.

Rey. Traitor, do you upbrayd us?

Ing. I beseech you sir, to suppress your passion;
And not to raise a tumult here: knowing
How truely-loyall the Prince Valdemar,
Has ever been to you, sir, and now pleads
Strongly against himself; in seeking to
Detain you, with your gracious noble Queen.

Vald. He accounts his friends, his nearest enemies,

Rey. We take heaven to witness, we are wronged. Enter Land, with Child and
Scania not so.
But peace; here she comes.

Land. Will you needs be gone, sir,
And leave me thus?

Rey. It is but two hours sailing,
In a fair day; and we shall soon be back.

Land. I do not use to weep: But now I must; Weeps.
My heavy mind fore-speakes some future evil.
Death (which shall be welcome) I know 's not far from me.

Rey. May the gods grant to hasten it. Aside.

Scan. The time was
When she, sir, could with a nod a' forced your fancy,
In a far greater matter, then your stay
For some small time.

Rey. And shall again sweet Sister,
But the mere necessity of our departure,
Is such: that we must needs away, at this
Very instant.

Land. Then give me leave (dear sir,)
To share the worst may happen in your voyage.

Rey. So to endanger your life, we'd loose ours first,
You shall by no means stir, my only soul, Come:
We will conduct you to your Chamber, and there
Leave you (with your friends and mine) to be guided
By your accustomed virtue, and strong heart. Exeunt.

Enter Cowsell and Radger. Cow. O brother, brother, I know the very grief on it,
Will kill me out right, as dead as a Herring.

Rad. O dear, loving brother. I shall fare no better,
I Am sure of that; would I had never seen you.

Cow. Besides brother, I took such an affection
To the women, fine, courteous, honest cre'tures.

Rad. And we to you brother, and to all the Daues.
You came not to pray on's, but to deliver
Us from the Swedes.

Cow. We ought to love each other,
Brother, being so near neighbors, and friends.

Rad. So we do, dear brother, all those are good and honest.
Who would 'a' thought his grace should leave the Queen
So abruptly, in the latter end of her time too?

Cow. Hard against our wills: but says, he 'll soon be back.

Rad. IN the mean time brother, and before we part,
We are best take to other cup.

Cow. I thought to 'a'
Made that now my motion brother, we shall
Remember you in Denmark.

Rad. And when we
Forget you brother, may the gods forget us.
Ho! drawer, Rolfo,
Within, Anon anon sir. Enter Rolfo.

Rad. Honest Rolfo, one flaggon more of that
You gave us last, the very same I charge thee,
Without tricks or mixture.

Roll. By Love sir, you shall:
What? Do you think I 'll use you like a stranger?

Cow. Prithee kind Rolfo, let not us be forced
To knock again. Exit Rolfo.

Rad. Captain Hubba (as I
Conceive brother) goes not along with you;
I met him spurring to our house, as I came.

Cow. The Princess Scania, by much entreaty
Got leave of the Lord Inguar, his Coronell,
To stay only two days; and he is gone
A visit to his Mistress. Enter Rolfo.

Rad. Welcome Rolfo.
Come, give it me: for we shall need no glasses. They drink at the Lines.
Here worthy brother, half to your good journey

Cow. Let me see brother, Peeps into the pot.
you have drunk the full half --
Here Rolfo, fill 't again. Exit Rolfo.

Rad. O sweet brother, that you co'd stay all night,
I should never be weary of your company. Enter Rolfo.

Cow. Nor I of yours brother, and now from the deep
Bottom of my heart to the wide mouth of my stomach
I speak it dearest brother, here is a whole one,
To our next merry meeting --

Rad. Quickly Rolfo, Exit Rolfo.
Fetch it, and be honest. O sweet brother,
That I co'd embrace you thus for ever, ever. They embrace.

Cow. I must kiss at parting. They kiss.

Rolf. Y' are a couple of the arrantest kind gentlemen. Ent. Rolf.

Rad. Give me the pot: I never drunk in my life
With more sorrow, and a better desire. --

Cow. Here, take Money Rolfo, my brother paid last,
I must kiss thee too Rolfo,
Within, Rolfo. Rogue.

Rolfo. Anon, anon, sir. As they kiss.

Rad. Nay Rolfo, for all
Your haste: I must (for my brothers sake) take
Off that kiss, from thy now sweet (though greasy) lips. They kiss

Cow. And now farewell, but not for ever, my dearest
And best of friends. Rad. we 'll part at the other Tavern.

Cow. Then arm in arm let 's march, most worthy brother. Exeunt.

Enter Hubba and Marfisa. Hub. I could not otherwise choose, Mistress (though
Your distrust of my unfayn'd affection,
Kept me thus long from enjoying, what I
Most desired in a noble way) but come
(Urged by that love, that ever shall remain
With me, wheresoe'r I go) to tender
The duty of a servant, in taking leave
Of you, before my sudden departure.

Mar. It 's indeed too sudden: and I do now
Repent the not embracing, what I was not
Enough good to accept, your love. For, I confess
Though somewhat late, I loved you more then you
Did me; and ever shall unless the fault
Be only yours, in proving (which I do
Not yet suspect) a changling. I shall for
My part, punish severely in my self,
The offense of not being yours, by a continued
Sadness and grief, till once again I see you.

Hub. And though I have been too much noted for
My mirth (which yet, was never sawe'd with spite,
Or other bad condition:) I promise
(Por my misfortune in thus missing of you)
Not to laugh once (unless against my will,
At some unlucky chance) till I possess
The treasure I most covet.

Mar. That (if you
Mean me) shall be yours when we meet next, and
Safely kept for you, until then. IN the mean time,
I shall charily preserve (though but a poor
Satisfaction for you) your image in
The interior of my mind.

Hub. Which overpay's,
With much advantage, all my services.

Mar. 't was a strange resolution of the King,
To leave his Queen, she being so much against it;
And he so strangely fond of her at first:
Which she deserved, being a Lady the world
Cannot match.

Hub. He is these thirty hours in Denmark:
Where if he prove unkind to her, that cannot
(In true judgment) condemn others, that like not
Such proceeding.

Mar. He had need be circumspect
In what he does; or he may soon repent it,
And perchance,
When matters prove past remedy to him,
Yet, while I find you sound: no alien faults
Shall make me hate, what once I so affected,

Hub. Resting on that assurance, I must now
Crave the kind, favor of a parting kiss.

Mar. That you shall have they kiss
and half a dozen more,
When you come to your Ship: For, so far I
Will with you; and would along to Denmark, but to try
If I may build upon your constancy. Exeunt.

Enter Harold and Eric. Har. It Is now but need, we both look to our selves:
Or we may pay the forfeyt of our slackenesse
(With the loss of both our heads) upon a Scaffold.
For, Reyner having cast the fair Landgartha
Off, (of whom he was not worthy:) and by
A dreadful precipice, fallen from much goodness:
He will not stop at his first fault. But (hurried
By the guiltiness of his Conscience)
Run headlong down the hill, upon the rock
Of dangerous mischief; to which he 's now engaged.

Eric. She is a Lady of so stout a heart,
That when she finds him base (although she loved him
Exceedingly) she cannot but be revenged
For her repudiation, and disgrace.

Har. And may prove our strong friend to ruin him;
That has threatened (and that not privately)
To rid himself on us.

Eric. And will, if he can:
You may by his death then, that would be yours,
Settle your self securely in his kingdoms,
By matching and partaking now with her.

Har. Brother, the man whose deity we adore
(And who to give us rest, still lived without it)
Can witness for me, could I but persuade
My mind by any probability,
't were possible, for me to live in peace here,
And not have my throat cut: although my right
Unto the Crown of Denmark be apparent,
My title while I slept or waked, should sleep;
As when King Reyner lived a virtuous kind man.
For I delight not in the expense of blood;
Though I fear not to spend my own in a
Just cause. But seeing all rest is denied me:
As the strong law of nature binds, I must
Shift for my self, the best I may. Which shall not
Be effected by base treachery, or murder.
Nor do I chiefly yet mean to rely
On the brave Landgartha's assistance; whom the
Love of a wife, and hope of reconcilement,
May urge beyond all spirit of revenge.

Eric. What is 't you mean to plot then for our safety?

Har. We'll to the pious Christian Emperor,
Lewis the Debonaire; who (as you know)
Does often solicit me to plead my right
To the Crown, by dent of sword; that being the best
(Nay only) Patent, Reyner has to show for 't.
Though he from 's father got it: which does lessen
Much his guilt.

Eric. It Is not his guilt that now most troubles him;
But by more sin to guard it.

Har. Twelve thousand.
Expert Soldiers (that lie near here, of the borders
Of Germany) I may have when I list;
To add (with all speed) to our own sure friends.
And unto others that will fall in troops,
From now dishonored Reyner, for his base
Adultery intended with Vraca,
To strengthen himself against his wife and me.

Eric. Unheard of madness, so vilely to betray
(And to 's own ruin) a poor and virtuous Lady;
That but for him, and his damned shameless lies,
Had never married any. Being withal
(As 't is reported) most extremely fair,
Far, far beyond the other,

Har. Such are the follies
Of humane nature, when it is forsaken
Of him that made it: But we'll now make use on it.

Eric. You should be sudden, least we be laid hold on;
And to take him unprepared.

Har. When night ascends
Her sable charyot, we will both of us
(Mounted on our best horses) post away;
And be (I hope) cre we be missed, passed danger.
Come, let us therefore in, and loose no time:
Which, in necessity 's a fatal crime. Exeunt.

The fifth Act.
Enter Valdomar and Jnguar. Vald. You are happy beyond expectation
In your Embassage: for all men did conceive
(And very probably) the Queen would aid
With the utmost of her power, Harrold in his
Design for Denmark. But, she noble Lady,
(Although in outward show, she have not granted
What you demand) I know (such is her virtue
And loving nature) is coming in her mind,
Now to assist your most ungracious King.

Ing. For which in chief he is to you beholding;
Though he deserved it not, at his departure.
But now, Contrition has wipt off his guilt,
Though not the punishment, before the gods.
Nor is there any hope left us on earth,
But what we now may gain here by your means

Vald. Had you but been a witness of her griefs
(Able to rive a heart of steel) you had
Melted (as we almost did) into tears:
Especially when she heard of the infamous
Marryage, with Swealands daughter (told her by
A whispering flatterer:) how then she tore
Her golden hair, and used such cruelty
On her fair limbs, which had wellneere ended her
(Notwithstanding what we could do to hinder 't:)
Cursing the time when she ever saw a Dane;
Not for her husbands renogading most:
But the loss of her virginity, and foul
Disgrace.

Ing. We heard of all: Yet, were compelled
By strong necessity (perforce) to build
On her heroicke goodness, and your worth.

Vald. 't was well conceived; and better put to trial,
That compulsion may work peace again.

Ing. Here the divine Lady comes (her self) unto us. Enter Landgartha, Scania,
Elsinora, Fatyma, and Marfisa in woman's apparel with Swords on.

Land. Although (Lord Inguar,) your sovereign, and my
Unkind husband, were rather to expect
Sharp war and hate then any aid from me
In his distress: having (as far as 't lay
In him) disgraced me by his flight; and as
I 'd used false play with others: yet, my love
To him (deeply engraven in my heart.)
Joined to my own innocence and merit, has
(As all may see) got the upper-hand; and stopped
My once intended course of strict revenge;
Though he enjoy another wife, now the Mistress
Of what is mine by bond.

Ing. Most gracious Queen,
I can say nothing, to excuse his guilt;
Or lessen it: but that your virtue shines
The brighter for his deep ingratitude,
Which now 's the greatest Corrosive to himself,
And cause of all his evils, by the loss
Of in a manner all was his before:
And that his act, has rendered both of you
Famous to all the world, in different manners:
You as the glorious mirror of all worth,
But him (with grief I speak it) for 's offense.

Scan. Which now (dear Madame) as it is repented,
Exacts your mercy more then punishment.

Elsin. To prove a lasting Pyramid to all
Succeeding times, of such a noble act.

Vald. It can yield you no benefit to ruin
Him and his poor subjects, being also yours;
And in their loves, they are yours.

Fat. Much more then his
I do believe.

Ing. Madame. I can depose it. To Fatyma.
And that they 've ever deemed it their chief glory,
To have had her for their Queen; their hearts he lost,
When he lost her: nor is there ought can raise
The minds of the few, that now stick to him, but her
Strong assistance, and the tried valor of the
Norwegian Ladies, that before
Gave us the victory against the Swedes.

Land. King Reyner and your self (Lord Inguar) have
Too many friends here, to be denied in what
Our power may stead him, or you demand.
And I Am the more induced to pardon his fault,
That I acknowledge my self faulty too
(And which my heart has often accused me for,
With no small grief) in granting that to him
Under the flattering title of marryage, which I
Resolved never to 'a' lost; and which he durst not
Seek to have forced from me. But it 's now past help.

Scan. There 's one way yet left (Madame) to help all.

Land. He then transported, by his fierce desire,
Which slav'd him: by craft (I Will give it no worse
A name) did that wrong to my modesty,
Which I (being not so deep in passion)
Might well have hindered; and by yielding to it,
Have given scope for others to condemn me.

Ing. Which none can justly do: For, I Am assured,
Madame (though you have cause not to believe it)
That his intents to your grace, were sincere
At first, as now they are: and therefore (dear Queen,)
You are to meet his past ill, with your goodness.
Which, if you do not speedily: there will be
No time, nor means hereafter, left for you
To exercise your valor in this cause.

Land. When we behold our neighbors house on fire,
The Proverb says we ought look to our own:
This you conceive; and I suppose you are
Informed by these that love you, that we have
As many valiant men and women, in
A readiness, as may, if heaven be pleased
(For we are pleased in 't) reinthrone your King;
And chase those rebels that now urge his flight.
Let then my brother (the Prince Valdemar)
And you, make all the haste you can before us;
With news of our approach. And, one thing more
I must entreat you do for me: which is
To deliver this Letter, unto him that
Caused my sorrow; and left me great with child.
Which fruit of his, he shall soon look on, young Frideslaus.

Vald. He should 'a' stayed, to have got
Such another.

Scan. In honesty, he could
Have done no less.

Ing. Your graces Letter, I hope
Within these three hours, he shall read at furthest.

Vald. You 'll give me leave to go before, to provide
A lodging for you?

Scan. Yes: for I mean to be
Your bedfellow to morrow night.

Vald. And I shall strain my self, to bid you welcome.

Ing. The King will do as much too, for your Highness.

Land. Fie, not so soon man, that were a shame indeed,
People would then say, that I went to ask it. smilingly
Nor does he need me; having one (at least)
Already to keep him warm.

Ing. He thinks of none,
But your Grace.

Vald. We must be now abrupt in our
Leave taking?

Land. Be gone Scania, fare you well. Inguar, may all
The gods be your guides. Exeunt ambo.

Land. And now Marfisa.
Silence declares with you, how gladly your heart
Consents, to go for Denmark.

Mar. I mean to do
Your Majesty some service there, now that
You measure my affection by your own.

Scan. But what, if you come to wear the Willow garland,
By the inconstancy of Captain Hubba?

Mar. Not (do as the Queen did) forgive the offense.

Fat. No less then 's life would satisfy your anger.

Mar. Do you make doubt on it?

Elsin. I believe him honest.

Land. What is your own opinion? Marfisa.

Mar. I still suppose the best.

Land. Then wait upon
My cousin Fatyma: and both of you make haste
To summon with all speed (on pain of death)
All our troops (both men and women) in Anstoy,
Saltsburge, and thereabouts. Our Sister and Aunt
Shall to the nearer quarters; whilst I prepare
Here all things requisite for our departure.
And as we once made no small haste to meet
King Reyner, when he brought us aid against
Our foes: let us do the same in gratitude
(And with more honor) now, in assisting of him.
Those which we leave, will keep safe here. Away.

Fat. The trust imposed on us, we 'll not betray. Exeunt omnes severally.

A march. Then enter Harrold, Eric, and Lothaire armed. Har. We must make
haste, Lord Lothaire, (now that by
The help of heaven, for which we chiefly move:
And the assistance which you Lord and ours,
The noble Emperor Lewis, true inheritor
Of his great fathers virtues did afford us,
We are ascended to what is our right,
Being thereto lifted by your manly worth too)
To make all sure, by joining our last issue
With Reyner, ere the brave Landgartha come
(Whom he once more thinks to deceive:) For, where
She leads, all goes to wrack in the other side.

Loath. It 's strange so stout a mind as hers, should ever
Yield love or obedience to a man that has
So basely dealt to her.

Eric. She squares all her
Actions by the rule of goodness, not
Of passion; and thinks this deed of hers,
A very grateful offering to her gods,
Yet, we do hope to send (before she land here:
Her husbands rank soul, to great Beelzebub.

Har. Then let us march on with speed; and trust our cause
To him, that only gives life by his laws. Exeunt a march.

After the march, Enter Reyner and Hubba. Rey. Hear you no news from Inguar (
Hubba) yet

Hub. Not a word: But a ship is now on entering
In at the haven; and we hope it 's his.

Rey. No, no. We are of all the world forsaken,
But most of heaven: For, we have deserved it,
And our repentance now comes too too late.

Hub. I do beseech you sir, not to yield to
Such weak, unmanly diffidence.

Rey. We wronged
Thee ( Hubba) too; and now thy loyalty
And kindness wounds our soul deeper, then if thou had
Proved false, all turns to my confusion.

Hub. It was your passion and not you, struck me, sir.

Rey. Would I were quickly dead, or never borne,
To see the evils which I have occasioned,
And must needs feel, if I but live a while.

Hub. Your noble Queen Landgartha, will I doubt not
(If in the mean time sir, you do what lies in you,
With patience) soon rid you of those fears;
And State you as before; and in her love too.

Rey. I never shall see that Halcyon day again,
To see her, Hubba, though you all suppose
The contrary; and caused me send to move
Her goodness. She is too magnanimous
Ever to look at such a wretch as I am,
That deceived her once so foulely.

Hub. You Will find
Your self deceived, I hope sir, in that ere long.

Rey. Had I but faithful proved to her, as she
Deserved (thou know's it Hubba,) I might then
'a' played at stoole-ball with young children, or
Have wasted time more idly, if I Would listed;
And have my estate multiplied to many
Kingdoms. Now, thou see, we are not worth one
Province, Stricke me heaven. Enter Valdemar and Inguar.

Vald. Honest Captain, I
Am glad to meet you alive.

Hub. Your Highness poor servant.

Ing. The King walks strangely sad.

Hub. He Is not himself: and therefore, whatsoever
News you bring; y' had need use your accustomed
Discretion in the relating of it.

Rey. You are both as welcome hither, as my
Distraction will give me leave to bid you.

Vald. I never knew you (sir) too much exalted
At flattering Fortunes smiles, or when you Conquered:
And (now she frowns) you still ought to preserve
A valiant indifferency.

Rey. Healthy men
Know how to afford good counsel unto others,
Whose forces being too weak, to bear the blows
Of their diseases, yield and languish under
The weight that 's insupportable.

Jng. The weaker
Their minds are, the more they yield; beyond
Necessity: and thereby become chief Actors
In their own Tragedies.

Rey. I know you speak this,
To prepare my mind, for the bad news you bring.

Ing. Your virtue will now most consist, in not
Being over joy'd, when you read this Letter,
Written and sent by her, that says she loves you.

Rey. Let me see 't. I know the hand, it is hers,
O let me, let me kiss it, kiss it still, Kisses the Letter.
And not presume to look what it contaynes,
To plague my guilty conscience. Vald. read and be ruled.
Reyner opens and Reads. If this my second duty, may prove as happy in the
recovery of thy kingdoms, as my first was against a Tyrant; yet honoring thee
with the victory; J shall account my travel well bestowed. Make head bravely
(as wisdom permits) against the enemy: for I am coming with all speed, to
let him know, that Landgartha (being thy Queenne and only lawful Wife) is a
warrior: and will prove so to his prejudice, and thy advantage: having from her
heart (notwithstanding thy unkindnesse) absolved thee of all the wrongs thou
did her.

Landgartha,



Rey. A gracious language! O you gods defend me,
From turning altogether fool at this. For, my
Frail vessel is not able to contain,
The forcible excess of this sweet comfort.
My soul results so strangely, mounts, mounts up,
That I have much ado, to keep from dancing:
My nimble spirit elevats my body,
And my very life (I think) will now with joy
Forsake me, fly away.

Vald. Be not in extremes,
So like a mere frantic Pray recall your wits,
Before she comes, you may loose all; your self, and us.

Rey. Excuse me, worthy Cousin, you feel not
The force of my impulsion. Yet, I confess
I Am (but as others are) a poor weak man;
Subject to many changes against my will.

Ing. Collect your self, were 't but in obedience Enter scout.
To your wise and noble Queen. What news with you?

Scout. That Harrold and his brother Eric, with
A mighty power of Danes and Germans, march
Hither with speed, doubtless to force a battle.

Ing. Which we must decline, till our best soldier
Come: and then we are for 'em.

Vald. Lead us from hence,
To guard your works; and do not now forget
(Your wished aid being so near you) your old valor;
And judgment to command.

Ray. I hope we shall not. Exeunt.

A march. Enter Harrold, Eric, Lothaire, and one or two more with Battle-axes.
Har. Our foes have fortified themselves so strongly,
With Wagons, Carts, huge timber, and deep trenches:
As it is impossible almost to force 'em.

Eric. Which if you do not, you will find it a worse task,
To quayle Landgartha; whose fleet's now at sea;
Nay hard on landing.

Loath. The present attempt will not
Perchance, prove so dangerous, as to the eye
It seems; if we valiantly engage
Our selves in the onset.

Har. Let us boldly on then;
And to conclude what hitherto, we have
So prosperously achieved. I will begin:
And die, rather then loose what I have won. Exeunt.

Allarums, A while after which is begun, enter Reyner and Valdemar with
Battle-axes. Rey. All 's lost beyond recoverie, they are broke
Upon us in, and fight like hungry Lions,
Tearing our men to pieces, that now leave,
In foul disorder.

Vald. Do you (whilst I charge up,
To give some stop unto their fury) rally
And hearten yours, the best you may. For, if
We can hold out, but one full hour: the noble
Landgartha (that with speed incredible,
Has almost landed all her forces) will be
With us, to mend all again.

Rey. She shall never meet me flying. Exeunt. allarums.

Enter Landgartha, Scania, Elsinora, Fatyma, and Marfisa: The four Ladies,
like Amazons. Marfisa with her Gown tucked to the midleg, spurs, etc. As in
the first of the third Act; Battle-axes withal. Land. You hear this Music,
Ladies, and perceive
What need our friends have of our swift assistance.
We are not therefore now, to insist upon Here the Allarums sound as far off.
A tedious consultation; or on words
By me delivered, to encourage those
Whose worths I know already. Do you Aunt
(Assisted by Fatyma and Marfisa)
Lead half our Army: and wheel round about
(With speed and silence) to charge strongly home,
Upon our enemies backs. My sister and I
Will to our Husbands, that are hardly pressed;
Their men all routed, and a number slain.
Farewell, I hope that we shall meet again. Exeunt sverally allarums.

Allarums. Then enter Reyner at one door, and Harold at the other. Rey. Stand
Traitor!

Har. Thou usurper, I will stand;
And could afford you other glorious titles:
But that I mean not (having met you) to
Waste time in words, until your foolish sweetheart
(Whom you would still deceive) come to your rescue.
But now, I hope you never shall enjoy her,
You know how.

Rey. You shall know somewhat from me, howsoever.

Here they fight, and Harrold beats Reyner under him; on which Landgartha
enters, beats in Harrold and returns. Land. Is it you? I were not beholding, to
Land. Exit.
Have done this for you now. Go, look to your self and people.

Rey. Dear heaven, where am I? or, is this a dream? Reyner rises as she beats
in Harrold.
It was Landgartha sure. O no, it was not,
That glory and great miracle of the world,
Could not afford such grace to me, the mere
Fallen dregs of villainy. But yet, 't was she,
The figure of her heavenly face, was once
(And still is) so imprinted in my soul,
As 't is impossible I should forget her,
Therefore you gods, heap all those mountains on me,
Which the impious Giants lifted against you,
Or sincke me down into the very Center,
That I may never behold her any more,
That is so like you, both in shape and goodness.
For, both I have contemned, and my most base
Ingratitude, never appeared at full;
Till now. O Jove, pownd pownd me with thy thunder,
For, my confusion is the worst of torments. Enter Scania and Valdemar.

Scan. The King 's in danger; and we had need make haste
To disingage him.

Vald. That 's done (I hope) already.

Rey. Welcome dear Sister, I am ashamed to look
You in the face.

Scan. We heard (sir) you were in danger.

Rey. I was: But now may (when I list) go take
A nap. Would the infernal dogs would tear
My limbs to callops: or add some worse torment
Unto my minds affliction.

Scan. You need not
Afflict your self so much, for ought we see:
For, now the wheel is turned to your advantage;
My Sister is friends with you too, sir.

Rey. She said
My life, when I was down; and ready to
Receive the last (and mortal) blow. But then,
Gave me so sad a look, O loving Sister,
That life which is her gift, if I must keep
In her displeasure, is much worse then death.

Scan. Sir, if you will be ruled by me, you must not
Express too much, those vehement affections:
For, she is acquainted but too well already,
With your sad passion, and the continuance of it.

Rey. Seeing you (dear Lady,) in love and wisdom,
Esteem that my best course: I shall be dumb
As night, calm as the calm'st evening after
A stormy day. Scania, let us follow, where she went then. Exeunt.

Enter Harrold and Eric. Har. After our loss and watching these two nights,
I cannot brother (the toil of our journey,
Lying so heavy too, on my tired body)
But sleep a little, though it be dangerous.

Eric. My neede's no less; a little sleep will serve.

Har. Let Us take it here then, the place being solitary.

They sleep, and a sweet solemn Music of Recorders is heard, then enter an
Angel. Ang. Heaven has decreed, another day
Shall gain what you have lost. Your way
Take both (as you were forced before)
Unto the pious Emperor.
One of you shall be King: whose seed
Shall be so too, until 't all bleed.
Then (when that issue is extinct)
Norway and Denmarkes whole precinct
Shall be ruled by Landgartha's line,
And Reyners. Her the powers divine
Will (for her Moral virtues) turn
A Christian, ere she come to the Urne:
Yield faith to this: For, without doubt,
What I have said shall come about. Exit Ang. then Eric stirs and wakes Har.

Eric. Sir, you sleep exceeding soundly: Pray wake.

Har. I now am fresh enough; Come let us be gone.

Eric. Dreamed you nothing, while you slept?

Har. No, did you?

Eric. Me thought I heard a most heavenly Music;
And that an Angel did appear: and wished us,
Betake our selves again to the Emperor,
That what we lost, another day should purchase;
And that the fair Landgartha (as the reward
Of her Moral virtues) would be made Christian,
Before she di'd.

Har. Though we afford no credit
Unto such dreams: Yet, we must steer our course
That way; there being (after so great a loss)
No comfort left, where our foes are so strong.

Eric. Heaven will in time (I hope) revenge our wrong. Exeunt

Enter Cowsell and Radgee. Cow. Come brother Radgee, it is now concluded,
We shall never part again.

Rad. O dear brother,
I never had a good day on it (much less
A good night) since (being barred the comfort of your
Sweet conversation) you parted from me.

Cow. Nay brother, I can howl the same sad Madrigall
Too: For look you brother, we were all so frighted
By those fat-foggy Germans (who men say
Are nothing but flesh and belly:) that we durst
Allow no time for mirth and drinking.

Rad. Very
Strange that brother. For, they say themselves are
Exceeding good fellows.

Cow. Just of that seize.

Rad. I Will tell you more what I heard spoken of 'em,
Brother, they 're sour: and never worth the trusting,
Or honest in their bargains, until they
Be drunk, or at least half drunk.

Cow. That Is as true,
Brother, as that you and I drunk half a score
Flaggons yesternight a piece. The North wind
Is not so bitter in a morning, till he
Has took a buttrum, or his Wine.

Rad. And then,
Makes as good Music, as a Bag-pipe when it is
Full blow'n. What do you think of the Swedes? brother*

Cow. They are not (yet) altogether so good drinkers,
As the Germans are: but well fallen to 't of late.
Which makes me suppose, brother, they will be beaten
Out too. For besides, the King will no more kiss
The Queen Vraca, as't is spoken: But stick
To 's own old Camrade, being indeed the fairer.

Rad. Yet, in my opinion brother: his Grace
Being married to both, should do exceeding well,
To keep both still: Sleep betwixt both 'a' nights.
And embrace both by turns. What say you brother?

Cow. What? But to concur with you? and for many
Good, and convincing reasons. 's for example:
The King being kept so warm on both sides, by
Two such delicate cre'tures, 't were impossible
He should catch cold; I, or perchance be troubled
With Coughs, Scyaticas, or other bone-ach;
And to have Swealand and Norway at command,
Were a matter of no small importance,
You conceive me, brother.

Cow. Few wise men better,
In part. But, stand aside: themselves are coming. Flourish.

Enter Reyner, Landgartha, Valdemar, Vraca, Scania, Inguar, Elsinora Fatyma,
Hubba and Marfisa; the Norwegian Ladies in woman's apparel, with Swords on;
Marfisa with her Gown untuck'd and sword on. Ing. You will not (gracious
Madame) thus deceive
The expectations of your poor, and loving
People: whose whole hopes, comfort, safety (nay all
We can for the present, or hereafter call ours)
Are but benefits derived from the fountain
Of your warm bounty; at whose goodness yet,
We most rejoice. Do not then (dear Empress,) strike
Sorrow to our lately bleeding hearts; that still
Pant (and not slowly) by our former fears;
And the sore stripes we took: Which, but for you,
For ever were incurable; and now
By your forsaking of us, will fester worse
Then before.

Land. That you need not fear, Lord Inguar.
For, I shall never be wanting in my care,
And love unto this Nation. Leaving here
The best half of our Army, now behind us;
To prevent all future mischiefs.

Jng. Our dishonor
In your departure, we shall never recover.

Rey. My offense (which now 's my worst affliction,
With what it does occasion) all may see,
Took origin and issue, more of humane
Frayltie, and foolish pride: then want of love
To you; or of desert in you, to merit
A better and more powerful man then I am;
The worlds only Monarch, if there were but one,
For which, I (without your mercy to restore me
Once more unto your heart, as to my kingdoms)
Must spend my days (which shall not then be many)
Like to a sickely beast without a soul.

Land. My heart shall still receive you: But, on my word,
The rest of my body you shall not enjoy, sir,
I now am gaunt you see,
All though you must not have a feeling of it;
And if I do play false, my belly will show't
Questionless: For, I am fruitful if
I should be touched.

Vald. Although but weakly, Madame.
On you, and this your kind friend: but that I waved
Him for my husband, that despised me as
His honest Mate; and would 'a' loved me for
By-blowes. Therefore, enjoy him still: for, I suppose
You are a Hen, that must be trod.

Vrac. That 's more then you know; or I hope shall find.

Rey. She shall never enjoy me; nor has not
Of a long time I Will swear, if that will serve.

Land. It shall not sir) believe it. Yet, never fear
You shall be armed in the front by me; which is
A wrong this other Lady cannot do you,
If she would.

Vrac. I Will leave that now for you, that have
The abler body.

Land. And you the frayler mind.
But if you chop words with me thus, or insult:
I may (for a farewell) crack your birds neck,
Before we part.

Vrac. I must not stand so near
You then. She steps behind Reyner, and holds him betwixt Langartha and her
self.

Rey. Nor I prove any safeguard for you. Steps from betwixt them.
But should take part with her, whom I love best;
And has best right unto me.

Vrac. That you say
To flatter her, and for mere fear. But if
I had you in private, I know what you
Would sing; and play too, if I should but yield. Land. runs at her, and Elsinora
steps in.

Elsin. What do you mean?

Land. That I will never have him,
That is resolved.

Elsin. Your resolution
(I must say) in that, is worse then madness.

Land. I Will not quarrel with you, Aunt. Yet, do admire
A Lady of your known modesty, should be
So far mistaken, and in such a cause.

Elsin. It Is you that are mistaken: I confess.
I was at first an opposite in your love
Unto the King: but, seeing you would needs
Yield (then) your virgin Forte unto his Highness:
I now would have you take what wives do use;
And let me still live chaste, that do profess it.

Scan. My Aunt says more (to me I am sure she did:)
All ought to live according their vocation.
And not preposterously prove aliens to it.
Nor will it serve to say he tore the bond,
Now that he is sorry for it: For, still the general good
Must be preferred to all particular
Merit; or that devotion that may
By foolish zeal, prove a too great offense.

Land. I must hear more opinions, ere I part
From my strong purpose: therefore sir, adieu.
Be merciful in chief, unto your subjects;
To allure their hearts, by love: that being the tie
That will hold strongest; never can be broken,
Unless by fools, or mad men. For, that party
That should tend any mischief, against a good Prince:
Were first to kill all his subjects, being the Kings friends;
Or perish himself, by his fatal and bad
Purpose. Be just and virtuous, and you need not
Fear poison, poynards, or conspiracy.
To end: Norway shall be preserved for your young son;
And as for me (though yours:) I Will end my life,
An honest widow, or forsaken wife: Exit with Elsinora, Fatyma, and Marfisa

Vald. I must take leave too.

Rey. Farewell, worthiest Cousin.

Scan. You know the way to Norway, Sir, and if
I might advise so wise a King to follow
Us thither, and not slowly: that honorable
Obligation would so bind your Queen
(Being seconded by us your friends, and reason)
That I believe what now she does deny,
She would then grant; especially, when she
Perceives you constant in your vowed affection:
For this perchance she does to tempt and try you.
Nay, I am sure she does; and that she will be
Yours again, if you persever in your love to her,
In the mean time, I shall not fail to prove,
Your grace's faithful, loving advocate.

Rey. In you the anchor of my trust lies only fixed,
Dear sister. I must follow your advise. kisses her.

Exit Scania and Valdemar. Rad. O brother, brother: must we part at last? They
embrace. Exeunt Cow. and Radgee.

Cow. No, no: get before; I Will steal along with you.

Rey. Inguar, Did think our hopes should end in this?

Ing. It may prove better; and I hope it will sit.

Rey. Accursed Fate of man, of foolish man,
That cannot prize a Jewel while he has it,
Till it be lost, and then his grief is vain,
Vain and unprofitable, when no hope
Is left to find it, which I feare's my case;
Our misery the mirror's made, by which
We only see our faults, our dangerous wounds.
Which likely then can never be recur'd:
Being Gangreene filthy sores, that do Corrode
So far into the very soul of man,
That they hale to sad desperation.
To which point I Am almost arrived, the Gemme
I lost, being so rich, as all earths Potentates
A richer could not boast. Which if I find not
(Struck with my dyre misfortune) my own hand
Shall send my spirit to the Stygian strand. Exit with Ing. and Hub.

Vrac. And seeing I Have walked astray, I will from hence:
By future good to expiate my offense. Exit in the middle.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
Scania (that spoke the Prologue) now delivers the Epilogue, apparelled as in
the last Scene, with her Sword and Belt in her hand.
THough our Author cares not, how his Play may take:
Yet, cause he purposes not to forsake
In his affection, any Worthy here;
He has sent me before the Court break up, to appear
For him again; to see how it has pleased:
For, notwithstanding he means to be eased;
For ever of the like task: Yet, from his heart
He wishes, you and he should fairly part.
And this he more (for him) desired me say:
Where others spend a year about a Play
(Picking a sentence here, a word from thence)
This Tragie-Comedy with the expense
Of less then two Months time he penned: For he
's not too ambitious of the dignity
Of a prime Poet; which he needs must know,
The Muses chief ( Apollo) does bestow
But very rarely. Himself he knows too
Better in the Art, then some that to be so
Thought worthy, malign him. If this please you,
It Is all he 'll ask of Hellicon: Adieu.
Some (but not of best judgments) were offended at the Conclusion of this
Play, in regard Landgartha took not then, what she was persuaded to by so
many, the Kings kind night-imbraces. To which kind of people (that know not
what they say) I answer (omitting all other reasons:) that a Tragie-Comedy
should neither end Comically or Tragically, but betwixt both: which Decorum I
did my best to observe, not to go against Art, to please the over-amorous. To
the rest of bablers, I despise any answer.

This Play was first Acted on S. Patricks day, 1639. with the allowance of the
Master of Revels.


