THE Reformed Wife. A COMEDY: As it is Acted, At the THEATER ROYAL, in
Drury Lane.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN LORD LORN.
I Impute it to my good Fortune, My Lord, that the first appearance of this
Play was on a Wednesday in Lent; for then (it seems) the Town look for a bad
Entertainment, and if they met with any thing they did not expect; it was a
disappointment that, I presume; they will forgive.

I confess it has succeeded beyond my Expectation, since I understand that Your
Lordship also has been pleased to speak in it is Favor. But You did not
apprehend what You drew upon Your Self when you was doing so, and little
thought, from commending the Brat, to have it laid at Your Door.

But though your approbation in Public makes me proud, yet the delicacy of your
Judgment in private keeps me humble; your Understanding discovers all faults,
but your good breeding will not let you take Notice of any, and you can
discourage no body, but when they attempt to imitate you.

If I had oftener had the honor to have been near your Lordship; the
Conversation of the Comedy would have discovered it; and though it be my
misfortune to be almost a stranger to your Person. Yet I may safely affirm,
that I am thoroughly acquainted with your Character, and to speak but truth of
you, would look too like a Dedication.

I might enlarge upon the Antiquity of your Race, were I so vain, as to hope to
add any thing to the honor of what is recorded in our Annals; I might dwell
upon those Qualifications, that render you so amiable to all that know you, the
Unaffected sincerity of your Nature, your Zeal for the welfare of your Country;
your exemplary Bravery, and just Sense of true Honor; but to do this, my Lord,
would be to entertain you with the daily Discourse of your Friends; as for
Enemies, you have none but those you found in Flanders, where you were giving
Commands to a Regiment, at an Age that others are receiving Precepts from a
Tutor.

I dare say no more, though at the same time I disoblige one, I gratify a
thousand; for you are the only Person that cannot bear to hear the Lord Lorn
well spoke of: But since I would not purchase their approbation at the rate of
your displeasure, I must relieve your Lordship from the pain of hearing what is
your due, and only tell you that I am,

Your Lordship's Most Devoted Humble Servant.

THE PREFACE.
I don't know whether I have more reason to be pleased or grieved at the Fate
of this Play; for the World is very jealous of applause, and he is sure to make
a great many Enemies, that is so unfortunate to succeed.

Some have already done me the Honor to say, that it was not all Mine; though I
am surpised at the imputation, that what I once believed too great a Dowdy to
belong to even my self; should deserve to be thought another's! But the uneasy
Critics, upon a nearer view of its Features, have mortified me, and more
judiciously concluded, that no Body would own it but my self.

All that I shall say to these last is, that I did not design a just Play, and
that I am as well pleased as they are, that I had no regard to the Unities of
Action, etc. but if I diverted my Friends, without offending the Ladies, I have
my wish.

These angry Gentlemen, I presume, will thank me for one thing, in the Third
Act, and that is, I have put a Pun in the Mouth of the fine Lady; a Gentleman
very remarkable for his good Nature and good Sense; told me of it before it was
Acted, but he agreed with me, to allow the Folly, for the sake of the
Diversion; it succeeded as we guest, and was always Clapped.

I confess I have had some grave Thoughts on the Occasion of such Labors, and
methinks it is very strange, that the chief thing, that flatters the vanity of
most Writers, is, what they cannot know, for Fame is a good that never arrives
to us till we are past enjoying it, and we are only immortal when we are no
more; as for my self, I presume, it will appear by what I have done, that I as
little value, as deserve, that Honor, notwithstanding I don't doubt, but I
shall be yet believed to have my share of the vanity; and that 'twill always be
one reason of writing, to be thought a little wiser than we are -- Vivimus
ambitiosa,
Paupertate omnes --


PROLOGUE.
SInce Novelties your Palates still pursue,
You have to Night, both Play and Poet new:
From whence alone his hopes of pleasing grew.
For so much this prevailing Passion thrives,
Each for his future Appetite contrives,
New Friends, new Favorites, and of late -- new Wives.
You Critics only keep your Old disease,
When Authors please you least, you're most at ease.
Our Poet's therefore glad of a pretense,
To be insipid, in his own defense,
And if you hiss, it is still at your Expense.
Often for change the meanest things are good,
Thus though the Town all delicates afford,
A Kit-cat is a Supper for a Lord.
But if your Nicer taste resolves to Day,
To have no relish for our Author's Play.
Place some diverting Scene before your Mind,
And think of that, to which you will be kind.
So thus when heavily the moments pass,
Toaster's to Circulate the lazy Glass
By nameing some bright Nymph their draughts refine,
And taste at once the joys of Love and Wine.
Personae Dramatis.
MEN.
SIR Solomon Empty. Mr. Johnson. Freeman. Mr. Wilks. Careless. Mr. Toms.
Cleremont. Mr. Mills. Ned, Servant to Cleremont. Doctor. Mr. Haines.
Astrologer. Mr. Fairbanck. Apothecary, a Hawker, and Three-Footmen.
WOMEN.
Astrea. Mrs. Knight. Clarinda. Mrs. Rogers. Sylvia. Mrs. Temple. Lady Dainty.
Mrs. Verbruggen. Mrs. Friendlove. Mrs. Powell. Fidelia, Maid to Astrea. Mrs.
Moor. Cloe, Lady Dainty's Woman. Mrs. Stephens. Pert, Exchange-Woman. Mrs.
Baker.
PAge 5 line 29 for the two grand Lotteries, read the grand Lotteries.

THE Reformed Wife, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Astrea and Clarinda. Cla. YOU manage this Husband of yours very dexterously.


Ast. While you live observe this; that the only way to rule a conceited Fool,
is to seem to be ruled by him.


Cla. I am convinced, but still admire by what strange Art you keep him at this
distance, for I have heard that your Old Men, like those that have stinking
Breaths, will always be drawing closer than other Folks!


Ast. Why, by a pretended distaste of all Men, I have secured my self against
one that I hate in earnest, so that now --


Cla. He avoids you to gain your Esteem!


Ast. And it is his only way to gain it, for trust me Clarinda, there is nothing
so distastful as a Husband's fondness, and you had better be hated of the Man
you Love, than Loved of the Man you hate.


Cla. Then we must hate if we Marry!


Ast. You Will find it difficult to Love, for Marriage sets the Object too near
us, and Love is a fine Flower, that loses its Scent if we keep it always at our
Nose.


Cla. Where is the fault then?


Ast. Perhaps it is in our selves -- our Pleasures languish when they become
familiar to us, and it is in Love as in Ambition, our thirst is still for
something that we have not.


Cla. I fancy the Dominion they pretend over us, may be one reason, and
methinks the slavery's misplaced, for the Government of Love should be in the
Women; They always make the Lover happy in his Chains; but --


Ast. Husbands, alas! Are like other Tyrants, the greatest good we expect from
'em, is to do no harm.


Cla. You indeed have reason to think so, for to a Woman of any Spleen, Sir
Soloman must needs be of a very unlucky temper, and seems to have something
peculiar in him to Create aversion, for he is always talking, and always giving
his impertinent Advice.


Ast. And you cannot oblige him more than to ask it.


Cla. He has all the ridiculous extremes of the Gay and the Grave, but I like
nothing in him so much as his pretending to understand the World -- he is so
wise an Owl!


Ast. Nay since he has been, as he calls it, of the party, he has taken new
Airs upon him; all my Family, forsooth, are ordered by rules of State, and he
is grown so important to himself, that he is afraid the Cook or the Butler
should Poison him -- but here he comes.


Sir Sol. No, no, no, Friend, I understand the World, I understand the World --.


Enter Sir Solomon Empty, followed by a Hawker with Pamphlets. Cla. What Is the
matter? Sir Solomon.


Sir Sol. Nothing Cousin, nothing, only this Fellow (suborned as I guess by the
Ministry) had a mind to corrupt my Judgment, with an Argument for a standing
Army.


Haw. Sir Solomon, if you don't like that, I have Books of the other Party.


Sir Sol. Have thou so Friend let us see 'em -- [Aside.] I believe this Fellow's
some broken Counselor for he is of both sides --


Haw. Here Sir!


Sir Sol. [Reads.] A Proposal to take the Lace off the Soldiers Clothes, and
put it on our Wives Petty-Coats -- Hah! hah! This is a foolish Project for
they will give it 'em again.


Cla. There may be some danger Sir Solomon.


Sir Sol. No, No -- I don't like that, any thing belonging to Soldiers should
come so near 'em -- what is this [Reads.] A useful Discourse concerning the
management of Husbands -- here, here, put this up Friend, Women know too much
already -- well, leave the first -- and if I like it -- [Aside.] I Will read it,
and give it you again -- Exit Hawker. But now for my own Family -- come, My
Dear, the Coach is ready.


Cla. I have been persuading her, ever since you went, but she is so unwilling!
-- pray, Madam, gratify Sir Solomon, and go to the Play.


Sir Sol. Ay do, My Dear, gratify me as my Cousin says, and go to the Play, you
must not deny your self all the Pleasures of the World, for your Love of me,
come it will divert you.


Ast. Divert me! Is it possible, Sir Solomon, you should have so little
Religion, as to fancy the Entertainment of that place could give a Civil Woman
any Pleasure? Not that I think, all are otherwise that go there, but the
dishonest Liberties of the Stage are such, that we seldom hear any thing, that
diverts without something that offends.


Sir Sol. [Aside.] Poor Fool! But it is a wicked place!


Cla. But the Moral, Madam, often leaves us a quite different impression.


Ast. Nay there you are lost Clarinda, for tell me a Play in which there is not
for a Moral, if you Marry you're a Cuckold, and Woman's Virtue is a Chimara.


Sir Sol. [Aside.] Well I am certainly the only Husband in this Town, that is
not one -- How happy am I in a Wife --


Cla. The License is indeed too great, yet the fault is equal in the Town, and
the Poet who only shows us the World a little too near, for, turn but your Eyes
off the Stage, and you shall see that your agreeable Woman is a Coquet, and
your agreeable Man an Athiest, and the first step to be very witty, is (it
seems) to be very wicked.


Sir Sol. Bless us all! But the World Cousin is very bad, very bad [Aside.]
('it is good to encourage Women in their Innocence) -- but you need not apprehend
now Astrea, for this is a New Play, and the Author advised with me in the thing
-- I protest he is a Pretty smart Man.


Ast. I don't understand those things, but am sorry you Converse with such
People, for the next Scandal to the being a Poet, is to keep 'em Company.


Sir Sol. Alas, My Dear, you don't take it -- we that would understand the
World; must make it our business to read Men -- I mingle with such People
indeed, and can hear 'em Crack a jest or so, and now and then put in a joke my
self, but Sir Solomon Empty, is not to be fathomed by every Body, I defy 'em to
get any thing out of me!


Cla. [Aside.] I Will Answer for it.


Ast. I did not apprehend it, but the World, that seldom makes a true Judgment,
content themselves with the appearances of things, and your Character is drawn
from the Airs that you make in make in Public.


Sir Sol. Looky' Wife, I would be mistaken in some things, a good States Man,
like a good Wrestler, conceals his strength for an opportunity, and my Capacity
is a Secret -- but you are Women and don't understand things.


Enter Footman. Foot. Sir, The Coach is at the Door.


Sir Sol. Very well -- I don't like that Fellow's Face, he looks as if he was a
Spy upon my Actions -- so now you are kind!


Ast. I shall always prefer Obedience to inclination.


Sir Sol. I Will lead you to your Coach.


Ast. Why will not you go with us?


Sir Sol. No, no, my dear, they stay for me at the Fountain, and I would not
miss a Night to be made a Privy-Councellor.


Ast. You always find reasons to leave me.


Exit Sr. Solomon and Astrea. Clarinda Sola. Well thou art a Machiavil, Astrea,
I am astonished, she longs to go, and by a Counterfeit unwillingness makes him
against his own inclination press her to go, and how happy he thinks himself in
having persuaded her to do what he would not have her do.


Exit. The SCENE changes to the Street. Re-enter Sir Solomon. There is no
blessing like a Virtuous Wife! No Comfort beyond it! To see her fears and her
Caution, to tell me I should please her more if I would lead her to the Church
-- Poor fool! She thinks of nothing but me and her Prayer Book, then she is so
tender of her Fame, that she is never guilty of an indecency so great as to
Kiss me in Company; and this Conduct has prevailed with her so much, that she
has a sort of unwillingness, and fear to do it, even when we are alone, and so
Chaste! -- Well I am the happiest Man! Ha! who have we here my Noble Captain.


Enter Freeman. Freem. Sir Solomon Empty!


Sir Sol. Welcome from Flanders Tom, welcome from Flanders -- What never a
Wooden Leg yet! Why thou art the unluckiest Fellow in the World! Not an Ear, or
an Eye, or a piece of thy Nose off, but return'st to thy Friends like an
ordinary Man!


Free. (Sighs.)
Sir Sol. Come don't be Melancholy but tell us, what weeping Orphans, and
smiling Widows thou have made, what Towns demolished this Campain!


Free. Faith, Sir Solomon, I have demolished nothing but my Commission, and
made no Orphans but my self, I am broke that is all.


Sir Sol. Ay, and enough too -- but how so Tom! Do you know --


Free. Prithee lay this aside, all I know is, that I am come from starving, in
a Crowd to starve in a Corner.


Sir Sol. Starve! A young Fellow, and talk of starving!


Free. I know thou understand'st Men, make me a little acquainted with my self,
and tell me what I am fit for -- I have been thinking a great while, and can
find no Virtue to lay to my charge.


Sir Sol. O! You are modest Tom, you are modest -- but let me see -- fit for!
Thou have a good Voice, I have heard, upon a Muster, and were of the Temple
before the War -- what do thou think of the Law.


Free. Very well, but I know nothing of it, but what I have got from being
Arrested.


Sir Sol. Enough, enough Tom, I knew several Eminent Pleaders that got Estates
with as little -- it is but talking on and loud.


Free. But we Soldiers, Sir Solomon, are so used to dispatch a business at a
blow, that I should starve before I could arrive at their secret of perplexing
a matter, and spining out a cause, beside, I want all the requisites, the
double Dealing, the Impudence! The Lungs! The Conscience! --


Sir Sol. Conscience! Nay, Tom, if thou have that in thy Head! -- thou were
born to be a Beggar -- but is there no way -- hark ye, Tom, thou art a very
Clean Shap'd-Fellow, what if you went into the Playhouse, and turned Actor! Ha!
ha! I thought I should make thy Fortune at last! Why thou may come to be a
King in time, and keep Company with Princes! I Will warrant, they shall make thee
an Alderman the first dash.


Free. I Would rather be his Horse.


Sir Sol. They Will try your Talent, Tom, not but thou may get as much honor
from acting a Cobbler, as acting a Lord, as an old Moralist said of the World,
and I had rather see a Scaramouch than an Emperor! for there is that Dog! that
sly Rogue, that arch Son of a Whore, that Pinkethman, there is always more in
that Fellows Face than his words, and to see that Rascal Act does me more good
than railing against the Court party -- well, Tom, how do ye like a Player.


Free. As ill as I do a Lawyer, and I am quite as unfit for it, I could no more
listen to the dull Chat of every Fop behind the Scenes, than I could bear his
slinking Breath -- then I should scarce be employed enough to live by it, for I
could not act in a dull Play, because I hate to speak any Bodies nonsense but
my own, and to be Hist off the Stage, or punished for an others Crime --


Sir Sol. Is the Devil -- but that would never happen, if these silly Fellows,
the Poets, would be ruled; they are still aiming at Wit -- If I was to write a
Play --


Fre. You would not split upon that Rock.


Sir Sol. No, no, Tom, I Would have something to divert every Body. I Would have your
Atheism to please the Wits -- some affectation to entertain the Beaux, a Rape
or two to engage the Ladies; and I Would bring in the Bears, before every Act, to
secure an interest in the Upper Gallery.


Fre. You have forgot one Range, what would you do for the Cits in the Middle?


Sir Sol. Why I Would raise 'em a Ghost to tell their Children of when they come
home -- but now you speak of Cits, Tom, I have an employment that will fit
thee. The Ladies, Tom, the Ladies, there is the Treasure at last --


Fre. Ay, such a Treasure as I shall spend my own before I shall find.


Sir Sol. Why what charges can there be when you Factor for your self?


Fre. O the greater -- He that will not employ a Procuress out of good Husbandry,
is like him that shoots his Wild-fowl to save money, when he reckons the
Powder, the Shot, and other Expenses; he will find that he might a had 'em
cheaper of a Poulterer.


Sir Sol. I see, Tom, thou run'st into the common error of ingenious Men, who
think the World is governed by reason -- you may perhaps come to live happy in
it with your reason; but the way to be a great Man, is to be enterprizing.


Fre. Indeed I am apt to think he will never do Miracles that does nothing but
what he should do.


Sir Sol. In that thought I leave you, ( going) But one hint more -- The two
grand Lotteries, Tom, in this Town, for broken Officers and Lovers, are the
Prayers and the Play, -- go try your Fortune my Hercules! -- I warrant you're
happy -- the Prayers and the Play.


[Aside.] Exit Sir Sol. Fre. If I was sure of meeting any of thy Relations
there, it might tempt me to go -- Now this old Rascal thinks a Soldier fit for
any thing that is mean, and values himself upon his Riches that we have secured
to him with our Blood -- What Gallant Spirit would move a Finger for such
Slaves! -- To bear all hardships, and stand intrepid midst a thousand horrors,
where Glory pushes us beyond our selves to be despised when we return, and
among the very People he has saved, with all his wounds, the tattered Hero
starves -- but Ingratitude's a humane Virtue, no Beast ever pretended to it,
and it is so perfectly in our Nature, that we may observe no People hate so
heartily as those that have been highly obliged -- as for us, it seems there is
no Rogue like a Soldier; we are a sort of Vagabonds, that are fit indeed, upon
occasion, to stand between sober folks and danger, and are used just like a
Militia Officer's Sword, when training day's over it is thrown aside -- O such
Worthies!


Exit. Re-enter Sir Solomon. Ha, ha, ha, Woe be to some poor Dog of a Husband
-- who knows now whose fate may depend upon this advice of mine -- some Lord or
Alderman, or perhaps some industrious Merchant, that may be sweating at the
Indies, while his Wife -- ha, ha, ha, -- well, I am a mischievous Dog, but let
'em take what follows.

Enter Cleremont. [Ha, my Friend Cleremont, the Spirit of Mirth and Wickedness!


Cle. ( Singing) Drink and drive care away.


Sir Sol. Now this Fellow's Merry will I sift him -- 'twas Machiavil's way (
aside) -- I read Joy in thy Face, has thy pony Mistress been kind, have thou
Cured her of all Distempers, and made her say, Yes.


Cle. Ah don't speak of her, Sir Solomon, don't Name her, it is touching upon
ones madness in an interval of Sense, and enough to make me rave in Flames, and
darts and Charms, and so forth -- I have been drinking all day to forget her,
and now you must lay her in my way.


Sir Sol. And is this all the use you make of a Lady, that lies in your way? If
I was in thy place!


Cle. Ay, thou wou'd'st lay about thee -- Thou art a Dangerous Fellow -- I find
I must take care when I am Married.


Sir Sol. O I never wrong my Friend, never wrong my Friend!


Cle. It Is good to be sure, Sir Solomon, I Will take her out of thy Neighborhood
-- such a vigorous Rogue! Why they say, thou art worse than St. George's
Dragon, a Virgin a day will not satisfy thee, besides Wives and Traders.


Sir Sol. Ha! Ha! People will say any thing -- though faith one can do nothing
in this Town, but its presently Whispered about.


Cle. [Aside.] here is a Rogue! I find to be unable's ashame at 60.


Sir Sol. But these things must not be talked of, Love and Cheating should be
always private -- But prithee tell me something of thy Courtship, does thy
Sickly Lady listen to thee yet?


Cle. No, nor ever will, without I could appear to her in the shape of a
Consumption, or Appoplexy -- she is in Love with nothing but Ghosts -- Flesh and
Blood are not gentile enough for her.


Sir Sol. You would never be advised -- you should Court her, in her own way,
when she is Gripped, you should have the Chollick, when she begins to faint, you
should fall in a Swoon -- Cough, Sigh and Complain, just as you see her, what
do ever think to gain a Woman by opposing her?


Cle. Ay, ay, the best way to gain her at her own Weapon, Contradiction.


Sir Sol. Look ye Friend, be ruled by me -- (there is a Policy in Life, and
every Man is a State to himself) now would I have you be acquainted with her
Doctor -- Fee him as often as she does.


Cle. I Would as soon take Physic of him as often as she does, why he is with her
Morning, Noon and Night, and has more Guinea's in a Day than Meals -- No, no,
Sir Solomon, I have taken a Cheaper way, a Poets sooner Fee'd than a Physician,
I Will besiege her so with Songs and Sonnets, that she shall surrender for her
own quiet.


Sir Sol. And have you laid in a Magazin of these Stores?


Cle. I am providing my self with a Song to day, I sent my Man at Noon to hire
a Poet, and he stay's as long as if he had employed the City Laureat -- but see
the Rascal's come -- well what heavy Rhymer did you meet with that kept you
thus long?


Enter Ned out of Breath. Ned. Sir, 'twas a long time before I could find one.


Cle. A long time! Why you might a beat all the Garrets, from Will's
Coffee-House to Aldgate in half the time.


Ned. Then I was with Three, Sir, before I met One -- that would be at leisure.


Clerimont Reading to himself. Sir Sol. What were they doing Ned?


Ned. One, Sir Solomon, was writing a Lampoon for a Lady of Quality, in which
he was to commend her and abuse all her Aquaintance.


Sir Sol. Nay, she ought to be praised if she paid for it, 'but what were the
rest upon?


Ned. One, Sir, was writing a Poem upon the Tiger that was baited, in which he
pretends to prove, that he was of the Court-Party.


Sir Sol. Ha! -- that is some Cabal Poet, that is let into the secret of the
Government.


Ned. The last, Sir Solomon, was making a Prayer for a Religious old
Gentlewoman, but that business not being in much have, I prevailed with him to
do mine.


Cle. I can hardly read this Fellows hand --

Reads. A SONG upon a Sickly Lady.
(1.)
COrinna with a graceful Air
Her Symptoms does reveal
Such Charms adorn the Sickly fair.
We scarce can wish her well.
(2.)
How does the pale Complexion please!
Faint looks and Languid Eye!
New Beauties rise with her disease,
And when she is Sick we die.

Sir Sol. Very pretty, Faith -- When she is Sick we die.


Cle. It Is very little for the Money!


Ned. For five Shillings more, Sir, he would a put in the Similitude of a Be,
that kills while he is a dying.


Cle. Pox take him, and his Be -- an unreasonable Son of a Whore, a Crown for
a Be! 'sbud I can buy a Hive for half the Money -- this is some saucy Rogue
that eat's every Day -- well now, Sir Solomon, against these Arms what Woman
can defend her self?


Sir Sol. They are unaccountable Creatures indeed, and very likely may be
sooner Fidled than reasoned out of their favors.


Cle. There is no best way to get a Woman. Some whine, some dance, some dress,
and some prate; but wiser Women, at last, considers a Man's Make rather than
his words or actions; nay, or his Face.


Sir Sol. It Is your interest they should.


Cle. Looky', Sir Solomon, the Woman that falls in Love with a Man for his
Face, may find her self as much disappointed as the Man that believes a Woman
for her Tears -- they are false Signs.


Sir Sol. But they are persuading ones.


Cle. Pshaw! Pshaw! they move only Children: but come along, and see your
mistake.


Exeunt. Enter Astrea and Freeman. Ast. I vow my heart's at my mouth!


Fre. There, let me seize my own. Kisses her.


Ast. You are sure he did not see us?


Fre. Certain of it.


Ast. Then I am happy. 'Twere very unlucky to be surpised the first time we
meet.


Fre. Fortune, Madam, has a greater care of Lovers.


Ast. Now pray let me know how to call you; for in a little time we must begin
to lay aside the Titles of Sir and Madam.


Fre. And substitute those of my Dear and my Life! --


Ast. Ay! ay! for our Seasons of Love, but what if we should forget our selves,
and fall to the dull indifference of Man and Wife?


Fre. Why then I must be called Freeman, and you --


Ast. ( Aside.) I must not tell him right -- Caelia.


Fre. I fancy you are a Coward, my Dear! I observe the first thing you provide
for is a retreat.


Ast. I Am afraid, my Hero! you will have the first occasion to use it.


Fre. I don't know what a long War may produce, but --


Ast. Have a care Servant, don't soil your Merit with handling it -- I dare not
stay now, but to Morrow


Fre. At Six --


Ast. I Will meet you in the Field.


Fre. Nay, your Honor's at stake, and if you disappoint --


Ast. I cannot spare a Glove, but be that my security --


Throws a purse of Money. Fre. Ha! -- but -- remember the Hour.


Ast. And you the occasion. Adieu, Servant.


Exit. Freeman alone opening the Purse. I came! I saw! I conquered! Gold bright
as her self! This is the luckyest adventure! Others Solicit, Bribe, Rise
early, haunt Courts and great Men's Levees, and follow Fortune in the servile
Crowd, but I meet the Goddess less engaged, and court her in her lovelyest
shape, a Woman; a Woman too that has more Wit and Beauty, than Riches ever
gave, or Poverty took away -- but what now can this Woman be! She has too much
Wit to come from the City, and too much Money to come from the Court -- but to
Morrow must unriddle all -- I feel my Soul rise with my Pocket -- ( looks on
the Gold) Thou lovely God that have no Atheist! Thou art the Courtiers Promise,
the Lawyers Honesty, the Soldiers Courage, and the Widow's Tears -- but here is
now a Fellow [ Enter Cleremont.] whose Life is a studied Idleness -- Well,
Cleremont, the report is true! I see Marriage writ in thy Face; and after
railing at (...) thou art resolved to fall into the Noose at last.


Cler. It Is the properest time to fall into one.


Fre. Then you begin to have nothing in your head now, but (...) Children, and
the Main Chance.


Cle. Nothing less, but instead of that, I have Pills, Elixers, Bolus's,
Ptizans, and Gallipots.


Fre. Why, is the Lady you court an Apothecaries Widow?


Cle. No, but she is an Apothecaries Shop, she holds all his Drugs, she has her
Physic for every hour of the Day and Night -- her Bed is lined with Poppies,
the black Boys at the Feet, that the vulgar employ to bear Flowers in their
Arms, she loads with Diascordium, and other sleepy Potions, that the little
Devils seem to nod over their Charge -- her sweet Bags are not perfumed with
such common stuff, and offensive to the Brain, as Musk and Amber; but they
breath the Delightful and Salubrious Scents of Hartshorn, Rue, and Assefetida.


Fre. Why, she is fit to be the Consort of Hippocrates! but what other Charms
has this extraordinary Lady?


Cle. She has one, Tom, that a Man may relish without being so deep a Physician.


Fre. What Is that?


Cle. Why 2000 l. a Year.


Fre. No vulgar Beauty indeed! but can thou for any consideration join thy
self to this Hospital, this Box of Physic, and be forced to lie all Night like
Leaf-gold upon a Pill?


Cle. Alas, Tom, this is not half the Evil, her humor is as strange as her
Diet -- all about her must have fine Airs, and if she could, her Postilion
should be a Gentleman -- she settled a Pension upon one of her Footmen for
losing a Foretooth, and said he was maimed in her service.


Fre. I Am afraid you will come to your Pension too for a more considerable maim
-- but what can you do with her, and her Physic; in a little time she will grow
like an Antimonial Cup, and a kiss will be able to work with you!


Cle. The best way to avoid that danger, would be to marry her; for most Wives
may be Antimonial Cups long enough, without being found out of their Husbands;
but to prevent that, Tom, I design to break all the Glasses, and kick the
Doctor down Stairs, on the Wedding day; and so I have told her.


Fre. That Is very familiar; are you so near Man and Wife?


Cle. O! nearer, we begin to hate one another already.


Fre. I find then you would Cure her of her Physic by a Counter-Poyson -- but
prithee Cleremont let me prevail with you to leave this humor of abusing
Marriage; it is a mean Entertainment, and there is not a Porter in Town but can
be too witty for you in it.


Cle. You see then I am of the right side, for their sense cannot rise above
speaking Truth.


Fre. Then to scorn Marriage while you desire it, is to treat your Mistress
like a common Dame that will be kicked into humor; and you will be thought to
know no other way that only strive to huff her to it.


Cle. Perhaps it might be the best.

For Women born to be controlled,
Stoop to the forward and the bold.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Lady Dainty and Cloe, followed by two Footmen. Lady. PEace good
Impertinence, I tell thee no Woman of Quality is, or should be in perfect
health; hah! hah! -- Tom.


1 Foot. Madam.


Lady. Go to my Lady Formals, ask how she rested, and tell her the violence of
my cold is abated -- Exit Footman.

To be always in health is as insipid as to be always in humor; one is the
effect of too little Breeding, as the other of too little Wit, and sit only for
the Clumsy State of a Citizen -- I am ready to faint under the very Idea of
such a vulgar Life. Hah! hah! hah! -- Will.


2 Foot. My Lady!


Lady. Run to my Lady Lovevisit, and tell her Ladyship, that I am so imbarrast
with the Spleen this Morning, I cannot tell whether I shall be able to stir
abroad; and know how she rested after the fatiegue of yesterday -- hah! hah!
hah! hah!


Exit Footman. Cloe. [Aside.] These Ladies make themselves Sick, to make
themselves business, and are well or ill, only in Ceremony to each other.


Lady. What do mutter?


Cloe. The new Footman is not returned.


Lady. It Is indeed a strange Lump, I wonder the good, Lady Prayseall, should
recommend him to me, he is not fit to carry a Disease to any Body; I sent him
the other Day with the Chollick to some Ladies, and he put it into his own
Language it seems, and called it the Belly-Ach! I was under the greatest
Confusion! for the same Afternoon, two or three of 'em, in the Public
China-House, Saluted me upon it, -- I was forced to explain the Booby's
meaning, else I had suffered the imputation of so vulgar a Disease! Hah! hah!
hah!


Cloe. I wish your Ladyship had not Occasion to send any: for my part --


Lady. Thy part! Why thou were made, I think of the Masculine kind -- it is
betraying our Sex, not to be Sickly and Tender! Whence came it, think thou,
that we first were served and attended, by Men of our own Rank, but that it was
the good breeding of our Mothers to be Feeble.


Cloe. I finding my Mother was a Clown. Aside.


Lady. Observe but the Families I visit, they have all something derived to
'em, from the Elegant, Nice State of Sickness, you may see even in the Males, a
Genteel, as it were stagger or twine of their Bodies -- As they were not yet
confirmed enough, for the Rough, Laborious Exercise of Walking; a Saunter in
their Motion, that is, so like Quality! And their Voice, is so soft and low,
you would think they were asleep, that are so very Delicate.


Cloe. Methinks, Madam, it would be better if the Men were not altogether so
tender.


Lady. Indeed, I have sometimes wished that they were not, but, it is to
distinguish 'em from the gross Education of the Commons, and it is fit, since
they differ so much by Nature, in their Spirit and their Form; Nay, most of
their very Diseases, are not Profaned by the Crowd, the Apoplexy and Gout, are
peculiar to the Nobility, and I could wish that Colds also were only ours, for
there is something in 'em, so genteel and becoming! -- Hah! hah! hah!


Cloe. [Aside.] That I hope I shall never be fit for 'em -- Your Ladyship
forgot the Spleen.


Lady. O my Dear Spleen, I grudge even some of us; that ingenious Disease
visits only the most Delicate.


Cloe. I knew a Tradesman's Wife, that was mightily troubled with it.


Lady. A Tradesman's Wife! Ha! ha! Nay, those little Creatures, like the Monkey
among Beasts, do follow us in every thing -- They Dress! They Game! They have
their Cold-Tea! Give Airs! Intriegue! And go as far as simple Nature can. Hah!
hah! Never think it Cloe, a Mere Commoner could not be so honored, as a Lion
they say will Fawn upon nothing but a King; so this Elegant distemper submits
its self to none, but the well descended -- I profess -- I Feel it, while I
commend it --


Cloe. Will your Ladyship take some Steel drops, or some Bolus! or Electuary!
or --


Lady. This Wench will kill me with Questions, hah! hah! bring any of 'em. Exit
Cloe.

These healthy Sluts are too Boisterous for the Tender Frame of a Well-bred
Woman -- I am resolved if there be a decayed Person of Quality to be got in
Town, I Will have her -- ever since this Noisy Creature has been in my House, it
has been taken for an Inn -- Well the Commons of England are the strangest
Creatures! Hah! hah!


Re-enter Cloe. Cloe. Madam, the Doctor, the Apothecary, the Exchange-Woman,
and the Cunning-Man; that your Ladyship calls, Stro-strologer are below.


Lady. Bid 'em come up, they may divert my Spleen, better than the Medicine --
Hah! hah! Well, the regularity of Life is certainly the happiest thing that
belongs to it.

Enter Cloe, Doctor, etc. I am glad you 're come Doctor, for to live without
you, is Sailing without a Compass; Mrs Pert, let me see how you have ordered
those Ruffles.


Pert. Madam, your Ladyship, I am sure will be in Love with 'em, I have made
'em to the Newest Fashion; some French Ladies were at my Shop Yesterday, and I
cut 'em exactly with theirs. Opening a Box.


Dr. How did your Ladyship rest?


Lady. Never worse Dr. but I know the reason, it was my Visiting-Night, and my
Old Lady Linger stayed after all were gone, and unmercifully kept me up, at
least half an hour beyond my time.


Dr. 'Twas unsufferable, Madam, but I Will order something to compose your
Ladyship, and repair that misfortune.


Lady. I like the Air of this Ruffle mightily -- The French are certainly the
most agreeable People upon Earth -- Do they wear 'em so low?


Pert. Exactly, an' please your Ladyship -- the Bottom of the Lace must agree
with the Tip of your Ladyship's little Finger -- To wear it higher, would show
too much of your Ladyship's Arm.


Lady. Which I would not do by any means -- it looks like a Washerwoman, to
bare above the Ring -- Dr. I long to enter on my New course of Physic, but
Pray let me have nothing in it, that may any way interrupt the order of my
Visits, for I would not purchase health so dear, as with the loss of one Days
agreements.


Dr. I shall be careful.


Lady. Mrs. Pert -- Be sure you get me the Lace, for I Will wear none but what is
Prohibited.


Pert. I Will search all the Merchants Pockets, as diligently as their Wives do,
but I Will have it for your Ladyship.


Lady. Mr. Rubarb, I must Quarrel with you -- you don't enough disguise the
Medicin's you send me -- I can taste they are Physic -- in a little time,
you will bring me to take plain Jalap? hah! hah!


Rub. To alter it more, might offend the Operation.


Lady. I don't care what is offended, so my taste is not.


Dr. Hark y' Mr. Rubarb, withdraw the Medicine Lady Dainty turning to the
Astrologer. rather than not make it pleasant, I Will find a reason for the
Operation.


Lady. And is it possible, Sir, that the Stars should have such Power over us,
methinks they live at too great a distance.


Ast. All things here are ruled by unseen ways, and what Physicians vainly
ascribe to Drugs, is done by the Stars.


Lady. Well this is a divine Art, but, Sir, have the Stars any respect for a
Face, or a Complexion?


Ast. Oh! Madam! More immediately as lying nearest their Orbs.


Lady. Well certainly this is the genteelest way of Curing that ever was
invented, and seems designed for the ease for the Nobility -- To take our
Medicines at the Mouth, is indeed so like a Horse! Hah! hah!


Dr. [ Aside, to Rubarb.] I have drained the Catalogue of Diseases already, and
cannot think what to put in her Head.


Rub. Nay, Sir, if we don't look about us, sh'll grow well upon our Hands.


Dr. Never fear that.


Enter Clerimont. Cle. So! here is the Levee! Doctor and Apothecary in close
Consultation! They are worse than a Jury upon Life and Death -- But yonder is my
Engine at Work; the Stargazer has got her by the Ear -- I must retreat and give
him the sign.


Goes behind the Scenes, and Sings -- Corinna with a graceful Air, etc. Lady.
Ha! -- It Is a good Voice.


Ast. (Between the Stanza's) I foresee that some rude influence will suddenly
assault you -- I cannot tell in what manner, but the same thing will prove
afterward very happy to you.


The Song ended, Enter Clerimont. Lady. Ay, Sir: How true you speak!


Cle. You see, Madam, what pains I take to contrive your diversion.


Lady. You take a very Preposterous way.


Cle. I cannot tell how I succeed, but I am sure I endeavor right, for I study
every Morning new impertinence, to entertain you.


Lady. You need not study for it, Nature, Sir, will never fail you.


Cle. But if she should one day, the misfortune may be irreparable! You might
forget to faint to be Shagreen, to have the Spleen, and all those agreeable
things that distinguish a Woman of Quality.


Lady. I am perfectly confounded! Certainly there are some People too impudent
for our resentment, but I shall leave him.


Exeunt all but Clerimont. Cle. All this shall not make me out of Love with my
Virtue -- Impudence, was ever a successful Quality, and 'twou'd be very
unlucky, if I should be the first that did not thrive by it.


Exit. Enter Clarinda and Astrea. Cla. I find then, you are a true Politician,
Astrea, and by an extraordinary Conduct have secured your self against the
Curiosity of the World, the insolence of Servants, and what methinks a Woman
most should fear, the Malice of revolting Favorites.


Astre. That indeed is the most certain danger, for its grown the manner of the
Fashionable Men, to recommend themselves to new Mistresses, by a Sacrifice of
the Old, and make other surrender with the Barbarities they use to the
Conquered.


Cla. Well! That one Rock now would keep me from venturing to Sea.


Astre. You will not be without dangers ashore, for there are some disagreeable
Puppies, that report a Woman ill because she would not be so, but the real
happy, like the real rich, seldom make a noise of it.


Cla. At this rate, the only way to preserve our Virtue, is to give it up like
throwing away our Money, for fear we should be robbed of it -- I find in a Poor
Woman's Affairs, the Public are very humorous, if she ventures she is lost, if
she don't she is not safe, well I Am very honest yet, and --


Astre. This is not generous, Clarinda -- You see the Confidences I make you --
Tell me, was you never in Love?


Cla. I don't know what Love is, but I like a Fellow mightily, that I saw at
the Play last night.


Astre. Ha! What sort of Man?


Cla. Nay, I cannot tell, but he chased you, for as soon as you went, I missed
him.


Astre. ( Aside.) It Is too sure -- His Heart failed him if he did, for he never
came up with me -- But where did he sit?


Cla. Just before our Box, in Red.


Astre. ( Aside.) It Is he, what must I do!


Cla. You are Alarmed!


Astre. No, I am thinking if I know him.


Cla. He seemed to be an agreeable idle Fellow, and his Conversation I
overheard, was full of unusual Generosity.


Astre. ( Aside.) I have it, it may help my own design -- What would you give
to see him?


Cla. Why, is it in your Power?


Astre. Very much -- But come into my Room, and there -- I Will contrive your
happiness -- ( Aside.) Or secure my own to deceieve my Rival's, an allowable
Cheat.

Th^^ Nature, Friendship, Honor we remove,
And no regards are prevalent in Love.

Enter Sir Solomon and Freeman. Sir Sol. Ha, ha, ha, to reach Peru in an hour,
my happy Mariner!


Fre. My North Star!


Sir Sol. Did not I tell you, Tom, I understood the World -- Ha, ha, ha, but
thou think she is a Wife?


Fre. Ay, and so Charming, that each Dart she shoots is big with double Death,
and Kills at once with Love and Jealousy -- She Is a Blessing too great for any
one Mortal.


Sir Sol. Ha, ha, that is pretty plain, Tom.


Fre. A pretty Blush still rises in her Cheeks, her looks are Modest, and her
Speech is Comely, a touch of her would move you more than all the soft embraces
Venus used to warm the God of War!


Sir Sol. You make my Blood boil with the Description, and throw me ten Years
back to Youth -- but how did attack her, I warrant she was mighty careful of
her Honor?


Fre. No, she had too much Sense, for in these matters, those extraordinary
Fears ^look more like a Gilt than Piety, and there is none so free of their
Honor, as those that are very tender of it.


Sir Sol. Nay, I am apt to think, that the Women that talk of their Honor,
like the Men that talk of their Courage, are the People that least value it --
But prithee, Tom, how was it then.


Fre. Why, I fixed my self near the Box.


Sir Sol. Ha! --


Fre. Where I met an honest Fellow of our Regiment.


Sir Sol. Ha! --


Fre. I observed she listened to our talk, and formed my discourse accordingly.


Sir Sol. Sly Dog!


Fre. She took occasion to go out before the Play was done.


Sir Sol. Ha! you Rogue!


Fre. And sent a Chairman to me.


Sir Sol. Hark 'ye, Tom, did not I tell you I understand the World --


Fre. You did, Sir Solomon.


Sir Sol. You Will be ruled by me another time?


Fre. Always, always.


Sir Sol. Looky, Tom, I am acquainted with these things, and if I please, could
tell you those that have been kept by Countesses -- but let that pass -- I
always loved intrieguing -- now what would I give to know who the poor Dearee
at home is. Ha! ha! ha! did she tell you that?


Fre. No, but I shall know all to day.


Sir Sol. I would fain find him out to share with you the pleasure of laughing
at him; ha! ha! who can it be, perhaps some Old --


Fre. Paralitick --


Sir Sol. Driveling --


Fre. Miser -- that would keep his Wife as he does his Money, as much from
other Peoples use as his own.


Sir Sol. But you ask his Pardon there -- I told you how 'twould be! Now, Tom,
don't you, like some Generals, half flushed with Victory, loose the Day by
being too sure of it: There is Conduct to be used in Love as well as War, and
you should pursue as well as Conquer -- It was Pompey's Character, to be able
to get a Battle, but not to keep it; but be you a Caesar in Love, and trust not
your Enemy out of your sight; the next thing you do, is to get acquainted with
her Husband.


Fre. That Is the Old way; but methinks it is drawing the Danger too near his
Eyes.


Sir Sol. Ay, so near, that he will near be able to see it.


Fre. Yet it is better done by a Friend -- for first, if I keep him Company
abroad, I but make Opportunities that I cannot use.


Sir Sol. Then you should drink him down at home.


Fre. And so while I am qualifying him for a Cuckold, put it out of my Power to
make him one.


Sir Sol. Talk what you will, Tom, ones bosom Friend is the properest Person to
make one a Cuckold: then I Would fain have you acquainted with him, if it be only
to see if there is any truth in that Old saying, that they are always fond --
My dear Rogue! of them that make 'em -- He Will have an extreme Affection for
thee.


Fre. I suppose, according to the degree of mine, for his Wife; for Nature, is
very grateful, before it is corrupted with Knowledge.


Sir Sol. Ha! ha! Well, certainly the Life of a Cuckold is a very happy one, as
long as he does not know it -- for all that do him the favor, are still ready
to wait on him, and to humor him; and he, without knowing why, is mightily in
love with them -- Well, Tom, you do nothing without you bring this about --
besides, I would not be so unfashionably wicked, as not to make a Friend where
I made a Cuckold.


Enter Careless. Car. ( Pulling Freeman) Sir, Sir Captain.


Fre. Ha, my Voluntier.


Sir Sol. Careless here, why thou art as generous as his Dog, and follow'st him
in all Fortunes -- But one would a thought, though he was broke, you might a'
been a Cadee, and rose in a standing Regiment.


Car. What now there is a Peace, Sir Solomom?


Sir Sol. Ay, ay, a common thing, but I see you have business -- your Servant.


Exit. Fre. Sir Solomon, I Kiss your hands -- What Is the matter?


Car. Don't stay a Minute, Sir; your Fortunes made.


Fre. Prithee, unriddle first.


Car. Nay, you will slip the Opportunity.


Fre. No matter, I Will hear it.


Car. Why then, Sir, I have been Walking in the Mall -- (as I usually do, till
Dinner time is over) where I over-hear'd a Young Lady commend you at an
unreasonable -- Fre. Frowns.

Extraordinary rate I mean, Captain, I took her at first to be one of those
Military Ladies, that used to fight their way through Gowns and Petticoats,
under your Commission; but meeting your Friend, Capt. Blunt, he told me 'twas a
Lady of 500 l. a Year.


Free. 500 l. a Year, Come! Come lets go --


Car. Nay, will not you hear it?


Fre. God's Death, you unseasonable Dog, come along.


Exeunt. Enter Clarinda and Sylvia. Cla. Puh! go fetch the Book, then good
Cousin! Exit Sylvia.

Love, what a strange betwitching ill art thou! That those who feel thy
Torments, wish no cure -- I am Sick, and all I Hear, or See, or Dream of, is my
Soldier -- Yet I Am to be near him soon -- But if I am, he perhaps may not Love,
or at least may not know that I do -- Or while in tedious Civillities, he Racks
my heart -- it will be Death to me -- Happy ignorant Man! Have you found it?


Re-enter Sylvia. Sylvia. Yes.


Cla. Prithee Sing it, while we walk, for it is the only Song I can listen to.


Sylvia Sings. (1.)
Fond Woman with mistaken Art,
Does on her self impose,
She feels with grief the secret smart,
Nor will the wound disclose.
(2.)
We Sigh, we Burn, we Rage, we Die,
Yet must the Curse endure,
To see the Loved Physician nigh,
And dare not ask the Cure.

Cla. Sings. And dare not ask the Cure.

Exeunt. Enter Freeman and Careless. Car. Here, they went this way.


Fre. Hold, we'll wait for 'em in this Double -- 500 l. a Year you say.


Car. Ay, besides a great deal of ready Money.


Fre. I did not see her Face, but it is the Tallest? Pray don't let me fail in
Love with the wrong* Woman.


Car. Never apprehend it -- A Man of your Necessities, methinks might know a
Fortune by instinct -- But hark ye, the Maid I hope is to be my Prize!


Fre. No, no, Sir, I will not have my Family Corrupted.


Car. Nay, Sir, I have kept a Plaguey Long-Lent, and it will not be much in danger
yet a while.


Fre. Well, Jack, I have a Carnival for thee in my Pocket, and if I succeed in
this Adventure, you shall never know another Lent. Strikes his Pocket.


Car. That indeed is Music, and I Am recovered with the Sound -- 'Zbud! We
will not value the Fortune with that about us -- But here they come.


Fre. Ha! I have seen that Face.


Enter Clarinda and Sylvia. Cla. Here again! Well if he has but Courage to
advance, I have at present so little Hypocrisy about me, I should surrender
upon any Terms -- Ha! he comes, my Resolution totters, and I find the Woman
return upon me very Powerfully -- I Am afraid I shall deny him.


Syl. ( Aside.) If I were sure the other was not a Servant! I could like him
mightily --


Fre. ( to Cla.) Madam, in these Familiar Walks, this Liberty's so common, that
had I no business --


Car. ( Aside.) Ay! Business! --


Cla. Sir.


Fre. You have taken away the Life of an Innocent Gentleman, who can find no
quiet in his Grave, but sends me, Madam, who am all that can appear of him, his
restless Ghost! --


Cla. A Ghost! Ha! ha! ha! Pray how long have you been dead?


Fre. Ever since last Night at the Play -- I did but see you, and was lost.


Car. Ah, Poor Man! Ghost I mean, but I am idle. Goes to Sylvia.


Cla. Nay, there you over did it, die in earnest -- What part did you Act?


Fre. A Lovers, Madam.


Cla. No wonder you're a weary of your Coffin -- But I warrant you would make
me some discovery -- Well, where is your hidden Treasure?


Fre. Madam, you must follow me to find it -- Offering at her Hand.


Cla. O! No I dare not trust my self with a Ghost.


Car. to Sylvia. Nay, Madam, though the Captain is, as a Man may say, a Ghost;
yet your Humble Servant, I assure you is Flesh and Blood, and the Worms have
not had a Meal of me yet.


Syl. I am sorry for it.


Car. And could you be so Barbarous to wish, This Face* This Shape! These
Limbs! To be thrown under ground.


Syl. Ay! For they are fit for nothing above --


Cla. Well, that I may not be troubled more with People of the other World --
Say, I wished to lay you, what should I do?


Fre. ( seizing on her Hand.) Oh! Madam, you do it while you wish it, behold
the Magic force of one kind Word, I Am all restored! The Life you give runs
thrilling to my Heart, and I Am no more a shade.


Cla. What have I done! Nay, be a Ghost again or we part.


Fre. ( Kneeling.) Ah! Madam, don't repent your Bounty, that from a shadow
raised a glowing Lover --


Car. ( to Sylvia.) You're afraid I warrant to be talked of, for Loving at
first sight -- Come it will be but a Nine-days Wonder -- I shall see --


Syl. All Puppies do in that time.


Car. I find we shall have rare witty Children!


Syl. 'Twill Cross the Proverb else, if you are the Father.


Car. ( Aside.) It Is likely to be a Match by her Natural aversion to me -- Look
ye, Madam, you may disguise your Inclinations if you please; indeed, if you had
fallen in Love with an Aesop, or a Creon, you might have had scruples to own
it, But --


Syl. Well, certainly thou art the vilest Ragamuffin, that ever trotted after a
Soldier; Thou not only wearest thy Masters old Clothes, but the worst of
Scraps; his ends of Sentences, and cast wit too.


Car. And thou art certainly the most ignorant, Abigal, that ever snear'd
behind a Lady, parts and Learning are lost upon thee, and thou understand'st
nothing but a Bribe.


Syl. I see then I Am in no danger of being talked to in my own Language.


Fre. to Cla. I find we may as soon meet an Ugly Woman without Affectation, as
a Pretty one without Cruelty, let some Passion prevail, be Merciful and hate me.


Cla. Nay, I Will rather glory in my indifference, and as a farther Proof of it,
I walk here every Evening, and you shall see that you are not considerable
enough to make me forbear one Day. Adieu!


Exit. Free. May you be as Happy as you are Cruel! --


Car. Or as she is Kind. Aside.


Syl. Farewell Frightful!


Car. Farewell Mopsa!


Free. What Is the matter.


Car. All the matter is, that no Woman will be pleased with plain dealing, you
have got a Mistress by being a Ghost, and I have lost one, by being Flesh and
Blood, well, I see he that would get a Woman must --

With her own Arts the Hippocrite betray,
For Woman never was caught but her own way.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Astrea. Ast. HE stays very long -- if Clarinda comes first, I shall not
have time for my purpose -- but what am I going to do? -- to bring my Gallant
to one that admires him -- a pretty undertaking -- but I have engaged, and
cannot withdraw. Yet stay, by this I shall lay the Fame of the Intriegue upon
her, and like a wise Monarch, make others fight for what I only enjoy -- it is
rare -- but if he should like her I am lost.


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, there is a Gentleman below, Mrs. Friendlove calls
Captain.


Ast. Oh it is well -- Hark ye, Fidelia, you must respect this Gentleman.


Exit. Fid. Certainly my Lady is the happiest Woman in the World, and the
greatest Politician: she does every thing with such an Air, that even I that am
privy to her Intriegues, dare not seem to know 'em; and the Fame of her Virtue
protects her against all discoveries -- She Is grown a Proverb, the Citizens
preach her to their Wives, and the Courtiers to their Daughters, and now it is
granted, that there is a pitch of Virtue secure against reproach -- but I must
go to divert the Woman of the House; for Lovers are best Company with one
another; and she will tell 'em a story of her Family, till they wish her at the
Devil. Well! there is one happiness in being a Ladies Woman, it instructs us in
the Fashionable Mysteries of Lying, Hypocrisy, and Intriegue: so that half a
Years Service, I Will maintain, shall teach a Woman to Cuckold her Husband, with
more dexterity, than ten Years practice.


Exit. Enter Freeman and Astrea. Fre. I Am in a Wood.


Ast. To bring you out I must tell you -- that it is with a great deal of
difficulty I stir abroad, and that I have contrived your acquaintance with her,
who is my Relation, and Neighbor, in order to gain more opportunities for my
self, and under that color make our affair as lasting as secure.


Fre. I begin to understand you -- I must publicly declare my self, Madam
Clarinda's Lover, while -- an excellent Plot -- which if you thought of it?


Ast. You are Mad -- I tell you she is in earnest; she saw you, liked you, and
would not rest till I had told her a possibility of seeing you again, which I
promised for the reasons I have given -- now do you think I have not made a great
venture?


Fre. Is she very handsome?


Ast. If she were, I find I should be in danger.


Fre. No, but I should then convince you, nothing could shake your interest in
my heart.


Ast. Well, some People do think her handsome, I wish you may not: but have a
care how you move, I shall be very Jealous!


Fre. I Am afraid I shall do it so awkardly -- she will find me out.


Ast. Trust nature: but I have one scruple just comes into my head that will
spoil all.


Fre. Nay then we are lost, what is it?


Ast. I Am afraid we shall lose the pleasure of the adventure, to think that it
will not be in our own power to discover it.


Fre. That indeed is a scruple I should not have thought of, but we must bear
our misfortune as well as we can; and let us not be the first instance of
Lovers that could not brook adversity.


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, Mrs Clarinda is at the Door.


Ast. Very well. Exit. Fidelia*

Stay here while I prepare her, and in the mean time I Will send Mrs. Friendlove
the Woman of the House, to entertain you with her Pedigree and Impertinence.


Exit. Freeman Solus. This is an Excellent Wench, and I Love her Heartily, but
500 l. a Year I don't know what to do, let me consider, if I Marry there is a
Pretty Woman, and 500 l. a Year, which are not often together -- Hum! If I
don't, here is the most agreeable Creature in the World, and -- Hum -- A Poor
Lover is the Devil -- No Bankrupt ever found a fair one Kind. Now for this
Well-wisher to the Mathematics:


Enter Friendlove. Friend. A lack-a-Day! Here Is the Poor Gentleman alone.


Fre. This is kindly done, Madam:


Friend. You and I Captain must be acquainted it seems.


Fre. You make me proud:


Friend. I knew one of your Name in Nottingham, I believe we are a little
related -- For you must know Captian, as I told you within, I am some way a Kin
to most of the great Families in England, and I never was two Minutes with any
Body of Pedigree, but I found out that I was their Cousin.


Fre. Very likely, Madam -- (This is an Original) Aside.


Friend. For which reason, Captain, out of pure respect to my Relations, I make
all my Servants call me at every Word, My Lady, and your Ladyship.


Fre. Your Ladyship is extremely in the right.


Friend. Ha! ha! ha! I Will tell you a very pretty Accident, where I was visiting
the other Day, came in three Welsh Ladies, who pretend (forsooth) to be above
other Folks for Family, and to be related to none but themselves -- But in a
quarter of an hour's time, Captain, nothing was so great, as I and my Cousins,
for upon a Comparison of our Pedigree, it appeared, that we all came from a
Marriage of the Ap Shinkins, and the Ap Shones, but you don't mind Me, you are
thinking of Miss.


Fre. Miss!


Friend. Ay, my Cousin Caelia, I call her Miss, because, I knew her from a
Child, It was the neatest best humored thing -- But pray, Captain how long
have you been in Flanders.


Fre. Three Years, Madam --


Friend. She always delighted in her Chamber, and placed every thing in such
order! I warrant you have a Mistress in every Town!


Fre. Yes, Madam.


Friend. Poor Gentleman! You cannot think how Miss would work, she made me the
Prettiest Purse, and I lost it, going with some Ladies to a Fortune Tellers.


Fre. This is designed Murder. Holding his Ears aside.


Friend. But now you talk of Fortune Tellers, Captain, I know some People laugh
at 'em, but as sure as you are there, he told me every thing so exactly, that I
was forced to give him the other, Shilling to hold his Tongue.


Fre. You did very prudently, Madam.


Friend. Are the Women in Flanders very handsome.


Fre. No, but to make amends they are very Kind.


Friend. Huh! Are they so -- Well I Love sincerity.


Free. No Body dies there of any thing but Bullets.


Enter Clarinda and Astrea. Cla. Here Is a Man!


Fre. Ha! Here will be fine Work! Aside.


Friend. Come Ladies don't be frightened, here is enough of us to deal with one
Man -- It Is Capt. Freeman, a Cousin of Mine, who has been giving me an account
of his Travels, which is so diverting.


Ast. He looks alarmed, I Will watch Him. Aside.


Friend. He says the Women in Flanders, Miss, are not half so handsome, as they
are here.


Free. These Ladies will Justify it.


Ast. I find there are Courtiers in Flanders, if there are no Beauties.


Cla. You're the first Traveller, Sir, that did not highten the Rarities of of
the Place -- I Will warrant there are handsome Women.


Fre. There may, Madam, but they don't do so much mischief as in England --
They know the danger of letting 'em be seen, and kindly keeping 'em up in
Nunneries, and Convents.


Friend. I Love 'em for that truly -- I am glad I was not born there, a Woman
must spend her Youth and Beauty, over a String of Beads, or a piece of
Needle Work, a pretty diversion, we know better things in England.


Cla. It may be a cunning, Sir, to increase that danger you speak of, for what
is always before us, does not affect us so much; and where Beauty is so common,
I fancy it does little harm.


Fre. Against that, Madam, you are an instance.


Cla. Mrs. Friendlove, your Relation has Traveled farther than Flanders.


Friend. Pardon me, Madam, my Cousin knows a pretty Lady, and if he had turned
his Eyes off you, might have seen more instances.


Fre. [turning to her.] (O dear Madam) [Aside.] A good occasion to Court my
Mistress.


Friend. Oh good, Sir --


Fre. I must have confessed -- that thou art a Monster. Aside.


Friend. Sweet, Sir.


Fre. [ looking upon Clarinda, all the while.] So much Youth and Beauty.


Friend. Oh dear, Sir --


Free. The most agreeable Air --


Friend. The civilest, best bred Gentleman --


Fre. And Wit, that would have Killed, without the Assistance of your Eyes.


Friend. Well I Love, Truth and Honor!


Cla. Ast. Ha! ha! ha! He manages it rarely.


Fre. The genteelest Woman in the World --


Friend. And do you really think so? -- Well, Cousin Clarinda, you will be
reconciled to the Captain, one would not think he had Traveled at all by his
sincerity -- Sweet Captain.


Ast. aside to Cla. O the Beast!


Fre. And were you half so cruel as you are fair, I were lost.


Friend. 'Twould be pity so worthy a Gentleman.


Free. [Aside.] She Will consent before I have half done -- From the first minute
I saw you, you have been present to my Thoughts.


Friend. Poor Gentleman, one does not know one's Power. aside.


Fre. And I should think of you, though I were speaking to a Monster.


Friend. Well, he is a charming Man! -- aside.


Fre. I behold that beauteous Face and blooming Youth, though a nauseous Hag,
and withered Age were before me --


Friend. ( Pulls out a glass aside.) I do look killing to day --


Fre. Is it possible, my lovely Unbeliever, you should see me, and suspect your
interest in my heart.


Ast. ( Aside.) I cannot bear it though in jest --


Cla. 'Twould be cruel in her to do so, let me persuade.


Friend. One must not believe all that Men say, Cousin, they are very deceitful
-- though I must needs own, the Captain is a worthy Gentleman, and very Judicious.


Fre. Oh! Madam, let me Kneel to thank you -- continue, most distinguishing
Lady, to pity me, and move that stubborn Fair One in my Favor. You never
pleaded in so just a Cause, nor is any so fit to argue it as you -- O that I
could but manifest my Breast, you would see the Pains I feel, that I Sigh, that
I Burn, that I could Die, to Merit the Heart of the Lovely Clarinda.


Friend. Clarinda!


Cla. Ast. A Pleasant mistake.


Friend. A strange mistake!


Ast. It Is so usual with Lovers, Madam, that I have known some make Love in
Jest, till they forget the Occasion.


Fre. ( Aside.) A touch for me, I must take care -- And where it was in the
Heart before, Madam, it is an easier mistake.


Ast. I own it -- ( Aside to him.) But you do it very Passionately.


Fre. I think of you.


Ast. You was afraid you should be so awkard.


Fre. You cannot be jealous --


Ast. I don't know what I am, but I Am in pain --


Car. The violence of his Love to you made him forget himself --


Friend. Very likely, nay, it must be so.


Fre. You are generous, Madam, to excuse an unhappy Lover.


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, the Chocolate is ready.


Friend. Come, come, Cousins all! We'll talk more within -- Well, I shall not find
in my Heart to let him live in Pain -- Poor Man! ( Looking on the Glass.) Very
well! Mighty pretty! I Am overjoyed!


Exeunt. Enter Cleremont and Doctor, and Drawer with Wine, Table and Chairs.
Cle. Bring the Wine into this Room, it is more private: soh! leave us -- Exit
Drawer.

Now Doctor, you fully know my grief -- There Is naught without the Compass of
your Art -- That subtle Art, that pierces deeper than the Skin, and views a
Ladies Mind as well as Body; sees all the secret Motions of her Heart, and
every Passion there: Can direct their violence, or, if it pleases, make new
Impressions -- But first your Health -- ( drinks.) Come, Doctor, this is
Physic you may take. Fills.


Dr. Sir, I Will do you reason -- Sir. ( Drinks.)


Cle. If one Deity can inspire another, speak my Oracle, shall I live, or die?
--


Dr. I have told you, Sir, I cannot help you -- There Is not a Lady at Court
would trust me after, Betray the Counsels of my Patients! -- Sir, It Is from
their Opinion of our secrecy we live --


Cle. And it is from a no less confidence of that virtue in you, Doctor, that I
open my self thus, Do ye think a secret of this nature -- but, Sir, my service
to you -- ( Drinks.) I assure you, Doctor, if I had not an Opinion of your
honor --


Dr. You would doubt it very much if I did this, Drinks. it is impossible, Sir,
I dare not venture. Sees his Hand in his Pocket.


Cle. Come, Doctor, you are too Scrupulous -- Gives him Money.


Dr. Alas, Sir, I would do any thing to serve you -- But you cannot blame my
fears, when my Honor, Fame, and future Fortune depend on the success.


Cle. Nay, I must needs commend your caution, and blame my self for not
considering that you would use it -- But your secret will be safe -- It is my
interest, and in that Doctor, all Men are sincere.


Dr. Worthy, Sir, I am entirely yours, but now, Sir, the first difficulty will
be the greatest -- How to break it.


Cle. Oh! there are a thousand ways -- You must think of some Distemper, and
prescribe me to her as Physic: She Will take me as a Potion at least, though she
will not as a Lover -- Come, Doctor, here is to her new disease --


Dr. You are pleasant, Sir,


Cle. If you could but make her Sick in half the time that you have made me
well --


Dr. I Will pawn my Art for the success.


Cle. Why now, my Doctor speaks like the Offspring of Aesculaepius -- This
indeed is Physic -- There Is balm in every Word, that new creates my Soul --
But, Dear Doctor, let me not delay your Art with praising it -- go and be
immortal.


Dr. I fly; and if I don't effect her way, all my Patients die when I come near
'em --


Cle. Or which is as bad -- may they all grow well with the first Dose -- Few
People know the true use of a Physician, were they well applied -- But how
stubborn this Rascal was, before he felt the Gold -- well there is no Cordial
like this grand Elixir! This is the true Panacaea! The Food of your Physician,
which the unknowing Patint parts with for Drugs and Death -- But I must follow
him --


Exit. Enter Astrea and Clarinda. Ast. Ha! ha! ha! Was there ever such a
Monster!


Cla. Not to perceive so plain a Cheat --


Ast. It was pleasant enough to see how fast she melted, and how much he
labored to prevent it --


Cla. But the Beast, in half an hour to consent to Marry him.


Ast. Old Women are always tenderhearted, and their Experience makes 'em know
how to value Opportunities.


Cla. Well, sure I shall never be such a Creature.


Ast. You cannot tell, Clarinda; for the Opinion of our Beauty is the last thing
that leaves us.


Cla. I believe indeed a Woman sees her Decays sooner in the Men's Faces than
her own.


Ast. But no Body minds a true Mirror.


Cla. Yet sure it must be very unhappy to keep up the Opinion of our Beauty,
after every body else has laid it down: And the Humor of the Town is very
quick in these Cases, for when a Woman is Thirty --


Ast. She grows a very discreet sort of a Body! -- Well, it must needs grate a
fine Creature, that is just declining, and still perhaps with all her Loevrs
glowing in her Thoughts, to see the Tide pass by her, and hear the Mortifying
Sound -- She was!


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, my Lady Dainty is inquiring for your Ladyship.


Ast. I hope she will do me the Honor to come up.


Cla. My Lady Dainty?


Ast. I believe you don't know her Person, but you must her Character.


Cla. I warrant this is she that thinks it the truest Mark of Quality to be
Nice and Sickly; and is as much afraid of looking well, as other Folks are fond
of it.


Ast. Many People are Fops in their Mien and Habit, but her Ladyship is so in
her Understanding, and takes as much Pains to punish her Inside, as to adorn
her Out.


Enter the Lady Dainty. Lad. Well, I am the happiest Woman in finding your
Ladyship at home!


Ast. You do me an Honor -- Madam, a Relation of mine.


Lad. I shall strive to be of her Acquaintance --


Cla. Your Ladyship makes me proud.


Lad. I have made at least twenty Visits to day, and not above Ten were at
home, which I take to be a great good Fortune, in having my Day's Journey so
happily shortened to your Ladyship, for in you I terminate my Evening: And it is
so blessed a thing to arrive where one loves, after the tedious Endearments of
so many one hates in a Day's visiting. Huh! Huh! --


Ast, Your Ladyship is certainly the most obliging thing!


Lad. Meeting with a Reasonable Creature at last, is like unlacing after being
squeezed up in a strait Pair of Boddice. Huh! Huh!


Cla. You must needs be very much fatigued.


Lad. O quite spent! Not but my Coach is very easy, yet repeating so many How
d'ye's in a Day is enough to kill a Horse.


Ast. Pray where was your Ladyship last?


Lad. Why, Madam, at my Lady Thrivewell's in the City, who knows no other
Happiness, and thinks there is no other Welcome but Eating and Drinking! At the
Sight of her Table I was ready to swoon, coming out of the Air! Huh!


Ast. How was it spread, Madam?


Lad. At the upper End sat her Ladyship, and at each Elbow a Daughter with Arms
like Plough-Men, and Cheeks like Milk-Maids -- They were enough to beat one
down with their Breath --


Ast. Ha, ha! a goodly Appearance!


Lad. The Table, (or rather Larder) was filled with Westphalia Hams, Pullets,
and Turkey-Pies; with a great Cheshire Cheese, that rivaled every one in bulk
but her Ladyship; and a large Tankard of Ale, enough to destroy a Dozen
Porters. Huh! Huh! --


Cla. Ast. Ha! ha! ha!


Lad. She forced me to sit down, and put enough upon my Plate to serve me my
whole Life --


Ast. She designed you a Complement --


Lad. To see the Titles of Quality joined with such Mob Dispositions! Well,
there is nothing distinguishes the Commons so much as their Eating; and I never
knew a true Plebeian but was a hungry -- Huh! huh!


Ast. Your Ladyship knows the Elegance of Life.


Lad. I aim at it a little -- But there is one Mark by which you may know such
Creatures, though you don't see 'em; for it is the most Essential Property of the
Vulgar to speak loud; their common Discourse is some Degrees above the Noise of
a Drum. For which Reason, when any raises their Voice above a Whisper, I strait
conclude, That they are either no Quality, or at most but half Blood; and it is
likely the Fault might be of the Side of the Mother.


Ast. Ha, ha! Your Ladyship is certainly the most entertaining Creature!


Lad. But now Ladies, exactly opposite to this, is the Life of the Refined and
Well-bred part of the Creation. The Vulgar, like other Beasts, are up and
Feeding before it is Day; but about a Delicate Creature every thing is slow and
solemn.


Cla. The Noises of the Streets, Madam, must be great Enemies to that Quiet.


Lad. So great, that I have often wondered why the Government don't provide
against so manifest a Barbarism. They should defend our Ears against offensive
Sounds, and banish all that had the little Breeding to rise before Eleven a
Clock.


Ast. I should vote for that Law; for I Am a mighty Friend to my Pillow -- But
pray, Madam, go on with your Description.


Lad. Here then, Ladies, I must needs lament that we are in some respects not
unlike the Crowd; And that it is still a Custom among us to go upon our own
Legs. I have often admired the Chinese Nobility; who, to prevent the Infamy of
so Vulgar an Exercise, contract the Feet of their Infant-Quality, and keep 'em
so little, that when they are of Age they may not use 'em; and never cut their
Nails that they might not be suspected to work with a Needle -- Is it not a
Scandal to the Nobles of England, to let a Barbarian transcend 'em in so high a
point of Elegance?


Cla. That, indeed, is one step to take away the Trouble of moving at all, and
make 'em live the Life of a Plant.


Lad. Which would be truly, blessed! For methinks People of Quality should be
known more by their Passions than their Figure; and that is always a certain
Way: For our Joy never rises above a Smile, nor our Sorrow above the Decency
and Color of our Clothes.


Cla. So that when a dear Friend dies --


Lad. To shed Tears is the Grief of a Peasant.


Cla. It discovers our Love at least.


Lad. As ill as it does our Breeding; For our Love for the Dead is best shown
in our Respect to the Living, and there the Fashion is against it; besides
Tears are the worst Wash one can possibly use for the Complexion -- Huh, Huh!
-- But to make an end of this Subject; There is one thing that more remarkably
distinguishes Persons of Rank from the Commons, and that is our Natural
Contempt of Business. Now the Vulgar, like a Hackney-Horse, never stir abroad
without something to do; and they visit, like a Merchant upon Change, for their
Profit more than their Pleasure. But it is a Reproach to the Honor of a
Well-bred Woman, to have any thing in her Head but the Fashions, or to know any
Fatigue but (...) Idleness.


Cla. Does your Ladyship never go to the Play?


Lad. Often, Madam, but not to mind the Actors, for it is common to love Sights
-- My great Diversion is to turn my Eyes upon the Middle Gallery; -- or when a
Citizen crowds her self in among us, it is an unspeakable Pleasure to
contemplate her Airs and her Dres -- And they never escape me; for I am as
apprehensive of such Creatures coming near me, as some People are when a Cat is
in the Room -- Huh! huh! But the Play is begun, and, if you please, we'll leave
the Discourse, and go to the Things.


Ast. We are glad of the Occasion.


Lad. For the Audience is much the more Entertaining Sight, and though they call
the Stage the Image of the World, yet the Box and the Gallerys are certainly
the truer Picture; For you may observe, in all Nations, the Mobb, when they
pl^^se, are uppermost so there.

Those Greasy Rulers sit above, below
The Fine-Nice-Tender-Powder'd Thing, a Beau.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Solomon Empty and Freeman. Sir Sol. WHy Tom, as great Capacities are
required in a Lover as a Privy Counselor, and nothing looks so dull in a
young Man as not to aim at Intrigue in all he does -- my Rule was always to
steal in at a Window and out at a Trap-door.


Fre. When there is no other way --


Sir Sol. Other way! If there was I would not use it -- it is the Difficulty and
the Danger that make it pleasing and like design -- I Would come if I could through
the Tyles and fall like Jove into her Lap.


Fre. Such thundering Gamesters as you and Jupiter, Sir Solomon maybe pleased
with Difficulties, but a Puny Loyer as I am would lose his Stomach if there was
any thing to be done but directly falling to --


Sir Sol. Well I see Tom, thou have not a Spirit, a Genius for Intrigue --
there is often more Pleasure in the Design than the thing -- now should I never
rest till I had made the Husband accessory, it sweetens the Stealth, and makes
it more secure, or if no Husband a Brother that is Jealous of the Honor of his
Family -- why Tom, I have employed Fathers and Mothers in this Business!


Fre. Nay Sir Solomon, there is none so fit to take care of 'em as they that
get 'em.


Sir Sol. Ha! ha! My witty Rogue -- sure she is mightily pleased with you!


Fre. She tells me so.


Sir Sol. Ye happy Dog! -- but prithee Tom tell me a little more for I love to
find my Plots Succeed, what sort of Wench is it -- ha!


Fre. A Beauty able to renew the long lost Fire in your Heart, and turn you to
a Rival.


Sir Sal. Egad sirrah, I Would Cuckold ye if I knew her, for this Libel -- hah!
Hem! I Am as Strong as you are -- but no more of that, kneel down and thank me
for my Advice -- I understand the World Tom! But go on, is she Black or Fair,
Tall or Short? Ha!


Fre. She Is neither, but agreeably divided between 'em all -- her Mien is easy
without Affectation, and in her Face a pretty Haughtiness appears that melts it
self into a Smile, and every Heart that sees it into Love.


Sir Sol. But Dear Tom, how was she set off, what Rigging had she? Ha!


Fre. I was not so Idle as to make a Critic on her Dress, but I think she had
a Yellow Gown --


Sir Sol. Yellow Gown! -- Pray Heaven it is not my Wife all this time. aside.


Fre. Ay Yellow! Why don't you like that Color?


Sir Sol. O very well, very well Tom -- Yellow you say? And what else? -- it
must be she. aside.


Fre. And Black upper Petty-coat --


Sir Sol. Upper Petty-coat? -- then he has too -- aside.


Fre. What Is the matter Sir Solomon, you're Concerned?


Sir Sol. No, no, no, not at all Tom -- Black upper Petty-coat! aside. you meet
her at six you say, Ha! Tom!


Fre. Ay, Sir Solomon, there is the Challenge she sent me next my Heart.


gives him a Letter. Sir Sol. Aside God's Death! this is confirmation! The Gypsy's
own Hand!

Reads Trembling. The Garden Door -- open -- and -- exactly at six -- your --
-- Expecting Caelia. Caelia! Ay that is her Contrivance -- Cockatrice! aside.


Fre. Aside. There must be something in this Disorder, Cleremont told me he was
Married -- I have gone too far --


Sir Sol. Aside. This is her Devotion! Well I Will know more, and if she has --
Ha! Ha! Ha! Tom, this is very kind, you must not disappoint her for the World.


Fre. No, Sir Solomon, I Am a Man of Honor -- but the unluckyest Dog that ever
was. aside.


Enter Cleremont. Cle. My Friend and Counselor, Sir Solomon Empty! Ha! Ha! Ha!


Sir Sol. Aside. Ay I have Counseled --


Cler. I followed your Instructions and am Happy -- I melted the Doctor, and He
my Mistress; all her Aversions to me are over, her Pukings, her Spleen, her
Swoonings, her Cholick! And now I am as well-come and agreeable to her as a
Dose of Physic -- all this my Counselor and deep Politician in Love I owe to
thy sage Advice -- Thou do indeed understand the World, and in all Love
Intrigues I Will be ruled by no other -- but what is the matter, are you both Dumb?


Sir Sol. Fre. Me?


Sir Sol. No, no, I was only thinking of a Business of Freeman's --


Fre. Which I must mind Gentlemen, and so your Servant.


Exit. Sir Sol. And I too -- going.


Cler. Hold Sir Solomon you must stay and hear my success.


Sir Sol. I cannot, I have Business.


Cle. A Pox, OF Business -- Ha! Ha! Ha! You cannot think what a change of
Affairs it wrought.


Sir Sol. Puh! --


Cle. I find the Plain Honest Way never does it, and a Man may throw away as
much Money upon a Mistress as a Place at Court, and never be the nearer.


Sir Sol. Aside Upper Petty-coat! --


Cle. A little bribe well Placed -- but Sir Solomon methinks you are not
pleased enough with the success of your Counsels.


Sir Sol. If I an't, I Am in the wrong, for they have took mightily, mightily!


Cle. O beyond expectation!


Sir Sol. Aside Ay with a Pox! --


Cle. She received me with all the Ease and Satisfaction that desiring Lovers
use, all her talk was with regard to me and all her Appeals were to me --


Sir Sol. Aside. Your Expecting Caelia! --


Cle. Could you a' Dreamt that it would come to this?


Sir Sol. No Faith I could not -- not in the least Mr. Cleremont, not in the
least!


Cle. Why thou deservest a Statue to thy Memory.


Sir Sol. I do indeed deserve one --


Cle. Thou do -- why some have been worshipped for half thy Sagacity -- you
don't know your self.


Sir Sol. Yes, yes, I do, I am wiser than ever, Mr. Cleremont, and know my self
intimately! -- rubbing his forehead.


Cle. All the distressed Lovers in Town will fly to you for Succor.


Sir Sol. Very likely -- The Garden door at Six? Aside. -- I will not, I cannot, I
must not, dare not stay any longer.


Exit. Cle. What a Devil's the Matter now? But thou art an Extraordinary old
Fellow --


Exit. Enter Careless in Disguise. Car. So! My Disguise sits well he will never
know me -- now let me consider -- what strange Story must I tell him to get him
out of the way -- but I shall not want invention; I Will tickle his Ears as I used
to do the Commisarys when we made up a false Muster.


Exit. Enter Sir Solomon Empty. Sir Sol. Jezebel! Harlot! This is her Aversion
to Men! Her Praying! Her Piety! -- but this is my Advice too. I must be giving
Counsel! -- hum -- Enter Careless.

But what Fellow's that? I don't like him -- he may be a Cuckoldmaker too for
ought I know.


Car. Aside. Here he is, now for my Plot -- Sir, Is your Name Sir Solomon Empty?


Sir. Sol. Yes it is -- what then? -- Thou art a Rogue I believe. aside.


Car. Do you know one Sir Humphrey Afterwit?


Sir Sol. Sir Humphrey Afterwit! -- No not I -- not I Fellow -- I know none of
your Sir Humpherys -- ( aside) some poor Dog or other in Prison -- there is such
new ways of begging since the War --


Car. I don't know how it is Sir, but he said he was near related to the Family
of the Emptys, and dyed at my House Yesterday.


Sir Sol. Why then you must bury him Friend -- don't trouble me with your dead
Men -- Upper Pettycoat. aside.


Car. But a little before he died, he bid me go to Sir Solomon Empty, and pay
him a considerable Sum of Money that he owed him.


Sir Sol. Adds me! -- Harkee Friend -- Sir Humphery Afterwit! -- what an
unlucky Brain have I! Ha! ha! ha! My dear Friend -- Afterwit! that ever I
should be puzzled to remember Thee! -- and I protest to you he was as perfectly
out of my Head, as if he had never been there.


Car. Very likely Sir.


Sir Sol. Why we are first Cousens -- but he is not dead sure, he cannot be dead!


Car. Indeed Sir he is -- he just came to Town, fell sick and died in two Hours.


Sir Sol. Tell me no more! The News goes to my Heart -- poor Have -- Wit!


Car. Sir, he said his Name was Afterwit.


Sir Sol. Right, right, Afterwit! But Grief, it is Grief makes me forget what I
say -- I have lost the best Friend!


Car. I suppose you know how much it is?


Sir Sol. No Friend, I can think of nothing now -- poor Numps Dead! -- go in
and pay it any of my Servants.


Car. Sir, he charged me to pay it none but you, and I was afraid to venture so
much about me, but if you will do me the Honor to go to my House.


Sir Sol. Well, come lets go then, I shall be out of Pain the sooner -- Ho! my
dear Friend gone -- poor Lackwit.


Exeunt. Enter Freeman and Astrea. Fre. Your too great Care has ruined us! --
had you not concealed your Name --


Ast. Who could have thought that Sir Solomon had been your intimate
Acquaintance -- I never heard him speak of such a Man -- but I Am undone, past
Redemption lost.


Fre. Sure there is a way.


Ast. O! none, never think on it -- had you not shown the Letter --


Fre. That unfortunate Letter!


Ast. Cursed Letter! -- if you had delayed your Discovery two Hours, I had
prevented it by telling you all -- I had begun with your Man, and sent him to
draw Sir Solomon out of the way, which now I suppose he cannot compass -- and if
you had seen him first.


Fre. How unlucky it was!


Ast. But we must do something -- let me consider -- He Will certainly be there
-- hum -- O I have it.


Fre. How, how dear Creature!


Ast. O! Sir you will tell.


Fre. You are unkind, but I deserve it -- yet pray tell me.


Ast. I have thought of a Device that must bring us off, let me see the Letter.


Fre. Here! here!


Ast. (Reads to her self.)
Fre: (Aside) I never knew a Woman plunged at an Excuse; now were I to be
hanged, I could not think of an Expedient, I see so many Dangers -- but Woman!
--


Ast. It Is well -- leave me -- ( gives him back the Letter.)


Fre. Must I not know your Plot?


Ast. Ask me nothing, but come at the Hour, and behave your self as you would
have done, had this not happened; leave the rest to me.


Fre. I go. --


Exit Fre. Enter Fidelia. Ast. I Am glad you're here; run immediately and call
my Cosen --

Exit. Fid. I have a thousand Fears -- I wish it were over -- let ^e see -- she
loves him too! it distracts me -- was ever Woman so reduced! -- but there is no
other way. I must lose my Lover or my -- Honor! Quiet! every thing! the fame
of so much Virtue and be exposed -- I cannot think on it.


Exit. Enter Careless and Freeman. Car. Sir, I plied him every Minute with
fresh Storys, and told more lies than are pardoned at a Jubilee.


Fre. I am glad they did not, but how came they not to succeed?


Car. I cannot tell what was in his Head, but I had not got half way when he
turned short, and bid me be at home to morrow, for he had extraordinary
Business.


Fre. Damn his Business.


Car. And him too. Sir for a Dog -- a French Husband would a been better bred
than to look into the Affairs of his Wife -- but we have nothing in that
Perfection as abroad, and our Cuckolds as well as our Grapes are but half
ripened.


Fre. (Looks at him)
Car. Nay Sir, the things that are most cultivated, our very Fops in England
are not to be named with theirs -- a true bred English Beau has indeed the
Powder, the Essence, the Tooth-pick, the Snuff Box, and is as Idle, but the
fault is in the Flesh, he has not the motion, and looks stiff under all this --
Now a French Fop, like a Poet, is born so, and would be known without Clothes,
it is in his Eyes, his Nose, his Fingers, his Elbows, his Heels; they Dance
when they Walk, and sing when they speak --


Fre. You're extremely Diverting.


Car. I would fain drive this ugly Business out of your Head, for it puts you
as much out of humor as a Dun in a Morning.


Fre. And as much at a loss, as when I have no Money for him.


Car. Never fear Sir, if she has undertook to bring you off.


Fre. Why are you acquainted with her Skill in these Matters?


Car. No Sir, but I never knew a Design fail where a Woman was the Ingineer --
the Plots that don't succeed are made by Men.


Fre. Ay, but there is more in that it Thou art aware of -- how if it shake my
Interest with the Fortune?


Car. It Is impossible, for when once a Woman loves, nothing Cures her but
Glutting.


Fre. Yet a modest Woman will be startled at such Galantries.


Car. In appearance she may, but a wild Man has always their secret
approbation, and every Woman has the Vanity to think she can keep him to her
self.


Fre. Do'ye think so?


Car. And hope you will find so -- I never doubt a thing that depends on a
Woman's Opinion of her self, for Nature has so ordered it that every one is
prepared to believe whatever we can say of 'em.


Fre. Did you find her Maid of that Humor?


Car. She would not listen to me because she did not like me (I pity her
Judgment) but I never knew a Woman refuse a Man that she liked -- when they
don't Fancy, they are very Saucy and very Virtuous.


Fre. Prithee Careless, leave this Libel and Mind the present Business -- it is
pretty near the Time, go to the Mall and wait for orders -- you will find me in
this Walk.


Car. Yonder Is one that will divert you in the mean time, the Charming Mrs.
Friendlove.


Fre. Her Impertinence was never so unseasonable.


Car. Faith Sir, according to the present Posture of Affairs, I fancy she might
be very seasonable.


Fre. How do ye mean?


Car. Why thus; -- You are not sure they will succeed in their Plot upon Sir
Solomon, now it will at least perplex the Matter if you can draw her thither
about that time, to consummate the Wedding that you have put in her Head.


Fre. But if they should succeed it might raise new Jealousies in him.


Car. To prevent that I may be ready to lead her another way.


Fre. I like it, let us meet her.


Exeunt. Enter Lady Dainty, Clarinda and Cleremont. Lad. Well, I must confess
Mr. Cleremont you are the most Diverting Man in the World, and the best Company
when one has taken the Waters, and I have drank Epsome this Morning.


Cla. His Discourse Madam; seems more peculiar to a Steel Mineral; for Reproach
and Scandal, at which he is very happy, eases us of Spleen and Dissatisfaction
with our selves, and might be very proper to assist the operations of Tunbridge.


Lad. You are extremely in the Right, and that must be the reason that makes
Tunbridge so Fruitful of Lampoons, for that Mineral not being strong enough to
make the crudities of Ill Nature pass, they are forced to bring 'em up in Verse.


Cle. Upon which Account Madam, all the Nice Women in the Town go thither to
divert their Spleen, and be abused, for Detraction is always so entertaining to
the Ladies, that rather than want it they will have it at their own Expense.


Lad. Well, you are certainly a Living Lampoon.


Cle. Since then Madam, you acknowledge me so Medicinal to you, throw away your
Juleps, Cordials, Slops, and take me all at once.


Lad. No Mr. Cleremont, that is too Bitter a Potion to be taken so suddenly.


Cle. Oh! The rather Madam, the rather; for if you stand making Faces at what
goes against you, it does but increase your Aversion and delay the Cure --
Come, you must be Advised. presses her.


Lad. What mean you Sir?


Cle. To banish all your Ails and be my self your universal Medicine.


Lad. Impudent robust Man! -- I protest did not I know his Relations, I-shou'd
think his Parents had not lived in Chairs and Coaches, but had used their Limbs
all their Lives -- Huh! Huh! But I begin to be persuaded Health is a great
Blessing -- aside.


Cle. My Limbs Madam, were conveyed to me from before the use of Chairs and
Coaches, and it might lessen the Dignity of my Ancestors no^ to use 'em as they
did.


Lad. Was ever such a rude Understanding? To value himself upon the Barbarism
of his Forefathers? Indeed I have heard of Kings that were bred to the Plough
and fancy you might Descend from such a Race, for you Court as if you were
behind one -- Huh! Huh! Huh! -- to treat a Woman of Quality like an Exchange
Wench, and express your Passion with your Arms, unpolished Man!


Cle. I was willing Madam, to take from the Vulgar the only desirable thing
amongst 'em, and show you how they live so Healthy -- for they have no other
Remedy.


Lad. A very rough Medicine! Huh! Huh!


Cle. To those that never took it, it may seem so -- pressing her.


Lad. Abandoned Ravisher! Leave the room, and see my Face no more --


Cle. ( Bows and is going.) --
Lad. And harkee Sir (...) Bribes, no Mediations to my Woman.


Cle. ( Bows and sighs.)
Lad. Thou Profligate! To Hug, To Clasp, To Embrace, And throw your robust Arms
about me like a Vulgar and Indelicate! Oh! I faint with Apprehensions of so
gross Address.


Cle. Oh! My offended Fair!


Lad. Inhumane! Ravisher! Oh! He takes her in his Arms and carries her off, she
struggling and embracing him.


Clarinda alone. Well this is one of the most extraordinary Scenes of Loves I
ever saw, I could never think a Woman's Fantask would ever run so high as to
oppose her Inclination, and believe her Ladyship would be glad to compound for
a little of the Vulgar.


Exit. Enter Friendlove and Maid. The Scene a Dressing Room. Friend. Confounded
Jade, to stay all this while -- I shall be too late -- I warrant the Parson has
been there this hour, and 'twas never know that they stayed for the Bride -- Pin
up this Favorite better -- Well these Soldiers are dear Creatures and I love
'em all!


Maid. They Will think your Ladyship was taken by Storm, to dispatch it so
suddenly --


Friend. They Will rather commend my Conduct, for yielding before I had
distressed the Garrison -- (set this Ribban right) -- let foolish Maids
squander their time that don't know the use of it, I Will snatch the precious
Minutes as they pass, and never stand shilly shally.


Maid. Methinks my Lady Empty takes it very patiently.


Friend. She dares not do otherwise, for fear I should make Discoveries to Sir
Solomon -- and truly I think it Just Reprizal, as I used to promote her
pleasure, to make her accessory to mine.


Maid. 'Twas foolishly done in my Opinion, to trust a Gallant so near your
Ladyship.


Friend. She grew very presuming forsooth, because one or two of her Fellows
had the little Sense to prefer her to me -- but the Captain knows how to
distinguish Women.


Maid. He Is a fine proper Gentleman.


Friend. So he is indeed -- nay, we shall be a mighty pretty Couple; but he
admires my Wit, it seems, more than my Beauty -- Who'd have thought a Soldier
had such Judgment -- (this clumsy Carrian runs the Pins into me.)


Maid. Madam, it bent under my Finger.


Friend. Bent under your Finger? -- make have -- now some People live all their
Lives without making any Conquests, yet they Dress and are Pretty Women too,
but I cannot tell how it is, they don't please -- there is Mrs. Prim, Mrs. Giggit
and Mrs. Saint Looks.


Maid. They want the Freedom of your Lady^^^ps Air.


Friend. Nay every Body does me the Justice, to say that I have very much of
Quality in my Manner -- (this new Tower does not please me)


Maid. He Is violently in Love with you.


Friend. I am no less with him.


Maid. Before Marriage


Friend. Oh! It Is not the Fashion after, except among your ordinary People, as
my Cosen my Lady Dainty says -- no People of Quality go beyond just being
Civil to each other, as My Lady, Your Ladyship, Or so -- Well, now am I Dressed
and going to Execution, but I have resigned my self wholly up to him to do as
he pleases, or since it is a sort of War, as he Dares -- ( going). Add's my
Life I forgot my Bridal Garters -- O, No they are on, what striving there'll be
about 'em and pinching ones Legs? Well this will be a happy Night, a Young
Hero and me; that is Courage and Conduct together -- well I always observe that
those Women are seldom happy that Wed very Young.

But in the World they never can Miscarry,
Who at the Years of full Discretion Marry.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Solomon Empty with his Sword drawn. Dishonored, Ruined, Cuckol'd,
and by my own Contrivance? I Will never outlive it -- ( putting the Sword to his
Breast) my Mind misgives me plaguily I shall never have the Heart to do it --
oh, commit Murder! I shall never enjoy my self after -- I cannot do it -- well,
tho I am abused, yet a living Cuckold is better than a Dead one -- I see if I
had been a rash Man, one of the King's Subjects might have been lost without
any regard to his Person -- but stay, supposing I should ask my self a few
Questions; how am I sure I am a Cuckold? -- [changing his Voice.] Oh! Sir, I
saw it under her Hand -- but Sir Solomon in an Age so full of Plots, how do you
know but this may be one to create Diversion? -- Pardon me Sir, I see no Color
to take it that way -- but it is the part of a wise Man to know the bottom before
he Determines, and how if Sir Solomon Empty should fix himself somewhere to
over hear their Meetings and receive Conviction before he concludes her False
--. There you have reason Sir, and Sir Solomon Empty shall do so, but I have no
hope, uot the least Glymps of Comfort, Oh Woman, Woman, Devil, Devil!


Exit. Enter Astrea and Clarinda. Ast. I confess Clarinda, my proceeding does
not look very generous, but if you consult your Heart, you will find when Love
has entered it, it is very little in the Power of Reason.


Cla. You need no more Apologies methinks, I should have done so my self.


Ast. You fired me with commending him and Love's a catching Disease,


Sla. Well it has gone no farther than this Letter?


Ast. You are Jealous?


Cla. No I would only find the Temper of the Man.


Ast. You need not fear it; there is but one way; Generosity will oblige a Man
of Sense, and nothing move a Fool; besides Marriage is a double security, for
it not only is apt to make a Man forget his Galantries abroad but renders him
less acceptable there. -- Few Women choose a Married Man for a Gallant.


Cla. Why not, as well as the Men like a Married Woman?


Ast. The Cases are very different -- for a designing Woman, though she has
Affairs with twenty Men, desires to keep 'em all to her self but a Man that
knows ever so many Women does not care if he never see any of 'em again.


Cla. You talk madly; but from that it appears that the Men are the more
reasonable, for if those Women had their Desires, in a little time three Parts
of the Sex would be forced to die Maids.


Ast. To prevent that Calamity Nature, you see, has made the Men very Fickle.


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, Sir Solomon is gone into the Garden Room, I saw him
look behind the Tapestry, and believe he designs to fix himself there.


Ast. Go, watch when he is hid, and tell me.


Exit Fid. Cla. Pray let me have my Lesson right -- you say I must take this
all upon my self.


Ast. Very well.


Cla. But harkee! How shall I come off with Freeman? He Will make me stand to my
Word?


Ast. You Will be pleased with that Force.


Cla. I must confess I Am very well inclined to him, but I would not go so fast
-- well I have but one Scruple.


Ast. What Is that?


Cla. I Am afraid I shall be jealous.


Ast. I Will soon cure you, and if I get safe over this, will never make another
venture.


Cla. A very Pious Determination!


Ast. You laugh --


Cla. For no other reason but because it is my turn.


Ast. Not Clarinda that I would have you think that I am just now frighted into
this resolution, or that I have taken it up on the sudden but from a long
digested Thought of such a Life -- for however pleasing it may appear there is
something so Disturbed, so Hazardous, so full of Fears and Disappointments;
That the faint Pleasures that arise don't half atone for the Anxieties that
attend 'em, so that from the sole Motive of good Sense --


Cla. We must be Sober -- now let me indeed Embrace you: Astrea, I am glad to
find a Woman of Wit own it, that reason brings her to the Interests of Virtue.


Enter Fidelia. Fid. Madam, the Gentleman is at the Garden-door.


Ast. Bid him stay, till he has notice to come in -- Exit Fid. now for this one
piece of Hypocrisy Clarinda, and then adieu to it.


Exeunt. Sir Solomon stealing in. Thus far it is well -- No Body has seen me
come in, and here let me fix my self -- ( goes near the Scenes) now shall I see
with my own Eyes the dishonor of my Family, the Bane of my Quiet! and -- but
it turns my Head, and I Am resolved to be revenged -- 'zbud, I Will have him cut
to pieces for a Dog and her Skin pulled over her Ears and hung up in
Guild Hall, as a warning Piece to the rest of the Baggages -- But hark, I hear
'em coming -- my Heart Sinks, and if it be true I shall run Mad -- Ay, now:
Enter Astrea and Fidelia.

I Will watch every Motion --


Ast. Are you sure you left the Letter?


Fid. Yes Madam.


Sir Sol. Aside. Very well, this is plain -- God's Death I Have a Mind to go just now
and cut her Throat --


Ast. But it is hardly six a Clock.


Sir Sol. Aside. you're very punctual you Whore --


Ast. I Am upon Thorns to see her, for I long to know how far this Business is
gone.


Sir Sol. Aside. Ha! What Business? Well I shall find out the whole knot --


Ast. You say he was with her here, last Night?


Fid. Yes Madam, and seemed mighty loving.


Sir Sol. Aside. I don't know what to make of this -- but I must have Patience
--


Ast. I am extremely concerned at her doing so, for it might have drawn a
reflection upon me -- what would Sir Solomon have thought of my conduct if he
had found a Man in the House?


Sir Sol. Aside. Ha: --


Fid. O Madam, she knew Sir Solomon was too well acquainted with your strict
Virtue and unblemisht Life, to believe any thing to the Prejudice of your
Honor.


Ast. Indeed I am pretty well assured of my Husband's Love, and it is my care
next Heaven to deserve it; but the World Fidelia is so full of strange
Hypocrisies that such an Accident as this might make him very uneasy.


Sir Sol. Aside. I Am in Heaven: My Wife's Honest and I am no Monster, -- there
must be some mistake in this Letter --


Ast. If my Cosen takes these Libertys I must desire her to forbear her
visits; for it should be very modest Woman's care to preserve the reputation as
well as the Conscience of Innocence, and I would not for all the World have my
Fidelity to my Dear Sir Solomon brought in Question.


Sir Sol. Aside. Poor Fool: If she had heard of my unmerciful resolution to
kill my self, it would have broke her heart.


Ast. I am ready to sink with Apprehensions of it --


Fid. Dear Madam, don't afflict your self so much, you lay it so near your
Heart, 'twill kill you --


Ast. Hold me --


Sir Sol. Aside. What shall I do? But I must not stir yet --


Fid. Oh: My good Lady take Comfort -- smell to this Bottle -- Oh, Unfortunate
Accident, Bear forward dear Madam, -- How unhappy would it be now if the most
Virtuous Lady in the World, The Glory of all good Women, And Pattern of
Chastity, should dye here between my Arms: Evil befall Madam, Clarenda for this
-- to disturb my Lady that is so tender of her Fame and so averse to all such
Wicked Practices --


Sir Sol. Aside. Ay: So my Dearee is --


Fid. Oh, Look up Madam: -- Will your Ladyship give me leave to Pinch your Nose
to bring you to Life?


Sir Sol. Aside. Now could I kick that civil Jade, she cannot bring her to Life
without asking her leave.


Ast. Ho! Ho!


Fid. Be Comforted good Madam.


Ast. What could we say if Sir Solomon should hear of it? What Excuse could we
make?


Fid. I cannot imagine Madam, for as for my self I could not tell a Lie; No not
in very jest.


Ast. And as for me Fidelia, I could not forge or report an Untruth, though my
Life lay on it, and if we cannot tell how to hide it, we had better tell him the
naked Truth than be caught in a Story.


Sir Sol. Aside. Poor Fool! --


Fid. Be satisfied Madam, Sir Solomon may never know it, or if he should,
Heaven I hope will favor the Innocent and direct his Heart to suspect them
only that are Guilty.


Ast. That may be prayed for, but not hoped, for Sir Solomon is a Man of that
nice Discerning and pierces presently into the most difficult Matters, and what
interpretation can he make from this; a Man in the House and at so unseasonable
a time? It distracts me.


Fid. O dear Madam; this is the Gentleman.


Enter Freeman. Ast. Shrieks.
Fre. Have I surpised you before the time, my Life! My Heaven!


Sir Sol. Aside. Villain! Dog! Oh that I durst now run him through the Back --


Fid. Trembling Speak him fair Madam, for we are but weak Women and and don't
know what he may do to us -- he looks like a Cutthroat.


Fre. An Age has slipped between me and your Lips.


Sir Sol. Aside. Ay, Rogue -- but how will it end? --


Ast. I am ready to die --


Fre. How could you be so surpised my Dear, when you were to expect me at this
hour?


Fid. Pray Sir keep off, my Lady never saw you or heard of you in her Life.


Fre. Good Mrs. Abigail don't you be so quick, your Lady will not tell me so.


Ast. Good Sir, go out of my house, you are mistaken and I don't know you, hoe!
--


Fre. How not know me Madam, when I was here with you but last Night?


Sir Sol. Aside. Ha! (...) done very ill, yet I shall own my self obliged to
you, if you pursue your Mistake no farther and leave us.


Fre. Nay then I must. -- ( Puts his Hand in his Pocket.)


Fid. O good Madam take care of your self, he is going to pull out a Pistol -- (
kneeling) good Sir don't kill us take all we have and spare our Lives.


Sir Sol. ( Aside.) Ay Lord, what shall I do? I stand just against him.


Fre. Yes, yes, Mrs. Airsmock, I Will spare your Lives -- but not your Shame,
Madam -- there is my Invitation, farewell Jilt --


( throws the Letter.) Exit. Ast. What Is this I see, my Note to my Cosen? how,
Fidelia, have you betrayed me?


Fid. ( Trembling.) I know nothing of it, indeed Madam; I left it at her House,
as I hope to be Married.


Sir Sol. ( Appearing.) Ay, Mrs. Matchiavel, is this your Contrivance? but thus
I Will reward you for it. Draws.


Ast. O! Sir Solomon, don't kill her, let us first know the bottom -- but how
came you here?


Sir Sol. I saw something toward, and stepped behind the Hangings, and now
Astrea I am satisfied of your Honor, and nothing shall make me question it --
but this Queen I Will have hanged; corrupt the Wife of my Bosom, and make her
false to my Bed!


Enter Clarinda. Cla. Ha, ha, ha, ha, What Is the Matter good People?


Fid. O pray Madam, satisfy Sir. Solomon who will kill me else, did not you
receive a Note of my Ladies that I left at your House?


Cla. Ha, ha, is that all?


Sir Sol. That all? ay Madam, and if you are concerned in it, pray let me know
the meaning of it.


Cla. Indeed Sir Solomon, I am sorry I was not a witness of the Mirth.


Ast. Mirth, Cosen? you would have been disappointed -- but pray bring us out
of this Confusion, here has been a Man here that would have been very free with
me.


Cla. Ha, ha, why that is it.


Sir Sol. That Is it, Madam!


Ast. And to justify his coming threw me the Note I had sent to you -- I
thought I should have died, and your Mirth as you call it, might have cost me my
Life; my Maid murdered, and Sir Solomon remained assured of my Dishonor.


Cla. I Am sorry it had so different Effects -- I find I am to ask pardon for
what I thought you would thank me -- but to set all right again, this Gentleman
is one that I shall Marry to Morrow, and I thought the occasion of a Wedding,
and the season of a Christmas, might justify an innocent Frolic; and
observing the Note you sent me this Morning without out a Superscription to be
so worded, that it might come from me as well as you, and that there was not so
much difference between our Persons and Dress, but might deceive him a Minute
or two, and not fail, I thought of making a very ridiculous mistake.


Sir Sol. Ha, ha, ha! a very good Plot IN faith, and I Am sorry it did not take;
only my Dearee is such a fearful Fool, or it would have made good sport -- you
must know Cosen, I accidentally coming in, had slipped behind the Tapestry and
heard all.


Cla. Then you had all the pleasure of it to your Self -- I designed to be
there too, but was interrupted by an impertinent Visiter, my Lady Chatt -- but
how came your Sword drawn Sir Solomon, you have not killed my Lover?


Sir Sol. No, no, no, he went away before -- but you must know, as the thing
appeared then, I was so foolish as to believe that it was a contrivance of
Fidelia's and in the present Passion Cosen, did not know what I did --


F.d. ( In a low Voice.) I Am glad the Truth's come to Light --


Sir Sol. But all is well now Cosen, all is well, and I applaud you for your
Plot, I always took you for a sly Baggage -- but come come, we'll send for the
Fidles, and you for your Lover, for for ought I know, you have lost him -- he
was plaguily snubb'd poor Fellow; come along, we'll have the Business done now
-- you shall not lose a Night Coz, besides to keep you in Countenance, my Lady
Dainty is doing the same thing, and we'll be merry together --


Ast. ( Aside to Cla.) Rarely come off, the success of this would almost tempt
me to break my Vow.


Exeunt. Enter the Lady Dainty and Cleremont. (Hand in Hand) Followed by the
Dr. and Attendants with Music, Dancers, etc. Lad. Well, there is nothing shows
so visibly the remaining Footsteps of our primitive Barbarism as the noise at
Weddings; huh! huh! --


Cler. It serves to recommend the Pleasures that succeed, and make us taste the
Joys of silence with a higher relish -- They sit.

Dr. You Will grieve to see your Art outdone; I bring an approved Remedy.


( A Bridal Song, and after it a Mimick Dance.) Enter Sir Solomon, Astrea,
Freeman, Clarinda Sylvia and Servants. Sir Sol. My Lady Dainty, I wish you Joy,
and you too, dear Cleremont, an Hour hence you may wish it these -- we heard of
your Ladyship's design for a Wedding-Jigg to Night, and my Cosen and this
honest Captain were resolved to complement your Ladyship, and join in the same
Dance -- I warrant they shake their Heels rarely. --


Lad. ( (Aside to Cler.) Methinks the Style of Sir Solomon is very
extraordinary. --


Ast. Clar. We wish your Ladyship Joy.


Lad. ( Aside.) I wonder People of any Rank should use such vulgar Salutations.
--


Cle. You see Sir Solomon the success of your Counsels.


Sir Sol. Why every thing I do is lucky -- I am the most overjoyed Man of this
side the Globe -- but you cannot imagine what a sly Rogue the Captain has been
in this Matter shall I tell him Tom?


Fre. No, Prithee let it alone till after Supper.


Sir Sol. Ay you Dog, your Thoughts ru^ upon nothing but after Supper. -- But
Cleremont, you will Dye with Laughing, such Plots, and Counterplots. -- Harkee!
Tom, not a word to the Women of our first Contrivance.


Fre. No, no.


Sir Sol. For if my Dearee should but hear of so irreligious a purpose, it
would break her Heart. It seems she is one or other, the most reserved, most
pious, of such nice Honor, and the fearfull'st Fool, -- well, I am the
happiest Man in the World. --


Fre. In a Wife.


Sir Sol. And next to my own Happiness, I must Congratulate my Friends. -- Dear
Cleremont, I Am overjoyed at thy good Fortune -- why thy Wife looks better
already -- is it not possible to make her speak like one of us?


Cle. All things by Degrees, Sir Solomon, I must not over-dose her.


Sir Sol. Nothing pleases me so much as to think that all this happened through
my Contrivance -- Tom, Cleremont.


Fre. Thou art a great Man that is certain.


Cle. For Intriguing --


Lad. Truly Madam I wonder how this Ill-bred Custom prevails among People of
Figure? This Singing, this Dancing and this Tumult, is so like the Mob
Solemnities of a May Day, Huh! Huh! Huh!


Clar. And the Bride is used just like their Pole, for all the Town to Dance
round.


Lad. Directly so; well, certainly if it were not for the Pleasure of ruling
after, no Woman of Quality would suffer her self to be treated so like a
Commoner.


Ast. The grosser part of the Ceremony is to come Madam, and that is throwing
the Stocking.


Clar. That indeed is a thing that insults us so near, that I wonder the Men
have not thought it their Interest to lay it down.


Lad. I suppose it is to take away the rem ins of Modesty in a Married Woman
all at once, for they think that Quality is properly the Virtue of a Maid --


Enter Footman that Whispers Sir Solomon. Sir Sol. Tom, take hold of your
Mistress, the Parson's in the next Room -- let us dispatch that and then for the
Supper and then -- for the Posset you Rogue!


Enter Careless and Friendlove. Ast. Cla. Ha! Ha! Ha!

This is his contrivance.


Friend. Cosen Sir Solomon, I Am your humble Servant, and Miss my Cosen,
Clarinda this is very kindly done.


Cle. Aside to Sir Sol. what does this old strumpet Mean?


Sir Sol. Faith I cannot tell I suppose some joke of Freeman's.


Friend. My Cosen, my Lady Dainty! This was extemely obliging, to summon all
your Friends to the Celebration of our Nuptials -- I don't know how I shall be
able to return this Favor, but the Captain, Madam, must answer for me --


Lad. What Captain, and what Nuptials do you speak of, Mrs. Friendlove?


Friend. Your Ladyship has a mind to give me some confusions, but your Ladyship
need not be told that in half an Hour at most, my Name it is to be Freeman.


Cle. Sir Sol. Freeman!

-- Here Is another Plot, another Plot!


Ast. Ha! Ha! Ha!


Cla. How Madam, are your pretentions to my Husband?


Friend. Your Husband? -- why -- am I deceived then? Miss, Captain, pray speak,
am I Cheated? Dear Captain Cosen are you a Rogue? Ha! Are you false to me?


Fre. Why what can be said? you stayed so long that I was quite out of
Patience, and seeing the Parson, the Music and all things ready, and this Lady
in Humor and rather than disappoint my Lady Dainty, I engaged my self here --
that is all.


Friend. That Is all?


Cle. Sir Sol. Ha! Ha! Ha!


Friend. You false ungrateful Fellow, to serve a Woman of my Relations so. (
Aside) But this damned Jade to make me wait so long: She was an hour looking
for my false Teeth, if I had layn in 'em as I used to do at my Lady Topers, all
had been well -- I Will turn her away immediately -- but first I wish you all
jealous, when you have no reason, and secure when you have, and may every Body
think your Wives Handsome, but your selves; and may your Children be as dull as
if they were lawfully begot.


Exit. Cle. A heavy Curse.


Sir Sol. Farewell Hermaphrodite, -- well this is a night of Intrigues, nothing
but Stratagems; Tom, I begin to be in Love with my self, when I think I was the
first Ingineer.


Fre. Nay 'twas all your own Contrivance.


Sir Sol. All things break out so, luckily: But stay there is Careless left how
shall we provide for him, he is a very honest Fellow.


Car. Don't Name that Sir Solomon, if you intend to prefer me -- but now I have
no hopes of being a General, I think I must go into the Country, and be my
Elder Brother's Butler.


Sir Sol. Ay, thou had always a kindness for the Cellar, but if you would
make your Fortune under him, get to be his Steward, Jack, rather than his
Butler, for then you may come to be richer than your Master in a little time if
you have any Discretion.


Car. Which I never had -- but there is another way I like better, if you would
promise me your Interest.


Sir Sol. If it be not to serve the Court-Party, I promise you.


Car. Not in the least it is only to persuade that Lady (who I have found is
your Relation) to think better of me than I do of my self, and take me for Life.


Sir Sol. That Is a long Lease, but she has 200 l. a Year to keep it in repair
-- ( Turning to Sylvia) well Cosen, what think you of this Handsome Scoundrel?
H'as been a Volunteer a great while, let him now fight under a Commission.


Car. You see Madam, how Ominous it was to begin with a Quarrel, I knew 'twou'd
be a Match, by our Scolding before hand.


Syl. If we don't after, 'twill be well enough.


Car. We must not be singular -- now and then 'twill be necessary to be like
the rest of the World.


Ast. Well Clarinda, I wish you perfect Joy and must own to you, that your life
is the Happiest -- there all is Quiet, all is Peace, there is nothing to steal
the Color from your Cheeks, or betray you to Surprises, and now I am convinced
of the Folly, the Confusion and the Adversity of Mine.

The Guilty still with anxious Cares are pressed,
The truly Good alone are truly Blessed.

Exeunt. EPILOGUE, By a FRIEND.
Spoken by the Sickly LADY. LET none hereafter Plays Ungodly call,
For this was writ to mortify you all.
No Parson's here exposed, no Brothel stormed,
But a kind handsome keeping Wife Reformed.
A sign the Youth the World never understood,
Or else he would not dare to be so good.
He must the Fame he aims at quite disown,
Who draws good Characters to spoil his own.
This to excuse I thought a Friend he would need,
And came -- sick as I am, his Cause to plead:
It Is the first Visit I protest I Have made.
You're sometimes kind to what I do before you;
Pity the Youth, for my sake I implore you,
Hissing to Death my tender Organ Wounds!
And a sick Ear abhors ungrateful Sounds:
Yet can Applause though never so loud give Ease,
For they who flatter Women always please.
Then vain Assistance will I now explore
In Physic and Astrology no more.
You, dear Physicians, must my Health insure,
And the other Visit will confirm my Cure;
Else what is already done -- is all in vain,
And I relapse -- till you come here again.
By you I shall be always to be seen,
For whatever ails the sickly Fair within,
The Doctor at all Seasons is let in.
FINIS.

