A SHORT CONSIDERATION OF Mr ERASMUS WARREN's DEFENSE of his EXCEPTIONS Against
the THEORY of the EARTH.
SIR,
I Have read over Mr. Er. Warren's Defense of his Exceptions against the Theory
of the Earth: which, it may be, few will do after me; as not having curiosity
or patience enough, to read such a long Pamphlet, of private or little use.
Such altercations as these, are to you, I believe, as they are to me, a sort of
folly; but the Aggressor must answer for that, who makes the trouble
inavoidable to the Defendant. And it is an unpleasant exercise: a kind of
Wild-goosechase; where he that leads must be followed, through all his
extravagances.

The Author of this Defense must pardon me, if I have less apprehensions both
of his judgment and temper, than I had before. For, as he is too verbose and
long-winded ever to make a close reasoner: So it was unexpected to me to find
his style so captious and angry, as it is in this last paper. And the same
strain continuing to the end, I was sorry to see that his blood had been kept
upon the fret, for so many months together, as the Pamphlet was a-making.

He might have made his work much shorter, without any loss to the Sense. If he
had left out his popular enlargements, juvenile excursions, stories and strains
of Country-Rhetorick, (whereof we shall give you some instances hereafter) his
Book would have been reduced to half the compass. And if from that reduced
half; you take away again trifling altercations and pedantick repartees, the
remainder would fall into the compass of a few pages. For my part, I am always
apt to suspect a man that makes me a long answer: for the precise point to be
spoken to, in a multitude of words is easily lost: and words are often
multiplied for that very purpose.

However if his humor be verbose, it might have been, at least, more easy and
inoffensive: there having been no provocation given him in that kind. But let
us guess, if you please, as well as we can, what it was in the late Answer,
that so much discomposed the Excepter and altered his style. Either it must be
the words and language of that Answer: or the Sense of it, without respect to
the Language. As to the Words, it is true, he gives some instances of
expressions offensive to him; yet they are but three or four, and those
methinks, P. 31.
not very high: though he calls them (...) of passion; they are these indiscreet,
rude, injudicious, and uncharitable. These characters, it seems, are applied to
the Excepter, in some part of the answer, upon occasion offered. And whether
those occasions were just or no, I dare appeal to your judgment. As to the
word Rude, which seems the most harsh, I had said indeed, that he was rude to
Anaxagoras: and so he was, not to allow him to be a competent witness in matter
of fact, whom all Antiquity, sacred and profane, has represented to us as one
of the greatest men amongst the ancients. I had also said in another place,
that, a rude, and injudicious defense of Scripture by railing and ill language,
is the true way to lessen and disparage it. This I still justify as true, and
if he apply it to himself, much good may it do him. I do not remember that it
is any where said that he was rude to the Theorist; if it be, it is possibly
upon occasion of his charging him with Blasphemy, horrid blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, for saying, the Earth was dissolved at the Deluge. And I appeal to
any man, whether this is not an uncharitable, and a rude charge. If a man had
cursed God, or called our Savior an Impostor, what could he have been charged
with more, than Blasphemy, horrid blasphemy? And if the same things be charged
upon a man, for saying, the Earth was dissolved at the Deluge, either all
crimes and errors must be equal, or the change must be rude. But however it
must be rude in the opinion of the Theorist, who thinks this neither crime nor
error.

What says the Defense of the Exceptions to this? p. 1^*
It makes use of distinctions for mitigation of the censure: and says, it will
indirectly, consequentially, or reductively, be of blasphemous importance. Here
blasphemy is changed into blasphemous importance, and horrid blasphemy into
consequential, etc. But taking all these mitigations, it seems however,
according to his Theology, all errors in Religion are blasphemy, or of
blasphemous importance. For all errors in Religion must be against Scripture
one way or other: at least consequentially, indirectly, or reductively: and all
that are so, according to the doctrine of this Author, must be blasphemy or of
blasphemous importance. This is crude Divinity, and the Answer had reason to
subjoyn what we cited before, That, a rude and injudicious defense of
Scripture, is the true way to lessen and disparage it.

Thus much for rude and uncharitable: as for the other two words, indiscreet
and injudicious, I cannot easily be induced to make any apology for them. On
the contrary, I Am afraid, I shall have occasion to repeat these characters
again, especially the latter of them, in the perusal of this Pamphlet. However
they do not look like brats of passion, as he calls them: but rather as cool
and quiet judgments, made upon reasons and premises. I had forgot one
expression more. The answer, it seems, somewhere calls the Excepter a Dabbler
in Philosophy, which he takes ill. But that he is a dabbler, both in Philosophy
and Astronomy, I believe will evidently appear upon this second examination of
the same passages upon which that Character was grounded. We will therefore
leave that to the trial, when we come to those passages again, in the following
discourse.

These, Sir, as far as I remember, are the words and expressions which he has
taken notice of, as offensive to him, and effects of passion. But, methinks,
these cannot be of force sufficient to put him so much out of humor, and
change his style so much, as we find it to be in this last Pamphlet. And
therefore I am inclinable to believe, that it is the sense rather, than the
words or language of the Answer, that has had this effect upon him: and that
some unhappy passages, that have exposed his mistakes, were the true causes of
these resentments. Such passages I will guess at, as well as I can, and note
them to you as they occur to my memory.

But give me leave first, upon this occasion of his new way of writing, to
distinguish and mind you of three sorts of arguing, which you may call,
Reasoning, wrangling, and scolding. In fair reasoning, regard is had to Truth
only, not to Victory: let it fall on whether side it will. But in wrangling and
scolding, it is victory that is pursued and aimed at in the first place, with
little regard to truth. And if the contention be managed in civil terms, it is
but wrangling: if in uncivil, it is scolding. I will not so far anticipate your
judgment as to rank this Arguer in any of the three orders: if you have
patience to read over his Pamphlet, you will best see how and where to set him
in his proper place.

We now proceed to those passages in the answer, which probably have most
exasperated the Author of the Exceptions and the Defense. Exe. p. 77. etc.
In his Exceptions he had said, The Moon being present, or in her present place
in the Firmament, at the time of the Chaos, she would certainly trouble and
discompose it, as she does now the waters of the Sea: and, by that means,
hinder the formation of the Earth. To this we answered, that the Moon that was
made the 4th. day, could not hinder the formation of the Earth, which was made
the 3d. day. This was a plain intelligible answer: and at the same time
discovered such a manifest blunder in the objection, as could not but give an
uneasy thought to him that made it.

However we must not deny, but that he makes some attempt to shift it off in
his Reply: Def. p. 12.
For he says, the Earth formed the 3d. day, was Moses's Earth, which the
Excepter contends for: but the Earth he disputes against, is the Theorist's,
which could not be formed the 3d. day. He should have added, and therefore
would be hindered by the Moon: otherwise this takes off nothing. And now the
question comes to a clear state: for when the Excepter says, the Moon would
have hindered the formation of the Earth, either he speaks upon Moses's
hypothesis, or upon the Theorist's hypothesis. Not upon the Theorist's
Hypothesis, Ex^. p. 77, 78.
for the Theorist does not suppose the Moon present then. And if he speaks upon
Moses's Hypothesis, Def. p. 73. lin. 12, 13.
the Moon that was made the 4th. day, must have hindered the formation of the
Earth the 3d. day. So that the objection is a blunder upon either Hypothesis.

Furthermore, whereas he suggests that the Answerer makes use of Moses's
hypothesis to confute his adversary, but does not follow it himself: It Is so
far true, that the Theorist never said that Moses's six-days Creation was to be
understood literally, but however it is justly urged against those that
understand it literally, and they must not contradict that interpretation which
they own and defend.

So much for the Moon, and this first passage, which I suppose was troublesome
to our Author. But he makes the same blunder, in another place, as to the Sun.
Both the Luminaries, it seems, stood in his way. In the 10th. Chapter of his
Exceptions, he gives us a new Hypothesis about the Origin of Mountains: which,
in short, is this, that they were drawn or sucked out of the Earth by the
influence and instrumentality of the Sun. Whereas the Sun was not made,
according to Moses, till the 4th. day, and the Earth was formed the 3d. day.
It Is an unhappy thing to split twice upon the same rock, and upon a rock so
visible. He that can but reckon to four, can tell whether the 3d. day, or 4th.
day, came sooner.

To cure this Hypothesis about the Origin of Mountains, P. 97, 98, 99* 100, 101*
he takes great pains in his Defense, and attempts to do it chiefly by help of
a distinction: dividing Mountains into Maritime and Inland. Now it is true, says
he, These maritime Mountains, and such as were made with the hollow of the Sea,
must rise when that was sunk or deprest: namely, the 3d. day. Yet Inland ones,
he says, might be raised some earlier, and some later: and by the influence of
the Sun. This is a weak and vain attempt to defend his notion; for, besides
that this distinction of Maritime and Inland Mountains, as arising from
different causes, and at different times, is without any ground, either in
Scripture or reason: if their different origin was admitted, the Sun's
extracting these Inland Mountains out of the Earth, would still be absurd and
incongruous upon other accounts.

Scripture, I say, makes no such distinction of Mountains, made at different
times and from different causes. This is plain, seeing Moses does not mention
Mountains at all in his six-days Creation: nor any where else, till the Deluge.
What authority have we then to make this distinction: or to suppose that all
the great Mountains of the Earth were not made together? Besides, what length
of time would you require, for the production of these Inland Mountains? were
they not all made within the six-days Creation? hear what Moses says at the end
of the 6th. day. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, Genesis c. 21.
and all the host of them. And on the 7th. day, God ended his work which he had
made. Now if the Excepter say, that the Mountains were all made within these
six-days, we will not stand with him for a day or two: for that would make
little difference as to the action of the Sun. But if he will not confine their
production to Moses's six days, how does he keep to the Mosaical Hypothesis? or
how shall we know where he will stop, in his own way? for if they were not made
within the six days, for any thing he knows, they might not be made till the
Deluge; seeing Scripture no where mentions Mountains before the Flood.

And as Scripture makes no distinction of Maritime and Inland Mountains, so
neither has this distinction any foundation in Nature or Reason. For there is
no apparent or discernible difference betwixt Maritime and Inland Mountains,
nor any reason why they should be thought to proceed from different causes, or
to be raised at different times. The Maritime Mountains are as rocky, as
ruderous, and as irregular and various in their shape and posture, as the
Inland Mountains. They have no distinctive characters, nor any different
properties, internal or external: in their matter, form, or composition: that
can give us any ground to believe, that they came from a different Original. So
that this distinction is merely precarious, neither founded in Scripture nor
reason: but made for the nonce to serve a turn.

Besides, what bounds will you give to these Maritime Mountains? are they
distinguished from Inland Mountains barely by their distance from the Sea, or by
some other Character? If barely by distance, tell us then how far from the Sea
do the Maritime Mountains reach, and where do the Inland begin, and how shall
we know the Terminalis Lapis? Especially in a continued chain of Mountains,
that reach from the Sea many hundreds of miles Inland: as the Alps from the
Ocean to Pontus Euxinus, Def. p. ^^^.
and Taurus, as he says, fifteen hundred miles in length, from the Chinese
Ocean to the Sea of Pamphylia. In such an uninterrupted Ridge of Mountains,
where do the Land-Mountains end, and the Sea-mountains begin? Or what mark is
there, whereby we may know that they are not all of the same race, or do not
all spring from the same original? Such obvious enquiries as these, show
sufficiently, that the distinction is merely arbitrary and fictitious.

But suppose this distinction was admitted, and the Maritime Mountains made the
3d. day, but Inland Mountains I know not when: the great difficulty still
remains, How the Sun reared up these Inland Mountains afterward. Or if his
power be sufficient for such effects, why have we not Mountains made still to
this day? seeing our Mountain-maker the Sun is still in the Firmament, and
seems to be as busy at work, as ever. The Defender has made some answer to
this question, Def. p. 99.
in these words, The question is put, why have we no Mountains made now? It
might as well have been asked, says he, why does not the fire make a dough-bak'd
loaf swell and ^uff up? And, he says, this answer must be satisfactory to the
question propounded. It must be, that is, for want of a better: for otherwise
this Dowe-comparison is unsatisfactory upon many accounts. First, there was no
ferment in the Earth, as in this Dowe-cake: at least it is not proved, or made
appear, that there was any. Nay, in the Exceptions, when this Hypothesis was
proposed, there was no mention at all made of any ferment or leaven in the
Earth: but the effect was wholly imputed to Vapors and the Sun. But to supply
their defects, he now ventures to add the word fermentive, as he calls it. Ibid
lin. 19.
A fermentive, flatulent principle, which heaved up the Earth, as Leaven does
Dowe. But, besides, that this is a mere groundless and gross Postulatum, to
suppose any such leaven in the Earth; if there had been such a principle, it
would have swollen the whole mass uniformly, heaved up the exterior region of the
Earth every where, and so not made Mountains, but a swollen bloated Globe.

This Sir, is a 2d. passage, which I thought might make the Defender uneasy.
We proceed now to a 3d. and 4th. in his Geography and Astronomy. In the 14th.
P. 289.
Chapter of his Exceptions, speaking of the change of the situation of the
Earth, from a right posture to an oblique, he says, according to the Theory,
the Ecliptic in the Primitive Earth, was its Equinoctical now. This, he is
told by the Answer, is a great mistake; namely, to think that the Earth, when
it changed its situation, changed its poles and circles. What is now replied to
this? He speaks against a change, says the Defense, in the poles and circles of
the Earth; A needless trouble, and occasioned by his own oversight. For had he
but looked into the Errata's, he might have seen there, that these parentheses,
upon which he grounded what he says, should have been left out. So this is
acknowledged an Erratum, it seems, but an erratum Typographicum; not in the
sense, but only in the parentheses, which, he says, should have been left out.
Let us then lay aside the Parentheses, and the sentence stands thus, For under
the Ecliptic, which in the primitive situation of the Earth, according to the
Theory, was its Equinoctial: and divided the Globe into two Hemispheres, as the
Equator does now. The dry ground, etc. How does this alter or mend the sense?
It is not still as plainly affirmed, as before, that, according to the Theory,
the Ecliptic in the Primitive Earth was its Equinoctial? And the same thing is
supposed throughout all this Paragraph. Ex^. p. 289, 290.
And if he will own the truth, and give things their proper name* it is
downright ignorance or a gross mistake in the doctrine of the Sphere, which he
would first father upon the Theory, and then upon the parentheses.

And this leads me to a 4th. passage, much-what of the same nature, where he
would have the Earth to have been translated out of the Equator into the
Ecliptic, and to have changed the line of its motion about the Sun, when it
changed its situation. His words are these, Ex^. p. 158, 159.
So that in her annual motion about the Sun, she, namely, the Earth before her
change of situation, was carried directly under the Equinoctial. This is his
mistake. The Earth moved in the Ecliptic, both before and after her change of
situation: for the change was not made in the Circle of her motion about the
Sun, but in her posture or inclination in the same Circle. Whereas he supposes
that the shifted both posture, Ibid. p. 159.
and also her circuit about the Sun, as his words are in the next paragraph.
But we shall have occasion to reflect upon this again in its proper place. We
proceed now to another Astronomical mistake.

A 5th. passage, which probably might disquiet him, is his false argumentation
at the end of the 8th. chap. concerning Days and Months. Exc. p. 187.
He says there, if the natural days were longer toward the Flood, than at
first: (which no body however affirms) fewer than thirty would have made a
month: whereas the duration of the Flood is computed by months consisting of
thirty days a-piece: therefore, says he, they were no longer than ordinary.
This argumentation the Answer told him, was a mere paralogism, or a mere
blunder. For 30 days are 30 days, whether they are longer or shorter: and
Scripture does not determine the length of the days. There are several pages
spent in the Defense, to get off this blunder: P. 78, 79, 80, 81.
Let Us here how he begins: Though Scripture does not limit or account for the
length of days expressly, yet it does it implicitly, and withal very plainly and
intelligibly. This is denied, and if he make this out, that Scripture does very
plainly and intelligibly determine the length of days at the Deluge, and makes
them equal with ours at present, then, I acknowledge, he has removed the
blunder: otherwise it stands the same, unmoved and unmended. Now observe how he
makes this out; For, says he, Scripture gives us to understand, that days
before the Flood were of the same length that they are of now, BY INFORMING US,
that months and years, which were of the same length then, that they are of at
present, were made up of the same number of days. Here the blunder is still
continued, or, at best, it is but transferred from days to months, or from
months to years. He says, Scripture informs us that months and years were of
the same length then, that they are of at present. If he mean by the same
length, the same number of days, he relapses into the old blunder, and we still
require the length of those days. But if Scripture informs us that the months
and years at the Flood, were of the same length that they are of now, according
to any absolute and known measure, distinct from the number of days, then the
blunder is saved. Let Us see therefore by whether of these two ways he proves it
in the next words, which are these, For how could there be just 12 months in
the year, at the time of the Deluge: and 30 days in each of those months, if
days then had not consisted, as they do now, of 24 hours a piece. We allow a
day might then consist of 24 hours, if the distinction of hours was so ancient.
But what then, the question returns concerning the length of those hours as it
was before concerning the length of the days: and this is either idem per idem,
or the same error in another instance. If you put but hours in the place of
days, the words of the Answer have still the same force: Twenty four hours were
to go to a day, whether the hours were longer or shorter: and Scripture does
not determine the length of the hours. This, you see, is still the same case,
and the same paralogism hangs upon both instances.

But he goes on still in this false tract, in these words: And as Providence
has so ordered nature, that days (that depend upon its diurnal motion) should
be measured by circumgyrations of the Earth. -- So it has taken care that each
of these circumrotations should be performed in 24 hours: and consequently that
every day should be just so long that 30 of them (in way of round reckoning)
might complete a month. Admit all this, that 30 days complete a month. Still if
Scripture has not determined the length of those days, nor the slowness or
swiftness of the circumgyrations that make them, it has not determined to us
the length of those months, nor of the years that depend upon them. This one
would take to be very intelligible: yet he goes on still in the same maze,
thus, But now had the circumgyrations of the Earth grown more slow toward the
Deluge (by such causes as the Excepter suggested) so as every day had consisted
of 30 hours, etc. But how so, I pray? This is a wild step: why 30 hours? where
does Scripture say so: or where does the Theorist say so? We say the Day
consisted then as now of 24 hours, whether the hours were longer or shorter:
and that Scripture has not determined the length of those hours, nor
consequently of those days, nor consequently of those months, nor consequently
of those years. So, after all this a-do, we are just where we were at first,
namely, That Scripture not having determined the absolute length of any one,
you cannot by that determine the length of any other. And by his shifting and
multiplying instances, he does but absurda absurdis accumulare, ne perpluant.

We offered before, in our Answer, to give the Excepter some light into his
mistake: by distinguishing in these things, what is absolute from what is
relative: the former whereof, cannot, under these or any such like
circumstances, be determined by the latter. For instance; A man has ten
children, and he will not say absolutely and determinately what portion he will
give with any one of them: but he says, I will give my eldest child a tenth
part more than my 2d, and my second a 9th. part more than my 3d, and my third
an 8th. part more than my 4th; and so downwards in proportion, to the youngest.
Not telling you, in any absolute sum, what money he will give the youngest, or
any other: you cannot by this tell what portion the man will give with any of
his children. I leave you to apply this, and proceed to a nearer instance, by
comparing the measures of Time and Longitude. If you know how many inches make
a foot, how many feet a pace, how many paces a mile, etc. you cannot by these
numbers determine the absolute quantity of any one of the foresaid measures,
but only their relative quantity as to one another. So if Scripture had
determined, of how many hours a Day consisted: of how many days a Month: of how
many months a Year: you could not by this alone determine the absolute duration
or quantity of any one of these, nor whether they were longer or shorter than
our present hours, days, months, or years. And therefore, I say still, as I
said at first, 30 days are 30 days, whether they are longer or shorter: and 30
circumgyrations of the Earth, are 30, whether they be slower or swifter. And
that no Scripture Proof can be made from this, either directly or
consequentially, that the days before the Flood, were or were not, longer than
they are at present. But we have been too long upon this head.

We proceed now from his Astronomy to his Philosophy. P. 38.
'Twas observed in the Answer, that the Excepter in the beginning of the 9th.
Chap. supposed Terrestrial Bodies to have a nitency inwards, or downwards
toward the Center. This we noted as a false principle in Philosophy: and to
rectify his mistake, he now replies, That he understood that expression only
of self-central and quiescent Bodies. Def. p. 82.
Whereas in truth, the question he was speaking to, was about a fluid Body
turning upon its Axis. But however let us admit his new sense, his principle,
I Am afraid, will still need rectification; namely, he affirms now, that
Quiescent Earthly Bodies are impregnated with a nitency inward, or downward
toward the Center. I deny also this reformed principle; if Bodies be turned
round, they have a nitency upwards, or from the Center of their motion. If they
be not turned round, nor moved, but quiescent, they have no nitency at all,
neither upwards nor downwards: but are indifferent to all lines of motion,
according as an external impulse shall carry them, this way or that way. So
that his impregnation with a nitency downwards, is an occult and fictitious
quality, which is not in the nature of Bodies, whether in motion or in rest.
The truth is, The Author of the Exceptions makes a great flutter about the
Cartesian Philosophy, and the Copernican Systeme, but the frequent mistakes he
commits in both, give a just suspicion that he understands neither.

Lastly, we come to the grand discovery of a Fifteen-Cubit-Deluge, which, it
may be, was as uneasy to him upon second thoughts, as any of the rest: at
least one would guess so, by the changes he has made in his Hypothesis. For he
has now, in this Defense, P. 181, 182.
reduced the Deluge to a destruction of the world by Famine, rather than by
drowning. I do not remember in Scripture any mention made of Famine in that
great judgment of water brought upon mankind, but he thinks he has found out
something that favors his opinion: namely, that a good part of mankind at the
Deluge, were not drowned, but starved for want of victuals. And the argument is
this, because in the story of the Deluge, men are not said to be drowned, but
to perish, die or be destroyed. But are they said any where in the story of the
Deluge, to have been famished? Genesis 6. 17.
And when God says to Noah, I will bring a slood of waters upon the Earth, to
destroy all flesh, Does it not plainly signify, that that destruction should
be by drowning? But however let us hear our Author: when he had been making use
of this new Hypothesis of starving, to take off some arguments urged against
his fifteen-cubit Deluge (particularly, that it would not be sufficient to
destroy all mankind) he adds these words by way of proof. Def. p. 182.
And methinks there is one thing which seems to insinuate, that a good part of
the Animal world might perhaps come to an end thus: by being driven to such
streights by the over flowing waters, as to be FAMISHT or STARVED to death. The
thing is this, in the story of the Deluge, it is no where said of men and
living creatures, that they were drowned, but they dyed, or were destroyed.
Those that are drowned are destroyed, I imagine, as well as those that are
starved: so this proves nothing. But that the destruction here spoken of, was
by drowning, seems plain enough, both from God's words to Noah before the
Flood, and by his words after the Flood, when he makes his Covenant with Noah*
in this manner: Genesis 9. ^^
I will establish my Covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any
more by the waters of a Flood. Now to be cut off, or destroyed by the waters of
a Flood, is, methinks, to be drowned. And I take all flesh to comprehend the
Animal World, or at least, all mankind. Accordingly our Savior says, Matt. 24.
39. in Noah's time, the flood came, and took them all away: namely, all mankind.

This is one Expedient our Author has found out, to help to bear off the
inconveniences that attend his fifteen-cubit Deluge: namely, by converting a
good part of it into a Famine. But he has another Expedient to join to this,
by increasing the Waters: and that is done, by making the Common Surface of the
Earth, or the highest parts of it, as he calls them, to signify ambiguously,
Def. 165. and 180.
or any height that pleases him; and consequently fifteen Cubits above that,
signifies also what height he thinks fit. But in reality, there is no surface
common to the Earth, but either the exterior surface, whether it be high or
low: or the ordinary level of the Earth, as it is a Globe or unequal Body. If by
his common surface he mean the exterior surface, that takes in Mountains as
well as Low-lands, or any other superficial parts of the Earth. And therefore
if the Deluge was fifteen Cubits above this common surface, it was fifteen
Cubits above the highest Mountains, as we say it was. But if by the common
surface he mean the common level of the Earth, as it is a Globular or unequal
Body, then we gave it a right name when we called it the ordinary level of the
Earth: namely, that level or surface that lies in an equal convexity with the
surface of the Sea. And his fifteen Cubits of water from that level, would
never drown the World. Lastly, If by the common surface of the Earth, he
understand a 3d. surface, different from both these, he must define it, and
define the height of it: that we may know how far this fifteen-cubit Deluge
rise, from some known basis. One known basis is the surface of the Sea, and
that surface of the Land that lies in an equal convexity with it: tell us then
if the waters of the Deluge were but fifteen Cubits higher than the surface of
the Sea, that we may know their height by some certain and determinate measure,
and upon that examine the Hypothesis. But to tell us they were fifteen Cubits
above, not the Mountains or the Hills, but the Highlands, or the highest parts
of the common surface of the Earth, and not to tell us the height of these
highest parts from any known basis: nor how they are distinguished from Hills
and Mountains, which incur our senses, and are the measures given us by Moses:
This, I say, is but to cover his Hypothesis with ambiguities, when he had made
it without grounds: and to leave room to set his Water-mark higher or lower, as
he should see occasion or necessity. And of this indeed we have an instance in
this land Pamphlet, for he has raised his Water-mark there, more than an
hundred Cubits higher than it was before. In his Exceptions he said, P. 300.
not that the waters were no where higher than just fifteen Cubits, above the
ground, they might in most places be thirty, forty, or fifty Cubits higher. But
in his Defense he says, P. 180.
the Waters might be an hundred or two hundred Cubits higher, than the general
ordinary plain of the Earth. Now what security have we, but that in the next
Pamphlet, they may be 500 or a 1000 Cubits higher than the ordinary surface of
the Earth.

This is his 2d. Expedient, raising his Water-mark indefinitely. But if these
two methods be not sufficient to destroy Mankind, and the animate World, he
has yet a third, which cannot fail: and that is, Destroying them by Evil
Angels. Def. p. 90.
Flectere si nequeo. This is his last refuge; to which purpose he has these
words, When Heaven was pleased to give Satan leave, he caused the fire to
consume Job's sheep, and caused the wind to destroy his Children. And how
easily could these spirits, that are ministers of God's vengeance, have made
the waters of the Flood fatal to those Creatures that might have escaped them,
if any could have done it? As suppose an Eagle, or a Faulcon: The Devil and his
crew caught them all, and held their moses under water. However, methinks, this
is not fair play, to deny the Theorist the liberty to make use of the ministry
of good Angels, when he himself makes use of evil Spirits.

These, Sir, and such like passages, where the notions of the Excepter have
been exposed, were the causes, I imagine, of his angry reply. Some Creatures,
you know, are more fierce after they are wounded: and some upon a gentle chase
will fly from you, but if you press them and put them to extremities, they turn
and fly in your face. I see by our Author's example, how easily, in these
personal altercations, reasoning degenerates into wrangling, and wrangling into
scolding However, if I may judge from these two Hypotheses which he has made,
about the rise of Mountains, and a fifteen-cubit Deluge, of all trades I should
never advise him to turn Hypothesis-maker. It does not seem at all to lie to
his hand, and things never thrive that are undertaken, Diis iratis, genioque
sinistro.

But as we have given you some account of this Author's Philosophical notions,
so it may be you will expect that we should entertain you with some pieces of
his wit and eloquence. The truth is, he seems to delight and value himself upon
a certain kind of Country-wit and popular eloquence, and I will not grudge you
the pleasure of enjoying them both, in such instances as I remember. Speaking
in contempt of the Theory and the Answer, (which is one great subject of his
wit) he expresses himself thus: But if arguments be so weak, Def. p. 48.
that they will fall with a fillip, why should greater force be used to beat
them down? To draw a Rapier to stab a Fly; or to charge a Pistol to kill a
Spider; I think would be preposterous. I think so too, in this we are agreed. In
another place, being angry with the Theorist, that he would not acknowledge his
errors to him, he has these words, It Is unlucky for one to run his head
against a post: P. 108.
But when he has done, if he will say he did not do it, and stand in and
defend what he says: it is a sign he is as senceless as he was unfortunate: and
is fitter to be pitied than confuted. This wit, it may be, you will say, is
downright clownery. The truth is, when I observed, in reading his Pamphlet, the
courseness of his repartees, and of that sort of wit wherein he deals most and
pleases himself, it often raised in my mind, whether I would or no, the Idea of
a Pedant: Of one that had seen little of the World, and thought himself much
wittier and wiser than others would take him to be. I will give you but one
Instance more of his rustical wit: Telling the Theorist of an itch of writing:
P. 214.
Methinks, says he, he might have laid that prurient humor, by scratching
himself with the briars of a more innocent controversy: or by SCRVBBING
SOVNDLY against something else than the holy Scripture. He speaks very
sensibly, as if he understood the disease, and the way of dealing with it. But
I think Holy Scripture does not come in well upon that occasion.

All this is nothing, Sir, in comparison of his popular eloquence. See with
what alacrity he runs it off hand, in a similitude betwixt Adam and a Lord
Lieutenant of a County. P. 113.
When the King makes a Gentleman Lord Lieutenant of a County, by virtue of his
Commission is he presently the strongest man that is in it? Does it enable him
to encounter whole Regiments of Soldiers in his single person? Does it empower
him to carry a Cannon upon his neck? Or when the great Gun is fired off, to
catch the Bullet as it flies, and put it up in his Pocket? So when God gave
Adam dominion over the Fowls, did he mean that he should dive like a Duck, or
soar like a Falcon? that he should swim as naturally as the Swan, and hunt the
Kite, or Hobby, as Boys do the Wren? Did he mean that he should hang up
Ostritches in a Cage, as people do Linnets: or fetch down the Eagles to feed
with his Pullen, and make them perch with his Chickens in the Henroost?

So much for the Fowls, now for the Fish. When God gave Adam dominion over the
Sea, (...)
was he to be able to dwell at the bottom, or to walk on the top of it? To
drain it as a Ditch, or to take all its Fry at once in a Dragnet? Was he to
snare the Shark, as we do young Pickarels: or to bridle the Seahorse, and ride
him for a Pad? Or to put a slip upon the Crocodile's neck, and play with him as
with a Dog? etc. Sir, I leave it to you, as a more competent Judge, to set a
just value upon his gifts and elocution. For my part, to speak freely, Dull
sense, in a fantastic style, is to me doubly nauseous.

But least I should cloy you with these lushious harangues, I will give you but
one more: and it is a miscellany of several pieces of Wit together. Should
twenty Mariners, Def. p. ^.
says he, confidently affirm, that they sailed in a Ship from Dover to Calis,
by a brisk gale out of a pair of Bellows: Or if forty Engineers should
positively swear, that the Powder-mill near London, was late blown up, by a
Mine then sprung at Great Waradin in Hungary, must they not be grievously
perjured persons? -- Or if the Historian that writes the Peloponnesian war, had
told that the Soldiers who fell in it, fought only with Sun beams, and single
Currants which grew thereabouts, and that hundreds and thousands were stabbed
with the one, and knocked on the head with the other: who would believe that
ever there were such weapons in that war; that ever there was such a fatal war
in that Country? even so, etc. These, Sir, are flights and reaches of his Pen,
which I dare not censure, but leave them to your judgment.

Thus much is to give you a taste only of his wit and eloquence: and if you like
it, you may find more of the same strain, here and there, in his writings. I
have only one thing to mind him of, That he was desired by the Theorist to
write in Latin (if he was a Scholar) as being more proper for a subject of this
nature. Eng. Theo. p. 287.
If he had owned and followed that character, I Am apt to think it would have
prevented a great many impertinencies: His tongue probably would not have been
so flippant in popular excursions and declamations, as we now find it. Neither
is this any great presumption or rashness of judgment, if we may guess at his
skill in that Language by his translations, here and there. Cum plurima
religione is rendered with the principles of their Religion. Excep. p. 293.
And if he say he followed Sir W. Rawleigh in his translation, he that follows
a bad translator without correction or notice, is supposed to know no better
himself. And this will appear the more probable, if we consider another of his
translations, in this present work. Rei personam he translates the
Representation of the things: instead of the person of the Guilty: or the
person of him that is Reus not Actor. And in this, I dare say, he was seduced
by no example. But least we should be thought to misrepresent him, take his own
words, Def. p. 168, 169.
such as they are. Yea, though it was spoken never so positively, it was but to
set forth REI PERSONAM: to make the more full and lively representation of the
supposed thing. Here, you see, he has made a double blunder, first, in
jumbling together person and thing: then, if they could be jumbled together,
rei persona would not signify the full and lively representation of the thing,
but rather a disguise or personated representation of the thing. However I am
satisfied from these instances, that he had good reason, notwithstanding the
caution or desire of the Theorist to the contrary, to write his Books in his
Mother's tongue.

Thus we have done with the first part: which was to mark out such passages, as
we thought might probably have inflamed the Authors style in this reply. When
men are resolved not to own their faults, you know there is nothing more
uneasy and vexatious to them, than to see them plainly discovered and exposed.
We must now give you some account of the contents of his Chapters, so far as
they relate to our subject. Chap. 1st. Nothing. Chap. 2d. is against
extraordinary providence: or that the Theorist should not be permitted to have
recourse to it upon any occasion. This recourse to extraordinary providence
being frequently objected in other places, and of use to be distinctly
understood: we will speak of it apart at the latter end of the Letter. Chap. 3.
is about the Moon's hindering the formation of the Earth before she was formed
her self, or in our neighborhood; as we have noted before. Another thing in
this Chap. is his urging, Oily or Oleagineous particles not to have been in the
Chaos, but made since. I Will give a short answer to this: Either there was or
was not, Oleagineous matter in the new-made Earth, (I mean in its superficial
region.) when it came first out of a Chaos? If there was, there was also in the
Chaos, out of which that Earth was immediately made. And if there was no
oleagineous matter in the new-made Earth, how came the soil to be so fertile,
so fat, so unctuous? I say not only fertile, but particularly fat and unctuous:
for he uses these very words frequently in the description of that soil. Exc.
p. 211.
And all fat and unctuous liquors are oleagineous: Def. p. 69, and p. 98.
and accordingly we have used those words promiscuously, in the description of
that Region: ( Eng. Theor. Chap. 5.) understanding only such unctuous liquors
as are lighter than water and swim above it, and consequently would stop and
entangle the terrestrial particles in their fall or descent. And seeing such
unctuous and oleagineous particles were in the new-made Earth, they must
certainly have been in the matter out of which it was immediately formed,
namely, in the Chaos. All the rest of this Chapter we are willing to leave in
its full force: apprehending the Theory, or the Answer, to be in no danger from
such argumentations or reflections.

The 4th. Chap. is very short and has nothing argumentative The 5th. Chap. is
concerning the cold in the circumpolar parts, which was spoken to in the Answer
sufficiently, and we stand to that. What is added about extraordinary
providence, will be treated of in its proper place. The 6th. Chap. is also
short, against this particular, that it is not safe to argue upon suppositions
actually false. And I think there needs no more to prove it, than what was said
in the Answer. Chap. 7. is chiefly about texts of Scripture, concerning which I
see no occasion of saying any more than what is said in the Review of the
Theory. He says ( p. 49.) that the Theorist catches himself in a trap, by
allowing that Ps. 33. 7. is to be understood of the ordinary posture of the
waters, and yet applying it to their extraordinary posture under the vault of
the Earth. But that was not an extraordinary posture according to the Theorist,
but their natural posture in the first Earth. Yet I allow the expression might
have been better thus, in a level or spherical convexity, as the Earth. He
interprets (...) ( p. 53.) which we render the Garden of the Lord, not to be
Paradise, but any pleasant Garden; Genesis 13. 10.
yet gives us no authority, either of ancient Commentator or Version, for this
novel and paradoxical interpretation. The Septuagint render it (...). The
Vulgate, Paradisus Domini: and all ancient Versions that I have seen render it
to the same sense. Does he expect then that his single word and authority,
should countervail all the ancient Translators and Interpreters? To the last
place alleged by the Theorist, Prove. 8. 28. he says the Answerer charges him
unjustly that he understands by that word (...) no more than the rotundity or
spherical figure of the Abyss. Which, he says, is a point of nonsense. I did
not think the charge had been so high however, seeing some Interpreters
understand it so. But if he understand by (...) the banks or shores of the Sea,
then he should have told us how those banks or shores are (...) super faciem
Abyssi, as it is in the Text.

Page 59. He says the Excepter does not misrepresent the Theorist when he makes
him to affirm the construction of the First Earth to have been merely
mechanical; and he cites to this purpose two places, which only prove, that the
Theorist made use of no other causes, nor see any defect in them, but never
affirmed that these were the only causes. You may see his words to this purpose
expressly, Engl. Theor. p. 65. whereof the Excepter was minded in the Answer, P.
60.
p. 3. In the last Paragraph of this Chapter, if he affirms any thing, he will
have the Pillars of the Earth to be understood literally. Where then, pray, do
these Pillars stand that bear up the Earth? or if they bear up the Earth, what
bears them up? what are their Pedestals, or their foundations? But he says
Hypotheses must not regulate Scripture, though in natural things, but be
regulated by it, and by the letter of it. I would gladly know then, how his
Hypothesis of the motion of the Earth, is regulated by Scripture, and by the
letter of it. And he unhappily gives an instance just contrary to himself,
namely, of the Anthropomorphites: for they regulate natural reason and
philosophy by the letter or literal sense of Scripture, and therein fall into a
gross error. Yet we must not call the Author injudicious, for fear of giving
offense.

The 8th. Chap. Ibid.
begins with the Earths being carried directly under the Equinoctial, before
its change of situation: without any manner of obliquity in her site, or
declination toward either of the Tropicks in HER COURSE. Here you see, when
the Earth changed its situation, it changed, according to his Astronomy, two
things: its site, and its course; its site upon its axis, and its course in the
heavens. And so he says again in the next paragraph, put the case the Earth
shift her posture, and also her CIRCVIT about the Sun, in which she persisted
till the Deluge. Here is plainly the same notion repeated: that the Earth
changed not only its site, but also its road or course about the Sun. And in
consequence of this he supposes its course formerly to have been under the
Equinoctial, and now under the Ecliptic: it being translated out of the one
into the other, at its change. Yet he seems now to be sensible of the absurdity
of this doctrine, and therefore will not own it to have been his sense: P. 61.
and as an argument that he meant otherwise, he alleges, that he declared
before, that by the Earths ritght situation to the Sun, is meant that the axis
of the Earth was always kept in a parallelism to that of the Ecliptic. But
what is this to the purpose? This speaks only of the site of the Earth, whereas
his error was in supposing its course or annual orbit about the Sun, as well
as its site upon its own axis, to have been different, and changed at the
Deluge: as his words already produced against him, plainly testify.

What follows in this Chapter is concerning the perpetual Equinox. And as to
the reasoning part of what he says in defense of his Exceptions, we do not
grudge him the benefit of it, let it do him what service it can. And as to the
Historical part, he will not allow a witness to be a good witness as to matter
of fact, if he did not assign true causes of that matter of fact. To which I
only reply, though Tiverton Steeple was not the cause of Goodwin sands, as the
Kentish men thought, yet their testimony was so far good, That there were such
Sands, and such a Steeple. He also commits an error as to the nature of
Tradition. When a Tradition is to be made out, it is not expected that it
should be made appear that none were ignorant of that Tradition in former Ages:
or that all that mentioned it, understood the true grounds and extent of it:
but it is enough to show the plain footsteps of it in Antiquity, as a
Conclusion, though they did not know the reasons and premises upon which it
depended. For instance, The Conflagration of the world is a doctrine of
Antiquity, traditionally delivered from age to age: but the Causes and manner
of the Conflagration, they either did not know, or have not delivered to us. In
like manner, that the first age and state of the world was without change of
Seasons, or under a perpetual Equinox, of this we see many footsteps in
Antiquity, amongst the Jews, Christians, Heathens: Poets, Philosophers; but the
Theory of this perpetual Equinox, the causes and manner of it, we neither find,
nor can reasonably expect, from the Ancients. So much for the Equinox.

This Chapter, as it begun with an error, so it unhappily ends with a
paralogism: namely, that, because 30 days made a month at the Deluge, therefore
those days were neither longer nor shorter than ours are at present. Though we
have sufficiently exposed this before yet one thing more may be added, in
answer to his confident conclusion, in these words; But to talk, as the
Answerer does, that the Month should be lengthened by the Days being so, is a
fearful blunder indeed. For let the days (by slackening the Earth's diurnal
motion) have been never so long, yet (its annual motion continuing the same)
the Month must needs have kept its usual length: only fewer days would have
made it up. It Is not usual for a Man to persevere so confidently in the same
error; As if the intervals of time, hours, days, months, years, could not be
proportionably increast: so as to contain one another in the same proportion
they did before, and yet be every one increast as to absolute duration. Take a
Clock, for instance, that goes too slow: The circuit of the Dial-plate is 12.
hours, let these represent the 12* Signs in his Zodiac: and the hand to be the
Earth that goes thorough them all: and consequently the whole circuit of the
Dial-plate represents the Year* Suppose, as we said, this Clock to go too slow,
this will not hinder but still fifteen minutes make a quarter, in this Clock:
four quarters make an hour, and 12. hours the whole circuit of the Dial-plate.
But every one of these intervals will contain more time than it did before,
according to absolute duration, or according to the measure of another Clock
that does not go too slow. This is the very case which he cannot or will not
comprehend: but concludes thus in effect, that because the hour consists still
of four quarters in this Clock, therefore it is no longer than ordinary.

The 9th. Chapter also begins with a false notion* that Bodies quiescent (as he
has now altered the case) have a nitency downwards. Which mistake we rectified
before, if he please. Then he proceeds to the Oval figure of the Earth. And
many flourishes and harangues are made here to little purpose. For he goes upon
a false supposition, that the Waters of the Chaos were made Oval by the weight
or gravitation of the Air. A thing that never came into the words or thoughts
of the Theorist. Yet upon this supposition he runs into the deserts of
Bilebulgerid, Def. p. ^^ 86.
and the waters of Mare del Zur: Words that make a great noise, but to no
effect. If he had pleased he might have seen the Theorist made no use of the
weight of the Air upon this occasion, by the instance he gave of the pressure
of the Moon, and the flux of the waters by that pressure. Which is no more done
by the gravitation of the Air, than the Banks are pressed, in a swift current and
narrow chanel, by the gravitation of the water. But he says rarefied Air makes
less resistance than gross Air: and rarefied water in an Aeolipile, it may be,
he thinks presses with less force than unrarefied. Air possibly may be rarefied
to that degree as to lessen its resistance: but we speak of Air moderately
agitated, so as to be made only more brisk and active. Moreover he says, the
waters that lay under the Poles must have risen perpendicularly, and why might
they not, as well, have done so under the Equator? The waters that lay
naturally and originally under the Poles, did not rise at all: but the waters
became more deep there, by those that were thrust thither from the middle parts
of the Globe. Upon the whole I do not perceive that he has weakened any one of
the Propositions upon which the formation of an Oval Earth depended. Which were
these, First, that the tendency of the waters from the center of their motion,
would be greater and stronger in the Equinoctial parts, than in the Polar: or
in those parts where they moved in greater circles and consequently swifter,
than in those where they were moved in lesser circles and slower. Secondly,
Agitated Air has more force to repel what presses against it, than stagnant
Air: and that the Air was more agitated and rarefied under the Equinoctial
parts, than under the Poles. Thirdly, Waters hindered and repelled in their
primary tendency, take the easiest way they can to free themselves from that
force, so as to persevere in their motion. Lastly, to flow laterally upon a
Plain, or to ascend upon an inclined Plain, is easier than to rise
perpendicularly. These are the Propositions upon which that discourse depended,
and I do not find that he has disproved any one of them. And this, Sir, is a
short account of a long Chapter, impertinencies omitted.

Chap. 10. Is concerning the original and causes of Mountains, which the
Excepter unhappily imputes to the heat and influence of the Sun. Whether his
Hypothesis be effectually confuted, or not, I am very willing to stand to the
judgment of any unconcerned person, that will have the patience to compare the
Exceptions and the Answer, in this Chapter. Then as to his Historical
arguments, as he calls them, to prove there were Mountains before the Flood,
from Giants that saved themselves from the Flood upon Mount Sion: and Adam's
wandering several hundreds of years upon the Mountains of India; These, and such
like, which he brought to prove that there were Mountains before the Flood, he
now thinks fit to renounce, Def. p. 9^.
and says he had done so before by an anticipative sentence. But if they were
condemned before by an anticipative sentence, as fables and forgeries, why were
they stuffed into his Book, and used as Traditional evidence against the Theory?

Lastly, he contends in this Chapter for Iron and Irontools before the Flood,
and as early as the time of Cain^ because he built a City; which, he says,
could not be built without Iron and Iron-tools. To which it was Answered, Ans.
p. 49, 50.
that, if he fancied that City of Cain's, like Paris or London, he had reason
to believe that they had Irontools to make it. But suppose it was a number of
Cottages, made of branches of Trees, of Osiers, and Bulrushes: or, if you will,
of mud-walls, and a roof of straw, with a fence about it to keep out Beasts:
there would be no such necessity o^ Iron-tools. Consider, 'pray, how long the
world was without knowing the use of Iron, in several parts of it: as in the
Northern Countries and America: and yet they had Houses and Cities, after their
fashion. And to come nearer home, consider what Towns and Cities our Ancestros,
the Britains, had in Caesar's time: more than two thousand Years after the time
of Cain. Com. li. 5.
Oppidum Britanni vocant, cum Sylvam impeditam vallo atque folla munierant: quo
incursionis hostium vitandae causa, convenire consueverunt: Why might not
Henochia, Cain's City, be such a City as this?

And as to the Ark, which he also would make a proof that there were Iron and
Iron-tools before the Flood, Ibid.
'twas answered, that Scripture does not mention Iron or Iron-tools in building
of the Ark: but only Gopher wood and Pitch. Def. p. 103.
To which he replies, If Scriptures silence concerning things be a ground of
presumption that they were not, what then shall we think of an Oval and
unmountainous Earth, an enclosed Abyss, a Paradisiacal world, and the like:
which the Scripture makes no mention of. I cannot easily forbear calling this
an injudicious reflection, though I know he has been angry with that word, and
makes it a brat of passion. But I do assure him I call it so coolly and calmly.
When a thing is deduced by natural arguments and reason, the silence of
Scripture is enough. If he can prove the motion of the Earth by natural
arguments, and that Scripture is silent in that point, we desire no better
proof. Now in all those things which he mentions, an Oval and unmountainous
Earth, an Enclosed Abyss, a Paradisiacal world, Scripture is at least silent:
and therefore it is natural arguments must determine these cases. And this
ill-reasoning he is often guilty of, in making no distinction betwixt things
that are, or that are not, proved by natural arguments, when he appeals to the
interpretation of Scripture.

Chap. 11. Is to prove an Open Sea (such as we have now) before the Flood. All
his Exceptions were answered before, Answ. c. 11.
and I am content to stand to that answer: reserving only what is to be said
hereafter concerning the literal sense of Scripture. However he is too lavish
in some expressions here, as when he says, ( p. 115.) that Adam died before so
much as one Fish appeared in the world. And a little before he had said, For
fishes, if his Hypothesis be believed, P. 114.
were never upon this Earth, in Adam's time. These expressions I say cannot be
justified upon any Hypothesis. For why might not the Rivers of that Earth have
Fish in them, as well as the Rivers of this Earth, or as our Rivers now? I Am
sure the Theory, or the Hypothesis he mentions, never said any thing to the
contrary: but rather supposed the waters fruitful, as the ground was. But as to
an open Sea, whether side soever you take, that there was, or was not, any,
before the Flood: I believe however Adam, to his dying day, never see either
Sea or Seafish: nor ever exercised any dominion over either.

Chap. 12. Is concerning the Rainbow: and has no new argument in it, nor
reinforcement. But a question is moved, whether as well, necessarily signifies
as much. The real question to be considered here, setting aside pedantry, is
this, whether that Thing (Sun, or Rainbow, or any other) could have any
significancy as a sign, which signified no more than the bare promise would
have done without a sign. This is more material to be considered and resolved,
than whether as well and as much signify the same.

Chap. 13. Is concerning Paradise, and to justify or excuse himself why he
baulkt all the difficulties, and said nothing new or instructive, upon that
subject. But he would make the Theorist inconsistent with himself, in that he
had said, Def. p. 125.
that neither Scripture, nor reason, determine the place of Paradise: and yet
determines it by the judgment of the Christian Fathers. Where Is the
inconsistency of this? The Theory, as a Theory, is not concerned in a Topical
Paradise; and says moreover that neither Scripture, nor reason, have determined
the place of it; but if we refer our selves to the judgment and tradition of
the Fathers, and stand to the majority of their Votes, (when Scripture and
reason are silent) they have so far determined it, as to place it in the other
Hemisphere, rather than in this: and so exclude that shallow opinion of some
moderns, that would place it in Mesopotamia. And to baffle that opinion was the
design of the Theorist; as this Author also seems to take notice. P. 131.


After this and an undervaluing of the Testimonies of the Fathers, he
undertakes to determine the place of Paradise by Scripture, and particularly
that it was in Mesopotamia, or some region thereabouts. And his Argument is
this, because in the last verse of the 3d. chap. of Genesis, the Cherubims and
flaming sword are said to be place'd (...) which he says is, to the East of the
Garden of Eden. But the Septuagint (upon whom he must chiefly depend for the
interpretation of the word (...) in the first place, chapter 2. 8.) read it here
(...). And the Vulgate renders it, ante Paradisum voluptatis: and according to
the Samaritan Pentateuch it is rendered ex adverso. Now what better authorities
can he bring us for his translation? I do not find that he gives any, as his
usual way is, but his own authority. And as for the word (...) in the 2d. chap.
and 8th. ver. which is the principal place, it is well known, that, except the
Septuagint, all the ancient Versions, Greek and Latin, (besides others) render
it to another sense. And there is a like uncertainty of translation in the word
(...) as we have noted elsewhere. Lastly, the Rivers of Paradise, and the
countries they are said to run through or encompass, are differently understood
by different Authors, without any agreement or certain conclusion. But these
are all beaten subjects, which you may find in every Treatise of Paradise, and
therefore it is not worth the time to pursue them here.

Then he proceeds to the longevity of the Ante-diluvians: which, so far as I
can understand him to affirm any thing, P. 139.
he says was not general: but the lives of some few were extraordinarily
lengthened by a special blessing; the elongation of them being a work of
Providence, not of nature. This is a cheap and vulgar account,(and so are all
the contents of this Chap.) proved neither by Scripture, nor reason: and
calculated for the humor and capacity of those, that love their case more than
a diligent enquiry after truth. He has indeed a bold assertion afterward,
that Moses does distinguish, as much or more, betwixt two races of men before
the Flood: the one longlivers, and the other short-livers, As he has
distinguished the Giants before the Flood, from the common race of mankind. P.
141.
These are his words, Is not his distinction equally plain in both cases?
speaking of this formentioned distinction. Or, if there be any difference, does
he not distinguish better betwixt long-livers and short-livers, than he does
betwixt men of Gigantick and of usual proportion? Let Us see the truth of this:
Moses plainly made mention of two races of mankind: Genesis 6. 4.
the ordinary race, and those of a Gigantick race, or Giants. Now tell me where
he plainly makes mention of short-livers before the Flood. And if he no where
make mention of short-livers, but of long-livers only, how does he distinguish
as plainly of these two races, as he did of the other two? for in the other he
mentioned plainly and severally both the parts or members of the distinction,
and here he mentions but one, and makes no distinction.

Then he comes to the Testimonies cited by Josephus for the longevity of the
Ante-diluvians, or first inhabitants of the Earth. And these he roundly
pronounces to be utterly false. This Gentleman does not seem, to be much
skilled in Antiquity, either sacred or profane: and yet he boldly rejects these
Testimonies (as he did those of the Fathers before) as utterly false: P. 142.
which Josephus had alleged in vindication of the History of Moses. The only
reason he gives, is, because these Testimonies say, They lived a thousand
years: whereas Moses does not raise them altogether so high. But the question
was not so much concerning the precise number of their years, as about the
excess of them beyond the present lives of men: and a round number in such
cases is often taken instead of a broken number. Besides, seeing according to
the account of Moses, the greater part of them lived above nine hundred years,
at least he should not have said these Testimonies in Josephus were utterly
false, but false in part, or not precisely true.

Now he comes to his reasons against the Ante-diluvian longevity; which have
all had their answers before, and those we stand to. But I wonder he should
think it reasonable, that mankind, P. 144, 145.
throughout all ages, should increase in the same proportion as in the first
age: And if a decuple proportion of increase was reasonable at first, the same
should be continued all along: and the product of mankind, after sixteen
hundred years, should be taken upon that supposition. I should not grudge to
admit that the first pair of Breeders might leave ten pair: but that every pair
of these ten, should also leave ten pair, without any failure: and every pair
in their children should again leave ten pair: and this to be continued,
without diminution or interruption, for sixteen hundred years, is not only a
hard supposition, but utterly incredible. For still the greater the number was,
the more room there would be for accidents, of all sorts: and every failure
toward the beginning, and proportionably in other parts, would cut off
thousands in the last product.

Chap. 14. Is against the Dissolution of the Earth, and the Disruption of the
Abyss, at the Deluge: such as the Theory represents. Here is nothing of new
argument, but some strokes of new railing wit, after his way. He had said in
his Exceptions that the Dissolution of the Earth was horrid blasphemy: now he
makes it Reductive Blasphemy, as being indirectly, consequentially, P. 153, 154.
or reductively, contrary to Scripture. But this rule, we told him, all errors
in Religion would be blasphemy, and if he extend this to errors in Philosophy
also, it is still more harsh and injudicious. I wonder how he thinks, the
doctrine, which he owns, about the motion of the Earth, should escape the
charge of Blasphemy: that being not only indirectly, but directly and plainly
contrary to Scripture. We thought that expression, the Earth is dissolved,
being a Scripture expression, would thereby have been protected from the
imputation of blasphemy: and we alleged to that purpose, (besides, Ps. 75. 3.)
Isa. 24. 19. Amos 9. 5. He would have done well to have proved these places in
the Prophets Isaiah and Amos, to have been figurative and tropological, as he
call it: for we take them both to relate to the dissolution of the Earth, which
literally came to pass at the Deluge. And he not having proved the contrary, we
are in hopes still that the Dissolution of the Earth may not be horrid
blasphemy, nor of blasphemous importance.

Then having quarreled with the Guard of Angels which the Theorist had assigned
for the preservation of the Ark, in the time of the Deluge: he falls next into
his blunder, that the Equator and Ecliptic of the Earth were interchang'd,
when the situation of the Earth was changed. This error in the Earth is
cousin-germain to his former error in the heavens, viz. that the Earth changed
its tract about the Sun, and leapt out of the Equator into the Ecliptic, when
it changed its situation. The truth is, this Copernican Systeme seems to ly
cross in his imagination. I think he would do better to let it alone. However,
though at other times he is generally verbose and long-winded, he has the sense
to pass this by, in a few words: laying the blame upon certain parentheses or
semicircles, whose innocence notwithstanding we have fully cleared, and showed
the poison to be spread throughout the whole paragraph, which is too great to
be made an Erratum Typographicum.

Then after Hermus, P. 160, 161.
Caister, Menander and Caicus: Nile and its mud: Piscenius Niger, who contended
with Septimus Severus for the Empire, and reprimanded his Soldiers for
hankering after wine. Du Val, an ingenious French writer, and Cleopatra and her
admired Antony: he concludes, that the waters of the Deluge raged amongst the
fragments, with lasting, incessant, and unimaginable turbulence.

And so he comes to an argument against the Dissolution of the Earth. P. 16^
That, All the buildings erected before the Flood, would have been shaken down
at that time, or else overwhelmed. He instanced in his Exceptions, in Seth's
pillars* Henochia, Cain's City: and Ioppa; these he supposed such buildings as
were made before, and stood after, the Flood. But now Seth's pillars and
Henochia being dismissed, he insists upon Ioppa only; and says, This must have
consisted of such materials, as could never be prepared, formed, and set up,
without Iron tools. Though I do not much believe that Ioppa was an Antediluvian
Town, yet whatever they had in Cain's time, they might, before the Deluge, have
Mortar and Brick; which as they are the first stony materials, that we read of,
for building: so the ruins of them might stand after the Deluge. And that they
had no other materials is the more probable, because, after the Flood, at the
building of Babel, Moses plainly intimates that they had no other materials
than those. Genesis 11. 3.
For the Text says, They said one to another, go to, let us make Brick, and
burn them thoroughly; And they made Brick for stone, and slime had they had
mortar. But now this argument, methinks, may be retorted upon the Excepter with
advantage. For, if there were no dissolutions, concussions, or absorptions, at
the Deluge, instead of the ruins of Ioppa, methinks we might have had the
ruins of an hundred Antediluvian Cities. Especially, if, according to his
Hypothesis, they had good stone, and good Iron, and all other materials, fit
for strong and lasting building. And, which is also to be considered, that it
was but a fifteen-cubit Deluge, so that Towns built upon eminences or
high-lands, would be in little danger of being ruined: much less of being
abolisht.

His last argument ( p. 163.) proves, if it prove any thing, that God's
promise, that the world should not be drowned again, was a vain and trifling
thing, to us, who know it must be burnt. And consequently, if Noah understood
the conflagration of the World, he makes it a vain and trifling thing to Noah
also. If the Excepter delight in such conclusions, let him enjoy them, but they
are not at all to the mind of the Theorist.

Chap. 15. Now we come to his new Hypothesis of Fifteen-cubit Deluge. And what
shifts he has made to destroy the World with such a diminutive Flood, we have
noted before: First, by raising his water-mark, and making it uncertain. Then
by converting the Deluge, in a great measure, into Famine. And lastly, by
destroying Mankind and other Animals, with evil Angels. We shall now take
notice of some other incongruities in his Hypothesis. When he made Moses's
Deluge but fifteen Cubits deep, we said that was an unmerciful Paradox, and
asked, whether he would have it received as a Postulatum, or as a Conclusion.
All he answers to this is, That the same question may be asked concerning
several parts of the Theory: P. 166.
particularly, that the Primitive Earth had no Open Sea* Whether is that, says
he, to be received as a Postulatum, or as a Conclusion? The answer is ready, as
a Conclusion: deduced from premises, and a series of antecedent reasons. Now
can he make this answer for his fifteen-Cubit Deluge? Must not that still be a
Postulatum, and an unmerciful one? As to the Theory, there is but one
Postulatum in all, viz. That the Earth rise from a Chaos. All the other
Propositions are deduced from premises, and that one Postulatum also is proved
by Scripture and Antiquity. We had noted further in the Answer, that the Author
had said in his Exceptions, that he would not defend his Hypothesis as true and
real: and we demanded thereupon, Why then did he trouble himself or the World
with what he did not think true and real? To this he replies, Many have written
ingenious and useful things, which they never believed to be true and real.
Romances suppose, and Poetical fictions: Will you have your fifteen-cubit
Deluge pass for such? But then the mischief is, where there is neither Truth of
Fact, nor Ingenuity of invention, such a composition will hardly pass for a
Romance, or a good fiction. But there is still a greater difficulty behind: The
Excepter has unhappily said, Exc. p. 302.
Our supposition stands supported by Divine Authority: as being founded upon
Scripture: which tells us as plainly as it can speak, that the waters prevailed
but fifteen Cubits upon the Earth. Upon which words the Answerer made this
remark, Answ. p. 67.
If his Hypothesis be founded upon Scripture, and upon Scripture as plainly as
it can speak, Why will not he defend it as TRVE and REAL? for to be supported
by Scripture, and by plain Scripture, is as much as we can allege for the
articles of our Faith. Des. p. 168.
To this he replies now, that he begged allowance at first, to make bold with
Scripture a little. This is a bold excuse: and he especially, one would think,
should take heed how he makes bold with Scripture: lest, according to his own
notion, he fall into blasphemy or something of blasphemous importance;
indirectly, consequentially, or reductively, at least. However this excuse, if
it was a good one, would take no place here: for to understand and apply
Scripture, in that sense that it speaks as plainly as it can speak, is not to
make bold with it, but modestly to follow its dictates and plain sense.

He feels this load to lie heavy upon him, and struggles again to shake it off,
with a distinction. When he said his fifteen-cubit Deluge was supported by
divine authority, etc. This, Ibid.
he says, was spoken by him, in an Hypothetick or suppositious way: and that it
cannot possibly be understood otherwise by men of sense. Here are two hard
words, let us first understand what they signify, and then we shall better
judge how Men of sense would understand his words. His Hypothetick or
suppositious way, so far as I understand it, is the same thing as by way of
supposition; Then his meaning is, he supposes his fifteen-cubit Deluge is
supported by divine authority: And he supposes it is founded upon Scripture as
plainly as it can speak. But this is to suppose the Question, and no Man of
sense would make or grant such supposition. So that I do not see what he gains
by his Hypothetick and suppositious way. But to draw him out of this mist of
words, Either he affirms this, that his Hypothesis is supported by divine
authority: and founded upon Scripture as plainly as it can speak: or he denies
it, or he doubts of it. If he affirm it, then all his excuses and diminutions
are to no purpose, he must stand to his cause, and show us those plain Texts of
Scripture. If he deny it, he gives up his cause, and all that divine authority
he pretended to. If he doubt of it, then he should have expressed himself
doubtfully; as, Scripture may admit of that sense, or may be thought to
intimate such a thing; but he says, with a plerophory, Scripture speaks it as
plainly as it can speak. And to mend the matter, he unluckily subjoyns in the
following words, P. 16^, 16^.
Yea, though it was spoken never so positively, it was but to set forth
REIPERSONAM: to make a more full and lively representation of the supposed
thing. He does well to tell us what he means by Rei Personam, for otherwise no
Man of sense, as his phrase is, would ever have made that translation of those
words. But the truth is, he is so perfectly at a loss how to bring himself off,
as to this particular, that in his confusion he neither makes good sense, nor
good Latin.

Now he comes to another inconsistency which was charged upon him by the
Answer: Namely, that he rejects the Church-Hypothesis concerning the Deluge,
and yet had said before, Exc. p. 300.
I cannot believe (which I cannot well endure to speak) that the Church has
ever gone on in an irrational way of explaining the Deluge. That he does reject
this Church-Hypothesis was plainly made out from his own words: because he
rejects the Common Hypothesis: The general standing Hypothesis: See the
Citations in the Answ. p. 68.
The usual Hypothesis: The usual sense they put upon Sacred story, etc. These
citations he does not think fit to take notice of in his reply: but puts all
upon this general issue, which the Answerer concludes with: The Church Way of
explaining the Deluge, is either rational or irrational. If he say it is
rational, why does he desert it, and invent a new one. And if he say it is
irrational, then that dreadful thing, which he cannot well endure to speak,
That, the Church of God has ever gone on in an irrational way of explaining
the Deluge, falls flat upon himself. Let Us hear his answer to this Dilemma.
Def. p. 170.
We say, says he, that the Church Way of explaining the Deluge, (by creating
and annihilating waters for the nonce) is very rational. Then say I still, why
do you desert it, or why do you trouble us with a new one? Either his
Hypothesis is more rational than the Church-Hypothesis, or less rational? If
less rational, why does he take us off from a better, to amuse us with a worse?
But if he say his Hypothesis is more rational than that of the Church's, Then
Woe be to him, in his own words, P. 171.
that so black a blemish should be fastened upon the wisest and noblest Society
in the World, as to make himself more wise than they, and his Hypothesis more
rational than theirs. The truth is, This Gentleman has a mind to appear a
Virtuoso: for the new Philosophy, and the Copernican Systeme: and yet would be
a Zealot for orthodoxy, and the Church Way of explaining things. Which two
designs do not well agree, as to the natural World; and so betwixt two Stools
he falls to the ground, and proves neither good Churchman, nor good
Philosopher.

But he will not still be convinced that he deserts the Church-hypothesis, and
continues to deny the desertion in these words, (...).
We say that we do not desert or reject the Church way of explaining the
Deluge. Now to discover, whether these words are true or false, Let us observe,
First, what he acknowledges to have said against the Church-Hypothesis:
Secondly, what he has said more than what he acknowledges here. He
acknowledges that he said the Church-Hypothesis might be disgustful to the best
and soundest Philosophic judgments. And this is not good Character. Yet this
is not all, for he has fairly dropped a principal word in the sentence, namely,
justly. Exc. p. 312.
His words, in his Exceptions, were these, such inventions (which he applies to
the Church-Hypothesis) as have been, and, IVSTLY may be disgustful, not only to
nice and squeamish, but to the best and soundest Philosophic judgments. Now
judge whether he cited this sentence before, truly and fairly: and whether in
these words, truly cited, he does not disparage the Church-Hypothesis, and
justify, those that are disgusted at it.

He furthermore acknowledges that the usual ways of explaining the Deluge seem
unreasonable to some, and unintelligible to others, and unsatisfactory to the
most. But, it seems, he will neither be of these some, others or most. Lastly,
he acknowledges that he had said, Def. p. 171.
The ordinary supposition, that the Mountains were covered with waters in the
Deluge, brings on a necessity of setting up a new Hypothesis for explaining the
Flood. If so, what was this ordinary supposition: was it not the supposition of
the Church? And was that such, as made it necessary to set up a new Hypothesis
for explaining the Flood? Then the old Hypothesis was insufficient, or
irrational.

Thus much he acknowledges: but he omits what we noted before, his rejecting or
disapproving the common Hypothesis, the general standing Hypothesis, the usual
sense they put upon the sacred story, etc. And do not all these phrases denote
the Church-Hypothesis? Exc. p. 325.
He further omits, that he confessed, he had expounded a Text or two of
Scripture, about the Deluge, so as none ever did. And deserting the common
received sense, puts an unusual gloss upon them. And is not that common
received sense, the sense of the Church? and his unusual gloss contrary to it?
Lastly, he says, by his Hypothesis, we need not fly to a new Creation of
Waters, and gives his reasons at large against that opinion, which you may see,
Except. p. 313. Now those reasons he thought either to be good reasons, or bad
reasons: if bad, why did he set them down, or why did he not confute them? if
good, they stand good against the Hypothesis of the Church: for he makes that
new Creation and Annihilation of waters at the Deluge, to be the Hypothesis of
the Church. Defen. p. 170. I fear I have spent too much time in showing him
utterly inconsistent with himself in this particular. And I wonder he should be
so sollicitous to justify the Hypothesis of the Church in this point, seeing
he openly dissents from it in a greater: I mean in that of the Systeme of the
World. Hear his words, Def. p. 136.
if you please, to this purpose. And what does the famous Aristotelian
Hypothesis seem to be now, but a mass of Errors? where such a Systeme was
contrived for the Heavens, and such a situation assigned to the Earth, as
neither reason can approve, nor nature allow. Yet so prosperous and prevailing
was this Hypothesis, that it was generally received, and successfully
propagated for many ages. This prosperous prevailing error, or mass of errors,
was it not espoused and supported by the Church? And to break from the Church
in greater points, and scruple it in less, is not this to strain at Gnats, and
swallow Camels?

So much for his inconsistency with himself. The rest of this Chapter in the
Answer, shows his inconsistency with Moses; both as to the waters covering the
tops of the Mountains, which Moses affirms and the Excepter denies; and as to
the decrease of the Deluge, which Moses makes to be, by the waters retiring
into their channels, after frequent reciprocations, going and coming. But the
Excepter says, the Sun sucked up the waters from the Earth: just as he had
before sucked the mountains out of the Earth. These things are so groundless,
or so gross, that it would be tedious to insist longer upon them. And whereas
it is not reasonable to expect, that any others should be idle enough, as we
must be, to collate three or four Tracts, to discern where the advantage lies
in these small altercations: I desire only, if they be so disposed, that they
would collate the Exceptions, Answer and Defense, in this one Chapter, which is
our Author's Masterpiece: And from this I am willing they should take their
measures, and make a judgment, of his good or bad success in other parts.

What shifts he has used to make his fifteen-cubit Deluge sufficient to
destroy all mankind and all animals, we have noted before: and here it is ( p.
181, 182.) that he reduces them to famine. And after that, he comes to a long
excursion of seven or eight pages, about the imperfection of Shipping after the
Flood: Def. p. 183, 184, 185, etc.
a good argument for the Theorist, that they had not an open Sea, Iron-tools,
and materials for shipping, before the Flood. For what should make them so
inexpert in Navigation for many years and ages after the Flood, if they had the
practice and experience of it, before the Flood? And what could hinder their
having that practice and experience, if they had an open Sea, and all Iron and
other materials, for that use and purpose?

Lastly, he comes to his notion of the Great Deep, or Tehom-Rabbah. Def. p. 191.
Which he had made before, in express words, to be the Holes and Caverns in the
Rocks; I say, in express words, such as these, Exc. p. 312.
Now supposing that the Caverns in the Mountains were this great Deep: speaking
of Moses's Great Deep, according to this new Hypothesis. He says further ( p.
105.) In case it be urged, Ib. p. 105.
that Caverns, especially Caverns so high situate, cannot properly be called
the great Deep. Where you see, his own objection supposes that he made those
caverns the Great Deep. And in the same page, speaking of the Psalmists Great
Deeps (in his own sense of making them holes in rocks) and Moses's Great Deep,
he says, the same thing might be meant by both. By all these expressions one
would think it plain, that by his Great Deep he meant his caverns in rocks: yet
now, upon objections urged against it, he seems desirous to fly off from that
notion. But does not yet tell us plainly what must be meant by Moses's Great
Deep. If, upon second thoughts, he would have the Sea to be understood by it,
why does he not answer the objections that are made by the Theorist against
that Interpretation? Engl. Th. p. 81, etc.
Nay, why does he not answer what he himself had objected before ( Except p.
310.) against that supposition? He seems to unsay now, what he said before: and
yet substitutes nothing in the place of it, to be understood by Moses's
T^hom-Rabbah.

Chap. 16. Is a few words concerning these expressions of Shutting the windows
of Heaven and the Fountains of the Abyss, after the Deluge. And these were both
shut alike, and both of them no less than the Caverns in the Mountains.

Chap. 17. Has nothing of argumentation or Philosophy: but runs on in a
popular declamatory way, and (if I may use that forbidden word) injudicious.
All amounts to this, Whether we may not go contrary to the letter of Scripture,
in natural things, when that goes contrary to plain reason. This we affirm, and
this every one must affirm that believes the motion of the Earth, as our
Vertuoso pretends to do. Then he concludes all with an Harmonious close, that
he follows the great example of a R. Prelate, Def. p. 215.
and militates under that Episcopal banner. I am willing to believe that he
writ at first, in hopes to curry favor with certain persons, by his great zeal
for Orthodoxy; but he has made such an hotch-potch of new Philosophy and
Divinity, that I believe it will scarce please the party he would cajole: nor
so much as his R. Patron. I was so civil to him in the Answer, as to make him a
Saint in comparison of that former Animadverter: but, by the style and spirit
of this last Pamphlet, he has forfeited with me all his saintship, both
absolute and comparative.

Thus much for his Chapters: and as to his reflections upon the Review of the
Theory, they are so superficial and inconsiderable, that I believe he never
expected that they should be regarded. I wonder however, that he should decline
an examination of the 2d. part of the Theory. It cannot be for want of good
will to confute it: he has shown that to the height, whatsoever his power was.
Neither can it be for want of difference or disagreement in opinion, as to the
contents of this later part: for he has reckoned the Millennium amongst the
errors of the ancient Fathers, (Def. p. 136.) and the Renovation of the World
he makes Allegorical. (p. 224. etc.) It must therefore be for want of some
third thing: which he best knows.

But before we conclude, Sir, we must remember that we promised to speak apart
to two things, which are often objected to the Theorist by this Writer, and to
little purpose; namely, his flying to Extraordinary Providence, and his flying
from the literal sense of Scripture. As to Extraordinary Providence, Is the
Theorist alone debarred from recourse to it, or would he have all men debarred,
as well as the Theorist? If so, why does he use it so much himself? And if it
be allowed to others, there is no reason it should be denied the Theorist,
unless he have disowned it, and so debarred himself that common privilege. But
the contrary is manifest, in a multitude of places, both of the first and
second part of the Theory* For, Eng. The. p. 105. etc.
besides a discourse on purpose upon that subject, in the 8th. Chap. of the
first Book, in the last Chapter and last words of the same book ( Latin) he
does openly avow, both Providence (natural and moral) and miracles: in these
words, Denique cum certissimum sit, a divina Providentia pendere res omnes,
cujuscunque ordinis, and ab eadem vera miracula edita esse, etc. And as to the
second part of the Theory, the ministry of Angels is there acknowledged
frequently, both as to natural and moral administrations. From all which
instances it is manifest, that the Theorist did not debar himself, by denying
either Miracles, Angelical ministry, or extraordinary Providence; But if the
Excepter be so injudicious (pardon me that bold word) as to confound all
extraordinary Providence with the Acts of Omnipotency, he must blame himself
for that, not the Theorist. The Creation and Annihilation of waters is an act
of pure Omnipotency, This the Theorist did not admit of at the Deluge: and if
this be his fault, as it is frequently objected to him ( Def. p. 9. 66. 170,
etc.) he perseveres in it still, Eng. The p. 18, 19.
and in the reasons he gave for his opinion, which are no where confuted. But
as for acts of Angelical power, he does every where acknowledge them in the
great Revolutions, The. Lat. p. 53. Eng. p. 107, 108.
even of the natural World. If the Excepter would make the Divine Omnipotency
as cheap as the ministry of Angels, and have recourse as freely and as
frequently to that, as to this: If he would make all extraordinary Providence
the same, and all miracles, and set all at the pitch of Infinite power, this
may be an effect of his ignorance or inadvertency, but is no way imputable to
the Theorist.

In the next place it may be observed that the Theorist has no where asserted,
that Moses's Cosmopoeia (which does not proceed according to ordinary
Providence) is to be literally understood; and therefore what is urged against
him from the letter of that Cosmopoeia, is improperly urged and without ground.
There are as good reasons, and better Authorities, that Moses's six-days
Creation should not be literally understood, than there are, why those Texts of
Scripture that speak about the motion of the Sun, should not be literally
understood. And as to the Theorist, he had often intimated his sense of that
Cosmopoeia, that it was expressed more humano, and captum populi: as appears in
several passages; In the Latin Theory, speaking of the Mosaical Cosmogonia, he
has these words: Constat haec Cosmopoeia duabus partibus, Theor. li. 2. c. 8.
quarum prima, massas generales atque rerum inconditarum statum exhibet:
sequiturque eadem principia, and eundem ordinem, quem antiqui usque
retinuerunt. Atque in hoc nobiscum convenient omnes fere interpretes
Christiani: nempe, Tohu Bohu Mosaicum idem esse ac Chaos Antiquorum. Tenebras
Mosaicas, etc. hucusque convenit Mosi cum antiquis Philosophis, -- methodum
autem illam Philosophicam hic abrumpit, aliamque orditur, humanam, aut, si
mavis, Theologicam: qua, motibus Chaos, secundum leges naturae and divini
amoris actionem, plane neglectis, and successivis ipsius mutationibus in varias
regiones and elementa: His, inquam, post-habitis, popularem narrationem de ortu
rerum hoc modo instituit. Res omnes visibiles in sex classes, etc. This is a
plain indication how the Theorist understood that Cosmopoeia. And accordingly
in the English Theory the Author says, P. 288.
I have not mentioned Moses's Cosmopoeia: because I thought it delivered by him
as a Lawgiver, not as a Philosopher. Which I intend to show at large in
another Treatise: not thinking that discussion proper for the vulgar Tongue.
The Excepter was also minded of this in the Answer, p. 66. Now, it is much, that
he, who has searched all the corners, both of the English and Latin Theory, to
pick quarrels, should never observe such obvious passages as these. But still
make objections from the letter of the Mosaical Cosmopoeia: which affect the
Theorist no more than those places of Scripture that speak of the motion of the
Sun, or the Pillars of the Earth.

In the last place, the Theorist distinguished two methods for explaining the
natural World: that of an ordinary and that of an extraordinary Providence. And
those that take the second way, he said, might dispatch their task as soon as
they pleased if they engaged omnipotency in the work. But the other method
would require time: it must proceed by distinct steps, and leisurely motions,
such as Nature can admit; And, in that respect, it might not suit with the
busy lives, or impatient studies, of most Men. Whom he left notwithstanding to
their liberty to take what method they pleased: provided they were not
troublesome in forcing their hasty thoughts upon all others. Thus the Theorist
has expressed himself at the end of the first Book: C. 12.
Interia, cum non omnes a natura ita compositi simus, ut Philosophiae studiis
delectemur: Neque etiant liceat multis, propter occupationes vitae, iisdem
vacare, quibus per ingenium licuisset: iis jure permittendum est, compendiario
to sapere; and relictis viis naturae and causarum secundarum, quae saepe
longiusculae sunt, per causas superiores philosophari; idque potissimum, cum ex
piis affectibus hoc quandoque fieri possit: quibus velmale fundatis, aliquid
dandum esse existimo, modo non sint turbulenti. Thus the Theorist, you see,
sets two ways before them, and it is indifferent to him whether they take, if
they will go on their way peaceably. And he does now moreover particularly
declare, That he has no ambition, either to make the Excepter, or any other of
the same dispositions of will, and the same elevation of understanding,
proselytes to his Theory.

Thus much for Providence; As to the literal sense of Scripture, I find, if
what was noted before in the Answer, P. 82, 83. etc.
had been duly considered, there would be little need of additions upon that
subject. The matter was stated freely and distinctly, and the remarks or
reflections which the Excepter has made in his Defense, upon this doctrine,
are both shallow and partial. I say, partial: in perverting the sense, and
separating such things as manifestly depend upon one another. Thus the Excepter
falls upon that expression in the Answer, Def. p. 202.
Let us remember that this contradicting Scripture, here pretended, is only in
natural things: where he should have added the other part of the sentence, And
also observe how far the Excepter himself, in such things, has contradicted
Scripture. Here he makes an odious declamation, as it the Answerer had confessed
that he contradicted Scripture in natural things: whereas the words are
contradicting Scripture, here pretended: and it is plain by all the discourse,
that it is the literal sense of Scripture that is here spoken of, which the
Excepter is also said to contradict. Such an unmanly captiousness shows the
temper and measure of that spirit, which rather than say nothing will
misrepresent the plain sense of an Author. In like manner, when he comes to
those words in the Answer, The case therefore is this, whether to go contrary
to the letter of Scripture in things that relate to the natural world, be
destroying the foundation of religion, affronting Scripture, and blaspheming
the Holy Ghost. He says, this is not to state the case truly, Def. p. 206.
for it is not, says he, going contrary to the letter of Scripture that draws
such evil consequences after it, but going contrary to the letter of Scripture,
where it is to be literally under stood. And this the Theorist does, he says,
and the Excepter does not. But who says so besides himself? This is fairly to
beg the question, and can he suppose the Theorist so easy as to grant this
without proof? It must be the subject matter that determines, what is, and what
is not, to be literally understood. However he goes on, begging still the
question in his own behalf, and says, those Texts of Scripture that speak of
the motion and course of the Sun, are not to be understood literally. But why
not? because the literal sense is not to his mind? Of four Texts of Scripture
which the Theorist alleged against him, for the motion of the Sun, he answers
but one, and that very superficially, to say no worse. It Is Ps. 19. where the
Sun at his rising is said to be as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and
to rejoice as a strong man to run his race. And his going forth is from the end
of the heaven, and his circuit to the ends of it. P. 207.
Which he answers with this vain flourish: Then the Sun must be a man, and must
be upon his marriage; and must be dressed in fine clothes, as a Bridegroom is.
Then he must come out of a Chamber, and must give no more light, and cast no
more heat than a Bridegroom does etc. If a man should ridicule, at this rate,
the discourse of our Savior concerning Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and Dives
in hell, with a great gulf betwixt them, yet talking audibly to one another;
And that Lazarus should be sent so far, Luk* 16.
as from heaven to hell, only to dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool
Dives his tongue. He that should go about thus to expose our Saviors parable,
would have a thankless office, and effect nothing: for the substance of it
would stand good still: namely, that men's Souls live after death, and that good
Souls are in a state of ease and comfort, and bad Souls in a state of misery.
In like manner, his ridiculing some circumstances in the comparison made by the
Psalmist, does not at all destroy the substance of that discourse: namely, that
the Sun moves in the firmament, with great swiftness and luster, and has the
circuit of its motion round the Earth. This is the substance of what the
Psalmist declares, and the rest is but a similitude which need not be literally
just in all particulars.

After this he would fain persuade the Theorist, that he has excused the
Excepter for his receding from the literal sense, as to the motion of the
Earth: Def. p. 208.
Because he has granted, that, in certain cases, we may and must recede from
the literal sense. But where, pray, has he granted, that the motion of the
Earth was one of those cases? yet suppose it be so, may not the Theorist then
enjoy this privilege of receding from the literal sense upon occasion, as well
as the Excepter? If he will give, as well as take, this liberty, let us
mutually enjoy it. But he can have no pretense to deny it to others, and take
it himself. It uses to be a rule in writing, that a man must not stultum
fingere Lectorem. You must suppose your Reader to have common sense. But he
that accuses another of blasphemy for receding from the literal sense of
Scripture in natural things, and does himself, at the same time, recede from
the literal sense of Scripture, in natural things: one would think, quoad hoc,
either had not, or would not exercise, common sense: in a literal way.

Lastly, He comes to the common known rule, assigned to direct us, when every
one ought to follow, or leave, the literal sense: which is, not to leave the
literal sense, p. 215.
when the subject matter will bear it, without absurdity or incongruity. This
he repeats in the next page thus, The rule is, When no kind of absurdities or
incongruities accrue to any Texts, from the literal sense. If this be his rule,
to what Texts does there accrue any absurdity or incongruity, by supposing the
Sun to move? for Scripture always speaks upon that supposition, and not one
word for the motion of the Earth. Thus he states the rule, but the Answerer
supposed, that the absurdity or incongruity might arise from the subject
matter. And accordingly he still maintains, that there are as just reasons
(from the subject matter) and better authorities, for receding from the literal
sense, in the narrative of the six-days Creation, than in those Texts of
Scripture, that speak of the motions and course of the Sun. And to affirm the
Earth to be moved, is as much Blasphemy, and more contrary to Scripture, than
to affirm it to have been dissolved, as the Theorist has done.

Sir, I beg your excuse for this long Letter, and leave it to you to judge
whether the occasion was just or no. I know such jarrings as these, must needs
make bad music to your ears: it is like hearing two instruments play that are
not in tune and consort with one another. But you know self-defence, and to
repel an assailant, is always allowed: and he that begins the quarrel, must
answer for the consequences. However, Sir, to make amends for this trouble, I
am ready to receive your commands upon more acceptable subjects.

Your most Humble Servant, etc.


FINIS*

