A SERMON Preached at BARBICAN Upon the Sixteenth of April, 1696.

BEING A Day of THANKSGIVING unto Almighty God for Discovering and
Disappointing an Horrid and Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists and other
Traitorous Persons to Assassinate and Murder His most Gracious Majesty's Royal
Person, and for Delivering this Kingdom from an Invasion intended by the French.

By Andrew Burnett, M A. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm 144 9, 10. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God, upon a Psalter, and
an instrument of ten strings, will I sing praises unto thee.

It is he that gives salvation to kings, who delivers David his servant from
the hurtful sword.

LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1696.

A SERMON Preached on the Thanksgiving-Day, etc.
Micah VII. Verse. 15, 16, 17. According to the days of thy coming out of the
Land of Egypt, will I show unto him mavelous things.

The Nations shall see and be confounded at all their might, they shall lay
their hand upon their mouth: their ears shall be deaf.

They shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their holes
like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall
fear because of thee.


THE Providence of God, the malicious, mischievous and monstrous, desperate and
damned Plot and Conspiracy, Cruelty and Malice of our Enemies; The Royal and
most Excellent Proclamation of His Majesty King William, wherein He speaks of
the Mercy and Power of God, in discovering and delivering us from a Horrid and
Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists, and other Traitorous Persons; has assembled
us this day, to pay our Vows unto the Lord, and to speak of his mavelous
Acts. In order to which, I have chosen this Portion of Scripture, in which you
have,

1. The Lord standing engaged to his Church and People, to give them as great a
Deliverance from their Enemies and Troubles, as great and wonderful as that
from Egypt was.

According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt, will I show unto
him mavelous things.

O! The Lord will show his Church and People as wonderful things in Mercy, as
he did when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt.

2. You have the Amplification it self held forth in a general Expression in
the first Words of Psalm. 16.

1. The Nations (says he) shall see. 2. You have the Effects of this sight,
which are two.
1. They shall be confounded.

This is heightened from that which was to be a special ingredient in that
confusion, viz.

1. It should be at all their might. 2. From the sensible Signs and Symptoms by
which their confusion should appear, viz.
1. They shall lay their hands upon their mouth. 2. Their ears shall be deaf.
And in the II. place,

In the 17th Verse, You have another effect of the Nations seeing the
mavelous things God was to do in the Deliverance of his Church and People,
viz.

1. They shall lick the dust like a serpent. 2. They shall move out of their
holes like worms of the Earth.
III. They shall be afraid. Of whom? Why the cause of their fear, is,

1. God. Because of the Lord our God. 2. The Church.. And because of Thee, O
Zion.
Before I proceed any further, give me leave to open two things.

1. What is meant by Nations here. 2. What is meant by Seeing. The Nations
shall see.
1. By Nations we are to understand those that are Enemies to God, his Church,
and People, the Nations. That is, a People that are afar off; and Strangers to
God and his People. These are the Nations that are and shall be Counfounded at
the Happiness of God's Church and People:

And no wonder it be so, if we consider the Enmity and Envy that is in the
World at God's Church and People: Ishmael you know could not endure Isaac; nor
Esau, Jacob, in one Family; and no wonder if it be so betwixt the Church and
other Nations, Hence: They have consulted together with one consent, they are
confeder are against thee, says the Royal Psalmist David, Psalm. 83. 5. In the
Original, it is, (...). Berith Ychrothu. Percusso faedere contra te
conspiraverunt, vel. Leges contra te tuosque Gentes Sanciverunt. They have
conspired against Thee by a Covenant; They have made a League, and Laws against
Thee, and Thy Nations, Thy People. O! These are the Nations.

2. The Nations shall see.

By this Phrase of seeing, we may understand, that

1. The World is the very Theater and Stage, as it were; The Church is set as a
City upon a Hill, and therefore all that are about, such as Nations, cannot but
readily see and perceive most of the remarkable Changes of her case; wherefore
this without question is a special one, viz.

The Lords showing unto her mavelous things.

2. The Nations shall see. They shall be forced to see the Churches Prosperity
to their own Confusion and Ruin. O! The Mavelous Things which the Lord does
for his Church and People are Things not done in a Corner, as Paul has it to
Agrippa, Acts 26. 26. The Nations Mavelous Iniquity and Malice, Plotting and
Contriving, is in secret; O! But God's Mavelous Works, which he does for his
Church and People, are openly done in the sight of all.

3. The Nations shall see. Mavelous Things of their own Nature use to spread
far, and draw many to see them. The Queen of Sheba came far to see and hear the
Truth of the Mavelous Reports of Solomon: Sure we may say a greater than
Solomon is here, who deserves it much better, that Men should talk of the Glory
of his Mighty Acts.

3. The Nations shall see. The Nations are often the subject of God's mighty
Acts, and mavelous Things for his Church and People. Yea, they are many times
made both to see and fear them at once: I gave Egypt for thy Ransom, Ethiopia
and Sheba for thee, Isaiah 43. 3. And these are such wonders which the Nations
cannot but see, being so much concerned in themselves.

4. The Nations shall see. The Lord has promised that to his Church, Isaiah 26.
11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see; And
be ashamed for their envy at the People. Oh, it is a sight that in the World
they have worst will of. Yet they shall see their own might confounded and
weakened.

5. The Nations shall see. The Lords mavelous Things for his Church and
People, will not, shall not want Publishers, no, no, Psalm 145. 6. Men shall
speak of the might of thy terrible acts, and v. 4. One generation shall declare
thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. In the Hebrew, (...)
Dor Ledor Jeschachar Mehachecha. Aetas Aetati laudabit opera tua. One Age shall
praise thy Works to another Age: The Generation of the Old World and Old
Testament, shall declare thy Works, and the Generation of the New Testament
shall Praise thy Works, viz. Works of Creation, Providence, Redemption, Grace,
and Glory.

Having opened these two Words, the rest will come under this following

DOCTRINE.
That the mavelous Things which God does and will do for his Church and
People, shall have a dreadful Effect, a terrible, amazing, and wonderful
influence, upon all the Enemies of God, his Church and People. The Nations
shall see and be confounded.

In speaking to this we shall consider,

1. What is Imported in this, They shall be confounded. 2. What Influence the
seeing of God's mavelous Things can have, so as to procure this effect upon
them. 3. We shall apply the whole for our own Use and Instruction.
1. Proposition. What may be Imported in their being Confounded.

1. It Imports their losing, as it were the very use of their Reason. This is
one of the mavelous Things God threatens to do to his Enemies, Isaiah 29. 14.
The Wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent
men shall be hid. It Is written, says Paul, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1. 19. They
shall be Confounded, they shall not have so much as the use of their Reason.
And indeed, this is verified in our Enemies this day: Have they not manifested
their Madness; witness Sir John Friend's Prayer. It Is no Wisdom to Plot; He is
a wise Man in my Opinion that Plots not: That is true Wisdom not to Plot.

2. It may Import also even the loss of their Tongue. That they who not long
ago were ready to say, Our Tongues are our own, who is Lord over us, Psalm. 12.
4. Is it not just and right that they should now be put in that case as they
shall not know what to say? Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners
confounded; yea, they shall cover their lips, for there is no answer of God,
Micah 3. 7. This holds out, that Confusion and Speechlesness as it were go
together.

3. It Imports shame in their Countenance, Carriage, and Deportment, Psalm. 109.
29. Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle: Oh! Shame and Confusion go together.

4. Confusion may Import an Incapacity of any further Action. Oh, When the Lord
sends Confusion amongst the Churches Enemies, they must quit the Building of
their high Babels, as they did long ago, Genesis 11. 8, 9. Our Enemies this day
are they not rendered incapable of Plotting and Contriving any more?

5. Confusion may Import, (especially as it is applicable to the Enemies of
God's Church) no less than ruin it self, and a going to naught, as it were,
Isa. 41. 11. Behold all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed
and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall
perish. There you have the Exposition of their Confusion ere all be done. Are
not His Majesty's Enemies that were incensed against Him, this day Ashamed and
Confounded, and they that strive with Him, shall they not Perish? Some of them
have we see perished already; and I do not doubt but the rest shall have the
same Fate.

So much for the first Proposition.

We come now to speak to the

Second Proposition.
What are the Influences, (the seeing of these mavelous Things, the Lord does
and shall do to his Church and People) they can or shall have upon the Enemies
of his Church and People, so as to Confound them?

The Nations shall see and be confounded, says the Lord.

1. A surprising Influence. So far contrary to their Expectation. They hoped
God would never so appeared for his Church and People, and now they are all
surprised and disappointed, and so they begin to be Confounded like that, Job.
6. 20. They were confounded because they had hoped.

O, How did the Duke of Berwick carry over that joyful News to Lewis and James,
that all Things were well in England, and they hoped to bring their Cursed
Design to an effectual Issue: But now, How are they surprised? How are they
disappointed?

2. A convincing Influence. O, the Lords mavelous Works are able to convince
the stoutest Adversaries he has, Acts 4. 16. For indeed, that a notable
miracle has been done by them, is manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it, said the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes. There
is the Finger of God, could the Magicians in Egypt say, when their Enchantments
failed. Now of necessity, Lewis and James, they must see and acknowledge the
evident hand of the Lord in this great Deliverance, wrought for his People and
Church in these Nations, and they cannot help themselves in it, and no wonder
it increases their Confusion.

3. The mavelous Things the Lord Works for his People, has an incensing
influence upon them; they are usually put in a rage by them, Acts 5. 17. They
were filled with Indignation at the wonderful Things and Miracles done by their
Apostles. Oh, How are they this day enraged at the wonderful Things done by God
to his Majesty King William, to his Church and People here?

4. The wonderful Things that God does for his Church and People, puts them out
of their wits as it were, for fear, so as that they know what to do, or what
shift to make for themselves. Psalm 48. 4, 5, 6. For lo the kings were
assembled; they passed by togeither: they saw it, and so they marvelled, they
were troubled and hasted away: Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of
a woman in travail. O, has not Lewis and James, two wicked Kings, seen this
this; and do they not marvel? Does not this Deliverance, that makes us Rejoice
this day, Trouble them and make them Cry; Oh, What pannick Fear has seized and
taken hold on them.

5. In a Word, God's mavelous Workings pursues them to their ruin, and never
leaves them till it drives them to the utmost of their Confusion; even to that
as you have it, Asts 13. 41. Behold the despisers, and wonder and perish; as it
is cited out of Habbakuk, 1. 5.

2. Another Effect as a special ingredient of the Enemies Confusion, is, thar
it should be at all their might: Which Phrase may admit of a twofold Sense.

1. That all the Might of Adversaries, were they never so Potent, shall not be
able to hinder their Confusion, when the Lord's time of doing mavelous Things
for his Church and People comes about; no, no. O, There is no wisdom nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21. 30. and so no might
either: The very Nature of their Judgment will clear this; you see its
Confusion, which in effect will take away Reason, Courage, and Judgment from
them; and what shall all their Might avail them then?

The Nature of the Things which God promises to do for his People speaks this;
You see they are mavelous Things, and what can poor sinful men's Might do
against the Lord's Wonders? Aarons reed you know swallowed up the Magicians
rods, Exodus 7. 12. And has not the mavelous Things of the Lord swallowed up
the mavelous Policy, Iniquity, Plottings, Strength and Might of our Enemies
this day?

The way that the Lord takes to encounter the Adversaries of his Church, as he
is pleased to express it himself, may put this above all doubt, Isaiah 47. 3. I
will take vengeance, says the Lord to Babylon, and not meet thee as a man. If
they had only to do with men, men might meet men like themselves: O, But how
shall they, how can they, and wherewith shall they meet God?

2. It will bear this Sense also, That the Enemies of God, when they are at the
height of their Power, even at the highest pinnacle of their Might, then is the
time when the Lord brings Confusion upon them: O, then it is they begin to
think themselves Invincible, and that there is no reaching of them. Now the
Lord is concerned there; as you may see, Obadiah 3d and 4th verses. Then it is
readily they are and must be at the height of their Pride, and Pride you know
goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, Prove. 16. 18. Then
they begin to trust in very Wickedness it self, and to take such ways and
courses as are wicked, Isaiah 47. 10, 11. For thou have trusted in thy
wickedness; Thou have said, none sees me, thy wisdom and thy knowledge it has
perverted thee, and thou have said in thine heart, I am and none besides me:
Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it
arises, and mischief shall fall upon thee thou shall not be able to put it
off, and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly which thou shall not know. O,
then it is the Lord has (so to say) the best opportunity both to magnify his
Power upon them, and to get a full stroke of them; For when they are at all
their Might they use to be gathered best together, as at the Red Sea. When
Phoraoh and all his Chariots and Host were together, then did God drown them
all, Romans 9. 17. Even for this purpose, O Lewis the Great, has God raised thee
up, that he might show his Power in thee, and that his Name might be declared
throughout all the Earth.

3. A third Influence which the mavelous Things of God shall have upon his
Enemies, is held forth in these two Symptoms.

1. They shall lay their hands upon their Mouth.

2. And their Ears shall be deaf: That is, in effect, they shall lay their hand
on their Mouths in silent Admiration; their Ears shall be made Deaf with the
noise and fame of God's mavelous Works done to and for his Church and People.
O they, who not long ago did boast and brag of their Understanding, Quickness,
and Sagacity: Now, when the Lord shows his mavelous Things for his Church and
People, they appear very blockish, and can neither speak nor hear. O, How can
they speak when their Hearts are filled with carnal Grief? When they see that
they are like to lose for all their Might; That Tyrannical Power they were wont
to use and exercise over God's Church and People, and that without hope of
recovery. O, How can they hear that have received such an immediate stroke from
God upon them, as a piece of their Judgment, to make them so much a spectacle
to the world of his Displeasure?

4. A fourth effect of the Influence that God's mavelous Things for his
Church and People has upon his Enemies, is in this Similitude. They shall lick
the dust like a serpent.

Which Similitude denotes their Subjection, such as it is. This is an Allusion
to the custom of the East-Countries, where they use in their ordinary
Salutations (especially to Persons of Note and Respect) to Bow themselves so
low as if they seemed to lick the dust: So the Scripture tell us, Jacob bowed
to Esau, Genesis 33. 3. He bowed himself seven times to the ground; And Abigal to
David, 1 Samuel 25. 23. Abigal fell before David on her face, and bowed her self
to the Ground.

This denotes a Subjection with Homage as it were. O, They who a little while
ago would scarce cast an Eye, or look on the Godly; now they are content to
fall so low as if they kissed the Ground.

They who formerly looked like cruel fierce Mastiffs, are now fain to stoop
like Spaniels: O great Change! O wonderful Alterations!

5. Another effect and Influence that the mavelous Works of God shall have
upon his Enemies, is Fear, in this Similitude. They shall creep out of their
holes like worms of the earth.

This Similitude seems to hold out their fear in these three Things.

1. It supposes they were fain to fly into their holes. O, they are most dark
Creatures in themselves, and so cannot endure or abide the light of his
appearing, like those Creatures spoken of, Psalm 104. 20, 22. The Sun arises,
they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens. And thou
make darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do
creep forth. O, No wonder that these our Enemies, those haters of Light, get
them to their holes and hide themselves in Prisons and Mad Houses, under Beds,
when the Sun of Righteousness arises with healing under his Wings, lest their
Deeds should be made manifest.

2. This Phrase supposes, though they have got into their holes, yet they dare
not abide and stay there. O, Fear will not let them be secure there, even when
they are in their holes; till they are forced to creep out again. O, an evil
Conscience goes with them go where they will, and you may be sure where it is,
Fear must be also. O. they may Fear, even to be surprised and laid hold on,
even in their Dens and Holes.

3. This Similitude supposes, that when they do appear, it shall be in a most
fearful manner; for they shall creep out of their holes like worms of the
earth. O, they are readily sure to be called to an account, and that cannot but
make them afraid. O, they are such, as are destitute of all just defense for
themselves; and that cannot but make them Fearful. Yea, which is worst of all;
they have no hope for another World, to counter-ballance all these Fears in
this. And I am sure, the Absolution that Sir John Friend and Sir William
Parkyns received by those Papist Priests, (who for a cloak went under the Name
of the Church of England) I am sure, I say, they never carried it to Heaven.

But thus much for the Doctrinal part.

Now I come in the last place to the

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that the Nations shall see and be confounded at all their Might?
Then I infer, That many may get a sight of the Lord's mavelous Works done to
and for his Church and People, but shall never be the better of it. But let us
contend for another sight of God's mavelous appearings for his Church, His
Anointing King William, and his People this day, even such a sight as David's
was, Psalm. 106. 5. That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in
the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance. O, come
therefore this day and see the Works of God, He is terrible in his doing toward
the Children of men, Psalm. 66. 5. Now, in order, that you may see the
mavelous Things God has done to his Anointed King William, our Parliament
and Nobles, his Church and People this day, that you may praise his Name with a
Song, and magnify him with Thanksgiving: Let us see the mavelous and
malicious Wickedness that those Nations, (for so I may call them) those
English, Scotch, Irish, French, and Roman Papists, would have done to us this
day. Witness that most wonderful intended Massacre that ever man on Earth, or
Fiend in Hell devised. That Desperate, that Devilish, that most Damned
Conspiracy of Nations against the Life of His Sacred Majesty King William, whom
God has sent to be the Restorer of our lost Liberty; The Raiser of the
drooping Genius of Europe; The Ornament and Safeguard of the English Nation;
The Fosterer of our Country; The Delight and Love of God's People; The Settler
of Tranquillity Exiled; The Defender of Religions violated; The Terror of our
Enemies; The Suppressor of Rebels; The Supporter of Golden Liberty; The
Assertor of Virtue; The Expeller of Vice; The most Faithful Preserver of our
Laws and Immunities; The Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms. Against so
warlike a Prince, so zealous a Defender and Champion of the Kingdom and
Religion: A Prince, a King, a Hero, who deserves the Titles, and really the
Epithets of most Constant, most Invincible, most Pious, most Active, most
Sincere, most Fortunate, and the most Courageous of Princes.

For Happiness, an Augustus; For Clemeney, a Trajan; For Piety, a Constantine;
For Devotion, a Theodosius.
Thus would these Enemies have bereft us of him whom God has bequeathed us.
They Designed and Plotted like Brutus and Cassius, those reserved Enemies of
Caesar, to Murder him in secret; and not like Pompey and Cato, those noble
Antagonists, to bid him Defiance in the Field.

They designed, not like (Alcides) cruelly to Bite their Mothers Breast; but
like Nero, to rip up her Bowels. Not only (like Tarquinius) Summa papavera
amputare, lop off the Chiestains of the Nations, but like Procrustes, cut of
the Feet too. This Devilish Plot was extended from him that sat upon the
Throne, to him that labored at the Plow. And if we extend our Consideration to
the preparedness of their minds, had all that were Faithful in the Land no more
than one Neck, these Caligula's I allude to, had cut it off at one blow. Nay,
in one Sense they did it I may say: For the Head of the Parliament is declared
by Law to be King, and the Parliament (we know) is a kind of a whole Nation
Epitomis'd; and so to cut off, and Murder King William, was to Behead the
Parliament; and what was that in effect, but to cut the very Throats of the
English Nation? Oh, What Ear hears this but it tingles! Oh, What Tongue tells
this but it trembles! Oh whose Hair stands not at the hearing of it? And whose
Heart quakes not at the thoughts of it.

I remember Hyppolytus says in Seneca, Nullam caruit exemplo nefas. Never was
so Vile a Villainy, but it had Example. Ask all Antiquity, Search the Rolls and
Records of all Countries, of all Times, Ab orb condito canuit Exemplo nefas.
The World cannot Sample it. So Malicious, so Mischievous, so Monstrous a
Machination, I really believe never once entered into Imagination. Oh Mystery of
Iniquity! Oh Hellish Popish Policy! Oh Prodigious Project! What Basile says of
Herod's Wife,

(...). Her Meat was Slaughter, and her Drink was Blood. So may I say of the
Church of Rome, as it was first Bred of Blood, so it ever Fed of Blood. It
Breathed first by Murder, and it Breaths Murder still. O wherever did that
Bloody Butcher, the Pope, set his Foot, but the Ground forthwith grew Thirsty
of Blood!

In Charles the Fifth's time there were 50000 Murdered and Slaughtered by the
Pope. And, in one Year, there was no less than 60000 in France: Yea, Julius the
Second, in Seven Years, shed the Blood of above 200000 Christians. Is not Rome
worthy to be called the Sea of Blood? The Sea is not the fuller, though all the
Rivers Run into it: Rome is not the lest thirsty, though she have Drunk the Blood
of all these Thousands. Yet does she Thirst after the Blood of Protestants, the
Blood of God's Anointed, King William. Oh their Cursed, Damnable, and Heretical
Doctrine is, That Subjects may lawfully Depose Kings, and Kill them. They would
fain deny and disown this; and they say, We slander them: But they cannot.
Bellarmine, their Champion and Atlas, has Wrote a whole Book in Vindication of
Killing of Kings, and maintains Rebellion to be Lawful. And an Heretical King,
i. e, A Prorestant King, (says Sanders) is no King: therefore Kill him, Poison
him, Destroy him, Quacumque art and mart: It is lawful any way, says Mariana.

James Clement Received Immortal Thanks and Praise for his Act of Murdering
Henry the Third King of France: And I doubt not but that Bloody Butcher Lewis
and James Stewart, would have done the same to those Jacobites, who, I believe,
derived that Name from the Jacobin King-Killer. O was ever Villainy and
Wickedness cherished and honored before! Lewis and James, like Leviathans,
love to sport themselves in the Sea of King's Blood. Protestant Blood. O they
are well-skilled in the Art of Assassinating Kings! O monsters and not men! O
Canniballs, and not Hanniballs! Eaters of men's flesh, and drinkers of men's
blood! O Heathens, and not Christians! Yea, worse than Heathens; for, honest
Heathens are far better than Christian Knaves. O marvel and wonder at the
Cruelty of those blood-suckers, who intended to have sucked the Choicest blood
of this Kingdom! It was not done, it was but designed. They intended Evil
against His Majesty King William; they Imagined a mischievous Device; O but
they were not able to perform it?

That it was Designed, shows their mavelous malice and cruelty; That it was
not done, shows the mercy and mavelous Power of God.

That it was Designed, may justly provoke us to loath so bloody a Religion, and
to have no Correspondence with them.

For Simeon and Levi, Lewis and James, are Brethren, Instruments of Cruelty are
in their habitations; O my Soul come not thou into their Secret, unto their
Assembly be not thou united. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce, and
their Wrath for it was Cruel, Genesis 49. 56. 7. O Cruelty, that would have made
His Majesty King William the Anvil of their malice, to beat upon without either
Pity or Compassion. Oh malice, like the Fire of Hell, Unquenchable!

O let us not Plot against His Majesty King William, but let us Pray for Him.

We Read, that when Solomon was Crowned, and settled upon his Throne, 1 King. i.
39. to be King of Israel, they blew the Trumpet, and all the People said, God
save King Solomon. So let us this day Sound the Trumpet of Praise and
Thanksgiving to the Lord; for the Lord by this, has settled him surer upon His
Throne then he was before. The Lord has Crowned him de novo, with Length of
days, and Salvation. His Enemies that would have Cut the Thread of His
Majesty's Precious Life: they are sunk down in the Pit that they made (for they
have Cut the Thread of their own Lives) and in the Net which they hid, is their
own Feet taken, Psalm. 9. 14. (...) Sahhath, signifies both foveam and intentum,
a Pit, Destruction, and Ruin. The Destruction and Ruin they intended for His
Majesty, is now fallen upon themselves. For the King rejoices greatly this day
in the God of his Salvation, saying, I will extol thee O Lord, because thou
have lifted me up, and have not made my foes to triumph over me, Psalm. 30. 1.
But they weep, mourn, and are Counfounded. King William stands this day; they
are fallen: He is delivered, and they are Snared: He is Preserved, they are
punished: Some of them are Dead, and more I hope will Die: He is alive, and
shall I hope, live to see the Destruction, Ruin, and Confusion of all his
Enemies.

All the People said, God save King Solomon; so let us this day say, God save
King William. Salvation is a comprehensive Term.

1 It denotes and imports Deliverance from all sorts of Evil, Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal.

2. It denotes all good.

1. A happy Reigning in his Dominion.

2. A long Reign.

3. A Gracious one.

4. An Eternal one in Heaven.

3. It does import the Prayers of the Subjects.

4. The Consent and Approbation of such a one to Rule, and that we will do all
that may express our Thankfulness conducing to his Happiness. O let us
Associate our selves against all those that do or shall enter, into an
Assassination of King William. O, let them be ashamed and brought to Confusion
that rejoice at his Hurt: Let them be clothed with shame and dishonor that
magnify themselves against him: Let them shout for Joy and be glad that favor
his Righteous Cause: Yea, let them say continually, the Lord be Magnified which
has pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servant, Psalm 35. 26, 27, 28. The God
of Mercy and Salvation wrap up his Soul in the bundle of Life. The Lord
preserve him in all his Ways, both going out and coming in, from henceforth and
for ever.

Has God made known his mavelous Works to His Majesty King William, to our
Parliament, the Nobles of England, his Church and People? Has he turned our
Funeral into a Festival? Has he hedged us all in with his Providence, and
compassed about with Songs of Deliverance? O, with him let us then say, What
shall we render to the Lord for all his Benefits toward us, Psalm 116. 12.
David studied what Present he should Offer him: He lights upon that which he
was only able to give, and God most willing to receive, Thankfulness. I will
take the Cup of Salvation, and Bless the Name of the Lord, verse. 13. O, let us
studdy what Present to offer and render to the Lord for all his Benefits to
King William, to our Nobles, our Judges, his Church and People, to every one of
us, and every one of ours. O let us take the Cup of Salvation and Bless his
Name. O let us Bless and Praise him, let us Offer unto God Thanksgiving; and
that

1. Speedily, to day without delay.

2. Openly, in the midst of the Congregation. O, let young and old, men and
women, rich and poor, see our Thanksgiving this day unto the Lord for his
mighty Works.

3. Sincerely.

4. Cheerfully.

5. Devoutly: In Fear, Love, and Faith.

6. Fruitfully.

7. Universally, at all times and in all places.

8. Cordially. O let us say, the Lord is known by the Judgment he executes;
the wicked is snared in the work of his own Hands, (...) Higgaion Selah.
Meditatie in Tusculum. Res in perpetunm digne est meditatu de intentu impii and
Domini Judiciis. The Lord's wonderful Works (...)vellous Judgments are worthy
of perpetual Meditation and Commemoration.

O, then let us that are living, let our Posterity; yea, let the memory of all
Ages, all the Monuments of the Learned, proclaim the Lord's mavelous Works.
His Mercy and Power, and Celebrate His Name, His Praise, His Glory and
Salvation. Let us say with the Church; If it had not been the Lord who was on
our side, may Israel say, if it had not been the Lord who was on our side when
men rise up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath
was kindled against us. Blessed be the Lord who has not given us a Prey to
their Teeth. Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the
Snare is broken and we are escaped, Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7.

O let us all Adore His Omnipotency, Admire His Wisdom, stand in Awe of his
Justice, fly from His Vengeance and Wrath: O let us all Rejoice this day in the
Mercy and Salvation God has this day vouchsafed to our Sovereign King William,
our Nobles, Judges, and Rulers, His Church and People, every one of us, and
every one of ours. To Him therefore who has showed us His mavelous Things,
to Him who has confounded our Enemies and Comforted us, to Him who has
delivered us from the Might and Power of Nations, to Him who has discovered
the Enemies Hellish Designs, to the Almighty, the God of Nations, let us
Ascribe the Praise, Power, Might, Majesty, and Thanksgiving, from this time
forth and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

