LAW, and STATE PROPOSALS Humbly Presented TO THE Supreme Authority, THE
Parliament of England.

By William Ball, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Key in St. Pau's
Churchyard, 1659.

PROPOSALS, etc,
THe Parliament of England is Entrusted by the People for their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; not with Regular preservation is the true Final Cause
of all Entrusted Authority, how Supreme soever.
them: that is to say, for a Regular Preservation of them according to Justice,
not with an absolute Arbitrary Disposition of them at their Wills and
Pleasures, (as some State-Haereticks have asserted): so that the Parliament of
England is obliged, according to their Trust, to propagate, for the good of the
People, Laws* Consonant and Consistent with Reason and Justice; And it is the
hope of all the peaceable People of this Commonwealth, that they will
accomplish the same. In Order whereunto, I have humbly tendered these Sequells.

I. That Jurors (between Parties) be impannelled of able and sufficiently
knowing Men, of good Name and Fame for their upright Dealing; and not of Mean
and Ignorant Persons, to the great wrongs and aggrievances of many.

II. That all Judges whatsoever, who shall directly, or indirectly* take or
receive, any Bribe, or Gift, from any who have any Suit Depending before Them,
shall suffer Death without mercy.

III. That, all Forgers and Falsifiers of Deeds, Wills, Bonds; etc. Also,
Falsifiers and Embezellers of Examinations taken upon Oath in Chancery, suffer
Death without mercy; And that all Suborners and Accessaries be branded in
either Cheek with an F. forasmuch as Forgery is a most secret and pernicious
Theft.

IV. That Perjury, whereby any one is deprived, or in danger to be deprived of,
His, Her, or their Lives, Estates, or Rights; be punished with Death without
mercy; And that all Suborners be branded in either Cheek with a P. forasmuch as
Perjury may Violate three Divine Commandments, and is most Pernicious and
Dangerous in a Commonwealth.

V. That Perjurors, upon answer in Chancery to a Bill of Complaint, or
otherwise to a Petition of Right, be branded in either Cheek with a P. and they
liable (if able) to pay double Damages to the Party, or Parties wronged; or to
suffer farther Corporal punishment: that so the Rights of others may not be
concealed, nor they wronged, or vexatiously troubled therein.

VI. That all Embezellers of true Wills and Testaments suffer Death without
mercy; And all concealers of such Wills and Testaments be branded in either
Cheek with a W. forasmuch as the Practices and Compliances thereof are high
Theft.

VII. That no Will or Testament, for giving, or settling of any Lands (unless
where custom prevails) be deemed valid, unless such Will be Signed, Sealed,
and Published in the presence of four sufficient Witnesses: that so Heirs at
Law be not Dis-inherited (contrary to the Law of GOD; Numb. 27. and Common Law
of this Land) by Forged, or Fraudulent Wills; unduly obtained in the time of
agony, by Force, Fear, of Flattery; and that all Wills so obtained be deemed
Null.

VIII. That such as shall be found guilty of Fraud, shall pay treble D^mages,
or suffer severe Corporal punishment: Also, that all who shall obtain, or get
into other men's Rights, or Estates by fraudulent Practices and Devises, and
shall afterward enjoy or possess the same by Collateral con^eyances or
assurances; Also Lea^es for Life or Lives, and Mo^gages to be enrolled before
the Custos Rotulorum in the several Counti^^.
shall, upon complaint and proof of such former fraud, within the space of ^
years be outed of such Estates, and the Collateral conveyances and assurances
made Null; unless such Collateral conveyances mention some valuable
considerarion: that so, mean and necessitous Persons may not be unduly deprived
or wronged in their Rights.

IX. That all Feo^fments, Deeds of gift, Uses, and Rent-Charges, etc. be
enrolled in Chancery, or in the County where the Lands lie, before the Custos
Rotulorum, etc. within three months after their Dates, upon pain of being Null*
and in case the Party, or Parties, who should acknowledge such Deed, or Deeds,
happen to dye before three months; that then the Oaths of three sufficient
Witnesses of honest Repute, deposing the sealing and delivery of such Deeds
within three months after the Death of such Party, or Parties, who should
acknowledge the same, shall be sufficient for Caption; they being summoned
thereunto by Subpaena, or by other warrant from the Custos Rotulorum: by which
means, forged, srandudulent, and suspicious Deeds may be avoided; and the
passing of such Estates, known and manifested.

X. That all Lands, Rent-Charges, etc. above per annum, exposed to Sale, be
published three Market-dayes by Bills setting truly forth such Right as the
Vendors have, and such Encumbrances as are thereon (if any be), upon pain of
forfeiting the valews of one half of them to the Commonwealth, or to suffer
imprisonment, or Corporal punishment accordingly: And that such Bills be read
by some in the Marketplace (at the time of Market) next adjoining to the said
Lands, or in the chief Marketplace (or so esteemed) in, or within the County,
where such Lands lie, or where such Rent-Charges are issuing; and that such
Bills, after reading, be set up by the Town Clerk in such Marketplace: And
that afterward the said Bills, or true and exact Copies thereof, be Registered
in a Book for that purpose appointed, and kept by the Custos Rotulorum of the
County; the Party, or Parties paying 12 d. for every such Bill: and in London,
and other Cities, such Bills to be read, and set up as aforesaid in some Place;
and Registered, and kept by some sworn Officer thereunto appointed: By this
means Purchasors (if they take any care) will not easily be defrauded.

Concerning Commerce, etc.
1. THat (if it may be) Honorable Peace be procured, concluded* and continu^d
with all our Neighbour-Nations; that so Tra^e may b^ promoted, Manufactures
encouraged, the Commonwealth enriched, and the People less Taxed.

2. That the servile People of this Commonwealth transported into the
Plantations of America, may be more Christian-like, and humanly used, than (as
it is credibly reported) they usually are.

3. That Discovery be made (at the Charges of the Commonwealth) The Dutch would
not have set footing in the hither parts of nova Guinea, without expectation of
considerable profit, etc.
of that vast Region, commonly called Terra Australis inc^gnita,* over against
China, Japon, and the Philippina's in the Coasts of nova Guinea, and the South
Sea, or mare del Zur; which Regions are commended by Pedro Fernando de Quir;
and in which ('it is probable) as Rich and Commodious Plantations may be
discovered, as in America; and from which (if Discov^red) a valu^ble Commerce
might be held with China* Japon, and the Regions of the South Sea: however, the
Discovery will be honorable.

4. That severe Penalties be imposed on such as sell by false Scales, weights,
and measures; which is too usually done, not Diverse Persons keep true, and
false (...), and measures; and fell by either.
only in Market Towns, but also in Villages where Shopkeepers are; and that
they be subject to be indicted, etc. for such their defaults; and, upon
sufficient proof, subject to such Penalties.

5. That Pewterers be not permitted to allay their Tinn so much as they usually
do, but that they be stinted by a set propo^tion for Dishes, and such like
Utensils; and that prices be set thereon, according to the rate of Tinn, and
that by weight.

6. That the abuses of Wine-Coopers, and Vintners, in Sophisticating their
Wines be reformed; and that prices be set thereon, according to their Rates at
Importation, Customs, etc. considered.

7. That, whereas great wastes of Timber, and Wood, have bin made (especially
since the late troubles); some Order be enjoined for the Replantation of Wood,
in Wood-Land Countries, by such, and the Successors of such, who have
themselves, or whose Predecessors have, formerly felled them; and this to be
done by some Injunction; consideration being had to the quantity of Land, that
so the stock of Wood be not utterly decayed, and the Commonwealth thereby
Damnified.

8. That (fo^asmuch as much Building is composed of Brick) Bricks be larger
made, and better burnt than usually; upon some penalty to be imposed: by which
means Buildings will be stronger, and endure longer.

William Ball.

Proposal, etc.
FOrasmuch as Protection and Subjection are Relative and Correlative, in regard
whereof, not only limited Sir Henry Wotton, in his Supplement to the State of
Christendom, Page 17.
Kings, but also entrusted Potentates, and Powers, do ordinarily take some Oath
or Engagement to Govern the People under them according to Law and Justice: I
humbly therefore conceive, that it would be a great satisfaction to the People
of this Commonwealth, if the members of Or Oligarchical Trustees.
Parliament would vouchsafe to take this, or the like, ensuing Oath.

J. A. B. do swear to Protect and Defend according to my best Skill and
Ability, the People of this Commonwealth of England, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging, in their Just and Legal Rights, and Liberties; and to
maintain and procure just Laws and Ordinances; able, and upright Judges,
Magistrates, and Officers of Peace and War, in Order thereunto agreeable; and
to maintain and procure the general Safety, regular Government, and public
Profit of this Commonwealth. So, etc.

William Ball.

FINIS.

