THIRD REMARKS UPON AN ESSAY CONCERNING Humane Understanding: IN A LETTER
Addressed to the AuTHOR.

LONDON, Printed for M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street, MDCXCIX.

THIRD REMARKS UPON AN ESSAY CONCERNING Humane Understanding.
SIR,
I Have not yet received the Favor of your Answer to my Second Letter or
Second Remarks upon your Essay about Humane Understanding. You ruffled over the
First Remarks in a domineering Answer, without giving any Satisfaction to their
Contents: but the Second being more full and explicit, I was in hopes you would
have been more concerned to Answer them, and to Answer them more Calmly and
like a Philosopher. You best know the reason of your Silence; but as it will be
understood in several ways, so, it may be subject to that Construction amongst
others, That you could not satisfy those Objections or Queries, without
exposing your Principles more than you had a Mind they should be exposed. You
know there is a Sect or Party of Men among us, whom we have much ado to bring
to a fair and distinct Account of their Doctrine and Principles: They cannot or
will not fix their Notions, and declare them freely to the World, that they may
be impartially examined. I hope you do not approve that Method, nor think it
worthy of imitation. Yet if to find out Truth, be the End and Design of your
Writing, as I believe it is, it must be first known what you Affirm, and what
you Deny, before the Matter can be examined; especially as to those grand
Points that are of common Concern, and which I have made the Subject of my
Enquiries: I mean, the Grounds of Morality and Religion. And in Prosecution of
the same Argument, that we may have a little more Light into your Doctrine, I
now desire to know what Natural Conscience is, according to your Principles?

I told you in my former Remarks, That I thought it was Necessary as a Ground
for Morality, to allow a natural distinction betwixt Good and Evil, Right and
Wrong, turpe and honestum, Virtue and Vice. And this distinction, I thought,
was manifested and supported by Natural Conscience: whether amongst those that
have or have not External Laws. This, I think, is taught us plainly by the
Apostle of the Gentiles, when Romans ii. 14, 15.
he says, Those that were without a Law were a Law to themselves, doing by
nature the things contained in the Law, which show the Law written in their
hearts; Their Consciences bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or
excusing them. The Gentile Philosophers and Poets have said the same things
concerning natural Conscience, as you cannot but know; And that you must go
against the best Authors, Divine or Humane, if you deny to Man natural
Conscience, as an original Principle, antecedently to any other Collections or
Recollections.

I do not deny that you allow such a Principle as Conscience in some sense or
other; but consider, pray, how you define it, or what you say is to be
understood by it. Conscience, you Page 18.. 8.
say, is nothing else but our own Opinion of our own Actions. But of what sort
of Actions, I pray; and in reference to what rule or distinction of our
Actions? whether as Good or Evil, or as Profitable or Unprofitable, or as
Perfect or Imperfect: Or of all promiscuously, of natural Actions and about
things of indifferency as well as others. As for instance, whether we have
played well in a Game at Chess, or in a party at Tennis, is this matter of
Conscience? yet we make a judgment of our Actions in these cases as well as
other. But though they were imperfect in their kind, or not well managed, we feel
no Accusation or Remorse of Conscience for it. Surely therefore that Principle
ought to be better described and distinguished than by such a loose Character
of it as makes all our Actions indifferently the Objects of Conscience. I take
Conscience to relate to our Moral Actions only, and to the distinction of moral
Good and Evil, and such other Differences: Accusing, excusing or justifying us
according as we have observed, neglected or contemned those Differences. This
we understand by natural Conscience, and take it to be the Foundation of
natural Religion, as that is of Revealed.

Now I do not remember, that, in this sense, you have once named natural
Conscience in your Book: though you had a fair opportunity for it in your large
Discourse about Practical Principles, in your Third Chapter, Book I. But it may
be, you think there is none truly natural in this Acceptance: However, seeing
you own natural Religion, let us consider what you understand by it, and how you
can make it subsist without natural Conscience, in that Sense and notion we
have given of it. You place natural Religion, I think, in the Belief of the
Being of a Page 277.. 23.
God, and of Obedience due to him. This is good so far as it goes, and is well
supported. But the Question is, what Laws those are that we ought to obey, or
how we can know them without Revelation, unless you take in natural Conscience
for a distinction of Good and Evil, or another Idea of God than what you have
given us. That Principle of Conscience, and a true Idea of God with Moral
Attributes, being admitted, we have a Foundation for natural Religion: But not
being admitted, I do not see by what ratiocination you can collect
(antecedently to Revelation) what the Will of God is, what his Laws are, how
Promulgated and made known to us; And consequently what we have to direct our
Obedience, if we do not know wherein that Obedience consists. I may know there
is a King, and that I am bound to obey him; yet if I do not know his Laws, nor
what his Pleasure is, I cannot tell when I please him or displease him, obey
him or disobey him; if I know not, I say, in what particulars my Duty and
Allegiance are to be expressed and practiced.

Neither can we think Natural Religion a matter of small concern or
consequence, seeing, in virtue of that Principle, without any External Laws, so
far as we know, Noah, and Job, not to mention more, have been accounted Just
and Upright in the sight of God, and marked as the particular Favorites of
Heaven, by one of the Prophets. ( Ezekiel. xiv. 14.) If they had no other Guide or
Motive to Virtue and Piety, than your Idea of God and of the Soul, with an
arbitrary difference of Good and Evil, I wonder how they could attain to such a
degree of Righteousness as would bear that eminent Character, from God and his
Prophets. Upon this occasion also we may reflect upon Natural Faith, and the
Nature of it. You know how it is described by the same Apostle of the Gentiles,
He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And without this Faith, he says, it is impossible
to please him, Heb. xi. 6. Now how shall a Man in the state of Nature have just
grounds of this Faith, if he have no other Idea of God, than that he is an
All-powerful, Allknowing and Eternal Being? How from this can he prove, that he
will be a Rewarder of those that seek him? If Goodness and Justice belong to
his Essence, as well as those other Perfections, he may from the Idea of God
have a good foundation and support of his Faith; and consequently of his Virtue
and Piety. But without these, he is left in the dark, as to his fate, or future
Reward in another state.

Lastly, As to Providence, we cannot tell, from your Principles, how far it
will extend. We see Provision is made for the Subsistence of Creatures here,
that the World may be kept upon the Wheels, and still going: But as to their
Happiness, as we see it uncertain here, so we cannot prove, from the bare Power
and Knowledge of their Maker, what it will be hereafter.

So much for Natural Religion. We return now to Natural Conscience, and to what
you call Practical Principles; whereof you discourse amply in the forementioned
Chapter. As to that B. 1. c. 3.
Controversy about Natural Principles, I think it may turn either way,
according as they understand the Terms of the Question; which, in my mind, you
have not fairly represented. If by Principles, you understand distinct
Knowledge, that is, distinct Idea's, and distinct Propositions; we do not hold
innate Principles in that sense. Yet so you seem to represent them and their
Idea's; and you call them Characters, fair Characters, indeleble Characters,
stamped, imprinted, engraven in the Mind; Ch.2. and 3.
for all those Expressions you use upon that occasion. Now all these
Expressions seem to signify clear and distinct Representations, as Pictures or
Sculptures represent their Originals. Does any one assert that there are such
express Idea's, express Propositions in the Mind of Man, and an express
discernment of their connection or inconnexion before the use of Reason, or as
much before it as after it? I say, as much before it as after it; for the
fullest, clearest, and most distinct Knowledge that we have after the use of
Reason, cannot be more amply expressed, than to say it is imprinted or engraven
upon the Mind, in fair and indeleble Characters. You exaggerate the matter, and
set the question at what height you please, that you may have the fairer mark
to shoot at. If you had reflected upon that common distinction of Knowledge, as
clear or obscure, general or particular, distinct or indistinct, whereof we
have daily Instances in the Life of Man, you might have represented more
softly, and more easily conceived those Natural Impressions: which indeed
compared with perfect Knowledge, are but general, obscure, and indistinct
Notices, and yet sufficient for the Purposes to which they are designed. When a
Child feels the difference of bitter and sweet, he knows and understands that
difference in some kind or degree; for it has its Consequences, and becomes a
Principle of Action to him. Now, whether you please to call this Principle,
Knowledge, or Sense, or Instinct, or by any other Name, it still has the
effect of Knowledge of some sort or other; and that before this Child has the
Name of Bitter or Sweet, Pleasant or Unpleasant: much less can he define what
either of them is. We suppose these original Impressions to be like Gold in the
Oar, that may be refined; or rough Diamonds, that by polishing, receive a
further luster: or, to come nearer to your similitude, like Monograms or
Sketches, that want their full Lines and Colors to complete them; and yet one
may discern what or whom they are made to represent, though imperfectly drawn.
I say this only by the bye, that the Question may be better stated; for my
Design, at present, is only to speak of Practical Principles, or what I call
Natural Conscience, in reference to the distinction of Moral Good and Evil.
Accordingly, I understand by Natural Conscience, a Natural Sagacity to
distinguish Moral Good and Evil, or a different perception and sense of them,
with a different affection of the Mind arising from it; and this so immediate
as to prevent and anticipate all External Laws, and all Ratiocination. And when
I say Moral Good and Evil, I mean it in contradistinction to Natural Good and
Evil, Pleasure or Pain, Conveniences or Inconveniences, which are things of
another order and character: This inward Sense we speak of, is simple and
irrespective as to those Natural Evils or Goods, They are not its proper
Objects; They may be frequently in conjunction, but not necessarily. By these
Rules and Marks, I think it appears sufficiently what I mean by Natural
Conscience, and I wish you would as freely and fully tell us your Notion of it,
so far as it is opposite or different from this; that by a just state of the
Question, we might come more easily to the discovery of Truth. For there are
some Questions that are harder to state clearly and distinctly, than to
resolve, when so stated.

You will not now say, I believe, That if there was such a Natural Principle in
the Soul of Man, Infants or young Children would be able to distinguish Moral
Good and Evil: For you might as well expect, that in a Seed, there should be
Leaves, Flowers, and Fruit; or that in the rudiments of an Embryo there should
be all the Parts and Members of a complete Body, distinctly represented; which,
in continuance, are fashioned and brought to perfection. This is the case we
represent: Such a Principle as Natural Conscience, we say, is seated in the
Soul of Man, as other original Principles are; which show themselves by
degrees, in different times, and differently according to other circumstances.
Whether you will call this Principle, Knowledge, or by any other name (as we
told you before) is indifferent to us; but it is a Principle of distinguishing
one thing from another in Moral Cases, without Ratiocination; and is
improveable into more distinct Knowledge. We may illustrate this from our
Outward Sensations: We can evidently distinguish Red and Yellow Colors, and
yet are at a loss how to define either of them, or to express their difference
in words. And so in Tastes, Odours, Sounds, and other sensible qualities.

We are differently affected by their Impressions, and so is a Child, before
any Reflection or Ratiocination: though neither of us can give an Idea of the
Affection we feel, nor of the particular Modification and Action of the Object
whence it arises. This shows us, that there may be a power in the Soul of
distinguishing one thing from another, without Ratiocination: And if in
Sensible Qualities, why not also in Moral and Intellectual Relations, such as
Good and Evil, True and False? As our Outward Senses are sufficient (without
distinct Idea's and Propositions) to give us notice of what is convenient or
inconvenient to the Body: So those Inward Sensations were designed to direct us
as to what is agreeable or disagreeable, good or hurtful to the Soul. And as in
our Speculations we have an obscure and confused Knowledge of what we seek
after, or a kind of Presentation of the Truth, before we arrive at a clear and
distinct perception of it: so this Principle of discerning Good and Evil, is at
first obscure, and rises by degrees into a clearer light; and according to the
Improvement that is made of it, into a fuller sense of those Moral Differences.

Now, if this Account of Natural Conscience, or what you call Practical
Principles, be true; there are, in my opinion, in your Third Chapter, mentioned
before, several Defective Reasonings, or Ill-grounded Suppositions. One I have
spoke to, viz. That you represent this Natural Light, or Natural Conscience,
like our Idea's or Propositions in Mathematics, clear and distinct. I do not
consider or apprehend it so, but yet sufficient for a general Direction of our
Actions and Lives. You say your self, I deny not that there are Natural
Tendences Ibid.. 3.
imprinted on the Minds of Men; and that from the very first instances of Sense
and Perception, there are some things that are grateful, and others unwelcome
to them; some things that they incline to, and others that they fly. Grant us
in the Soul such a like Principle, which we name Natural Conscience, as a
Spring and Motive of our Actions (for that Virtue you give there to your
Principle) in reference to Moral Good and Evil: Or, which I suppose is all one,
as a Rule or Direction to our Actions; Grant this, I say, and we desire no
more: Give that Principle what Name you please, so it have the same Effect in
the Direction of our Actions. Whether it appear sooner or later, and be more or
less prevalent, that will not exclude it from being a Natural Principle: It Is
so in Reason, and Passions, and in our distinguishing some Sensible Qualities,
and in what we call Pudor Naturalis; yet those Principles are by all accounted
Natural.

But to proceed to another of your Suppositions: You seem to make account, that
if Conscience was an Innate Principle, it should be invincible and
inextinguishable, and universally received without doubt or question. Then to
prove that it is not so, Ibid..2. cap.9.
you bring in several barbarous or semi-barbarous People as your Witnesses;
Mengrelians, Tonoupinambo's, and such others. Gentlemen that are not of my
acquaintance: These are your Witnesses, to prove that there are no practical
Innate Principles or Natural Conscience in Mankind. This is like searching
Gaols and Prisons, to find Witnesses for a bad Cause. But I except against your
Witnesses, as Personae Infames, whose Testimony is of no force or validity.
It Is as if a Man should produce two or three Monsters, or Men of monstrous
shapes, and from them pretend to prove, that the Shape of Man is not naturally
regular. In the mean time, Sir, as your Plea is weak, in my opinion, so
methinks you have an ungrateful Office, To rake up all the dirt and filth you
can from barbarous People, to throw in the face of Humane Nature. This, some
will think an Indignity cast upon Mankind, and a piece of Ingratitude to our
Maker. But as to this Principle of Natural Conscience, or Natural Light,
whereof we are treating, we do not conceive it such a Light as may not be
dimmed, or, it may be, extinguished in some People. If there was no other
Principle in Humane Nature, than Natural Conscience singly, all Mankind would
be more uniform in their Actions and Principles: But seeing Man is made up of
various Principles, and such as often interfere one with another, what wonder
is it to see some following this, some that, some better, some a worse. There
is a Law of the Members, as well as of the Mind, and these are at war; and
sometimes one gets the victory, sometimes the other. Who knows not, that both
the Light of Nature and Revelation may be overpowered by contrary Principles,
Appetites, Passions, and present Self-interest? You might bring such Arguments
against Christianity, and pretend that there is no such Law given by God,
because multitudes of Men, that bear that Character and Denomination, do not
live according to its Rules.

Now if you say further, That there are not only rude and barbarous People, but
also civilized Nations that have had Practices and Customs contrary to what are
called the Laws of Nature, or Natural Conscience; I think this also is no
sufficient Argument against that Principle. You instance in some Practices of
the Greeks and Romans: But were those Practices commended or approved by the
generality of Mankind, or by those Nations themselves, according to their Laws
and Institutions? Exorbitant Practices against Natural Conscience, are no Proof
that there is no such Principle: As a wicked Rebellion in a Kingdom or State,
is no good Proof that there are no Laws against it. Nor because there are
Banditti or Buccaneers, or Commonwealths that are Pyratical, can we infer that
there are no Rules of Common Justice. As on the other hand, It is a strong
Proof of Natural Conscience, as the Supreme Law, if we find Instances and
Actions in those Heathen States you mention, the Greeks and the Romans,
transcendent or contrary to the Interest of State, and yet received with
general Applause and Approbation. As when a secret Project was offered to the
Athenians, how they might make themselves the greatest People in Greece, the
Motion was referred to be Examined and Considered by Aristides, and he made
this Report to the Senate; (...) Plut. in Vit. Aristid.
: Never was proposed a more Profitable Project, nor a more Dishonest. Upon
which Report it was unanimously Rejected: The sense of Virtue prevailing more
than of Profit and Advantage to their State. In like manner, when it was
offered to Fabricius, the Roman General, to Id. in Vit. Pyr.
take off Pyrrhus (a dangerous Enemy, and then in War with Rome) by Poison, He
nobly abhorred the Proposal; and instead of giving the Physician, who was the
Undertaker, a Reward or Recompense, as he expected, He sent Pyrrhus Notice of
the intended Treachery, that the Traitor might receive condign Punishment from
his own Prince.

These and such like Actions have always been accounted Honorable amongst Men,
and leave a sweet Odor and Fragrancy to all Ages in the Names and Memories of
their Authors, as of Excellent Persons, and great Examples. There are Two sorts
of Tempers and Actions amongst Men, which generally bear that Character of
Honorable: First, When we deny our private Interest, whether of Life or
Fortune, for the Good of the Public: Secondly, When we deny both for the sake
of Conscience, or for the love of Truth and Virtue. And if the first of these
be called Heroical, the latter may be called Divine. As on the other hand,
Nothing is more odious or disgustful than a perfidious Man, or a dry Knave,
whether he act merely for his own Advantage, or that of his Society, without
respect to the Rules of Virtue and Honesty. And if those Rules be neglected
more or less by Men, or appear little amongst some People, this is no good
Proof that there are no such Principles. As it is no sufficient Argument that
there is no Sun in the Firmament, because his Light is obscured in Cloudy Days,
or does not appear in Foggy Regions. It Is enough to prove there is such a
Luminary, if he shine clearer in other Climates, or by fits, though he be
subject to Clouds and Eclipses as well as the Light of Nature.

So I do not see any necessity of Universal Consent, or Universal Uniformity,
to declare a Principle to be Natural. How many are there, amongst all sorts of
Men, who say, they can make no distinction of Musical Sounds, or of Concords
and Discords? They say all Compositions for Voices or Instruments are equal to
them, as to Pleasantness or Unpleasantness; only some are more Noisie than
others, or of quicker or slower Time. Yet, I think, no Man will deny the Sense
of Music to be Natural to Mankind, without Ratiocination. So also, for Beauty.
I do not mean that of Faces only, or Color, but of Order, Proportion,
Uniformity, or Regularity in general. This is very different in different
Persons, and some scarce appear at all affected with it. Yet who does not think
that some Notion or Idea of Order and Regularity, and of their Difference from
Confusion or Disorder, is Natural to us? Even the Power of Reason, several
Passions, a propension to Laugh at ridiculous Objects or Actions, are more and
less, and appear sooner in some than others. And this may be observed in
Children, of whose Weakness you make great use, and frequent mention. If you
allow these other Principles to be Natural, and born with us, I know not why
you should make so much a-do about the word Innate. I should be glad to know if
you allow any Powers or Principles to be Innate, in your sense of the word. If
you allow none at all, not these last mentioned, nor so much as willing or
nilling this or that, the Controversy will be changed; and I desire to know,
what Idea you can form of a Soul, or of a Spirit, without any Powers or any
Action. I wish that may not be the Supposition that lies at the bottom of your
Philosophy, That the Soul of Man is no distinct Substance from God or the Body:
but either a Divine Influence, or the Power of the Body. This hypothesis, I
confess, may lead you to deny both innate Idea's and practical Principles.

To proceed a little further, you have an odd Exception in your 12th.
Paragraph, to show that the Dictates of natural Conscience are not Truths,
because they are not formed into Propositions; And to make them capable of
being assented to as Truths, they must have the word Duty joined to them. But,
say you, what duty is cannot be understood, without a Law: nor a Law be known
or supposed without a Lawmakers, or without Rewards and Punishments. This to me
is but Chicanry about words. But let us see how far these things make for you
or against you; Do we not preserve our selves, Do we not make use of Reason,
without the formality of a Law, telling us, It Is our Duty to do these things?
Or in the case of natural Conscience, have we not the Marks and Sense of our
Duty, and of the Will of our Maker from an inward Testimony, approving or
disapproving our Actions, according as we obey or disobey that Principle in the
distinction of Moral Good and Evil? On the one hand, Occultum quatiente animo
tortore flagellum.
On the other, -- Hic murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi.


These were both the Sayings of Heathens, that had no other Law than the Law of
natural Conscience. And so their Apostle says, They were a Law to themselves,
by help of that Principle. When you offer a Child Bitter instead of Sweet, he
turns away his Head and makes grimaces, when he has no Law or Duty prescribed
to him: nor any other Logic than what was born with him, or what he sucked
from the Breasts of his Mother. Then as to Punishments and Rewards, there is a
Presage of them from natural Conscience, and they are furthermore deducible
from the Nature of God, if you allow him Moral Attributes, as we do. Indeed in
your way, upon your Idea of God, and your uncertainty of the Immortality of the
Soul, I do not see how possibly you can prove future Rewards and Punishments
without a Revelation: nor consequently give us a Foundation for Morality and
natural Religion.

I must tell you again, that you bring such Arguments against Natural
Conscience, as you might bring against Christian Religion. In your next
Paragraph, put but Christianity in the room of innate Principles, and your
Argument will be as good. 13.
or as bad against either of them. The sum of your Argument is taken from the
Topic of Universal Practice, as conformable or not conformable to the Rule.
You say, it is impossible that Men should without shame or fear confidently
break a Rule, which they could not but evidently know that God had set up, and
would certainly punish the breach of, (Which they must if it were innate: Put
in this place, Which they must if they were Christians) to a degree to make it
a very ill Bargain, to the Transgressor. Does not this hit the Christians as
well and as manifestly, as those that abuse natural Conscience? Then you say
again, But let any one see the Ibid.
fault, and the Rod by it, and with the Transgression a Fire ready to punish
it; A Pleasure tempting, and the Hand of the Almighty visibly held up, and
prepared to take vengeance, (For this must be the case, where any Duty is
imprinted upon the Mind: Put here; For this must be the case, where our Duty,
as Christians, is manifestly known and acknowledged) and then tell me, whether
it be possible for People, with such a prospect, such a certain knowledge as
this, wantonly and without scruple to offend againct a Law which they carry
about with them, in indelible Characters, and that stares them in the face,
whilst they are breaking it. Might not this, to our sorrow, be urged against
Christians? Or to prove that the Law of Christianity is not known to them, or
believed. Neither ought you to be offended that we transfer your Argument to
Christians, seeing you your self, to prove that there is no Natural Conscience
in our sense, have argued before, from the Practice of Christians, as well as
Heathens. You allege the Practice of the Mengrelians: You instance in Duels
and bloody Wars, etc. amongst Christians. You might have applied all these
things particularly to Christians; but still we should have thought it no good
Proof that there is no Christian Law, no more than it is, that there is no
Natural Conscience. Do we not see Men, every day, in spite of Laws, External or
Internal, Divine or Humane, pursue their Lusts, Passions, and vicious
Inclinations? Though they have not only the Terrors of another Life to keep
them in awe and order, but see before their eyes, Gaols, Gibbets, Irons, Whips,
Racks, and Torturing Engines; Examples also of miserable Creatures suffering
actually for those very Crimes. If all these united Forces and Restraints
cannot keep them from extravagant Evils, can we think it strange, that the
single Principle of Natural Conscience should be suppressed or suffocated by
the Stupidity or Vices incident to Humane Nature.

In your next Section, you call for a List of the Laws or Principles. 14.
of Conscience: And so the Papists do for a Catalogue of Fundamentals. And it
would be easy to give them one, if there was but one Fundamental, (as a
certain late Author supposes.) As to the Dictates or Principles of Natural
Conscience, (call them Laws of Nature, or what you please) we say, in general,
that they are for the distinction of Moral Good and Evil: But the Cases are
innumerable, (as in other Cases of Conscience) wherein there may be occasion
for their Exercise. The general Rule is, Appeal with Sincerity to your
Conscience for your Direction: If that be obscured, perverted or seared, we
cannot help it. So your great Topics or Demands of Universal Consent,. 11.
Universal Practice, Invincible Evidence, are not to be found in this
miscellaneous World, and under all the corruptions of Humane Nature. These
Principles of Conscience, are Seeds, as we said before, that may die, or may
thrive, and spring more or less, according to the Soil they are set in, and
according to the care and culture that is had of them.

This minds me of your Dilemma in a following Section, which. 20.
you propose as very powerful or conclusive, in these words; But concerning
Innate Principles, I desire those Men to say, whether they can, or cannot, by
Education and Custom, be blurred and blotted out. If they can, we must find
them clearest and most perspicuous, nearest the fountain, in Children, and
illiterate People who have received least impression from foreign Opinions. Let
them take which side they please, they will certainly find it inconsistent with
visible Matter of Fact, and daily Observation.

The Close, you hear, is in an high Tone. But for trial of this Argument, let
us use the same method here, which we did before: And as then we put
Christianity in the room of Innate Principles, so put now in their place the
Power and Principle of Reasoning: So the Sentence will run thus; But concerning
this Power or Principle of Reasoning, I desire these Men to say, whether it
can, or cannot, by Education and Custom, (or contrary Principles; for that we
must take in, if we speak of Natural Conscience) be blurred or blotted out. If
they cannot, says he, they must be alike in all Men. If they can, they must be
clearest in Children before they are corrupted. We say, neither of these will
follow: These Powers may be weak in Children, and may be blurred or blotted in
several Persons, and yet be Natural Principles; as we see it is in the
Principle of Reason or Reasoning.

All Men will distinguish betwixt a Power, and the Actual and Prevailing
Exercise of that Power; which may be hindered by various Circumstances; and though
Natural to Rational Creatures, may be weak in some, and ineffectual in others,
by contrary Principles, or other Impediments. I see this word Innate is still a
Stumbling-stone: And we must ask again, whether you allow any Powers to be
Innate to Mankind? We say, thos^ forementioned Powers are Innate; but the
Exercise of them, more or less, is Conditional, and depends upon the
Disposition of the Body, Culture, and other Circumstances.

Thus much I have said, in defense of Natural Conscience, and Natural Religion.
I must now ask leave to reflect upon a Passage in my last Letter. I there told
you, That I writ as a private Person, without conference or confederacy with
any other, (any more than I suppose you to do.) But I told you also, That I
could not blame any other, whosoever they are or may be, that desire such
Principles of Humane Understanding as may give them good Proofs and Security
against such a System as this, Cogitant Matter, a Mortal Soul, a Manichaean
God, (or a God without Moral Attributes) and an Arbitrary Law of Good and Evil.
As to the Arbitrary Law of Good and Evil, I gave you my Thoughts against it, in
that Letter: And what is now said about Natural Conscience, tends to the same
effect. As to a Manichaean God, if he have no Moral Attributes, we cannot tell,
from your Idea of him, but he may prove so. Then for the Immortality of the
Soul, you seem now to have declared your self uncertain of it, without
Revelation. Lastly, for Cogitant Matter, this you propose as a Problem, which
you are unable or unwilling to decide.

I do not willingly dispute about what is Possible or Impossible to God, (for
we cannot comprehend an Infinite Nature) but rather what is Conceivable or
Unconceivable to us. And I will not assert any thing Possible, that is
Unconceivable, unless I have positive Assurance, Divine or Humane, that it is
Possible. Now you bring no positive Evidence of this Possibility of Cogitation
in Matter; and I think it unconceivable, according to our Faculties and
Conceptions, that Matter should be capable of Cogitation, as a power of Matter,
either Innate or Impressed. My Reasons are these; That Unity we find in our
Perceptions, is such an Unity, as, in my judgment, is incompetent to Matter, by
reason of the Division or Distinction of its Parts. All our Perceptions,
whether of Sense, Passions, Reason, or any other Faculty, are carried to one
Common Percipient, or one common Conscious Principle. For we compare them all,
one with another, and censure them all, which cannot be done without one Common
Judge or Percipient. Pray then tell us, what part of the Body is that, which
you make the Common Percipient: Or, if that be too much, tell us how any one
part of the Body may or can be so. If you say they are many; then let us know
how they conferr Notions, or tell one another what they have perceived in their
several Districts. Still they must come, however, to one Common Percipient,
either by Conference, or at the first Perception; and you are obliged to assign
this part of the Body, that we may examine whether it be capable of such a
Function, or no. I know it has been attempted by some Persons, but not so (if
I understand them right) as to make that Corporeal part the Percipient, but the
Soul exercising her Functions there. But if the Body be Cogitant, some one part
must be the Grand Cogitant, or Common Percipient. Now seeing this Percipient,
what or wheresoever it is, consists of many Parts or Particles, it is obnoxious
to the same Exceptions we made before; and is still, upon the same grounds,
incapable of performing that function.

In one part of your Essay, you seem to have ratified this Page 359.. 17.
Argument, and apply it to Motion. You say, in a System of Matter, It Is
impossible that any one Particle should either know its own, or the Motion of
any other Particle, or the whole know the Motion of every particular. Put
Cogitation now in the place of Motion, and the same Argumentation holds good:
As thus, It Is impossible that any one part or particle should know the
Cogitations of any other Parts or Particles, or the whole know the Cogitations
of every particular. Therefore there must be some other Common Percipient (that
is not material) both for the Regulation of the Motions of the Body, and for
the recollecting and judging of the several different Perceptions that come to
the Soul. I may further add, That not only the different Perceptions that come
to the Soul from different Parts and Motions of the Body, but also the
different Operations of the Mind or Understanding: Simple Apprehension,
Judgment, Ratiocination, must all lie under the Prospect, Intuition and
Correction of some one Common Principle; and that must be a Principle of such a
perfect unity and simplicity, as the Body, any part of the Body, or any
particle of Matter is not capable of.

And as Matter is not capable of the Operations of the Understanding, so far as
we can judge; so neither is it capable of the Operations of the Will. 'Twere an
odd thing, to fancy that a piece of Matter should have Free Will, and an
absolute Power like a little Emperor on his Throne, to command, as his Slaves
about him, all other Parts of Matter. Say to one come, and he comes; to
another, Go, and he goes; and to a third, Do this, and he does it? Yet such a
Liberty of Will, and such a Dominion we experience in our Soul, namely, a Power
of commanding or countermanding her own Thoughts, and the Motions of the Body.
Now suppose this Power transferred to Matter; A Power, first, to determine its
own Motions, and then to determine its supposed Cogitations. As to the motions
of Matter, The general Rule is, that it moves always in a straight Line, till
it be determined otherwise by some external Agent or impulse. But if it have a
Power of determining its own Motions, it may move in a Curve line, or any sort
of Curve, of its own accord, without any external Determination. If this be
admitted, all our rules in Philosophy or Mechanics are in vain, and we must
assert things whereof we have no Idea or Conception. And what is said of
Motion, may also be said of Figure or Situation. A Globe may change it self
into a Cube, or a Cube into a Pyramid, or any other figure, by its own Free
Will. For we find the Soul has that Power of changing the Conformation of the
Eye, for instance, or of the Hand, or other Parts. But if you say, That Power
indeed is not granted to all Matter, but to certain Systems of Matter; still
seeing those Systems are composed of common Matter, we must judge their Powers
to be the same with those of common Matter, till the contrary be made out by
Positive Evidence. However you must fix this Self-moving Faculty to some one
part of that System (for every part has not that Power and Free Will, upon any
Supposition) and when you have assigned that Divine Self-moving Part or
Particle of the Body, we shall examine the Powers and Capacities of it.

Thus much concerning the capacity of Free Will in matter with respect to
Motion. As to our Cogitations, (which have been partly spoken of before) we
find that the Determination of them lies under the command of Free Will in a
great measure; we turn our Thoughts from one Object to another, we recall past
Thoughts, and retrieve lost or half-lost Notices: And we consider and
deliberate about our Actions, which is best, and then make our choice. Upon
these accounts, there must be a common Percipient and a common Volent in
Conjunction; for these must communicate, and be in one and the same Subject.
What then is said before to prove that no Part of the Body is capable of being
the common Percipient, is now strengthened, when we add Volition to all the
other Operations it must be conscious of. For the more the direct Operations
are that must be united in one and the same Subject, and the more reflex
Operations are superadded upon those direct, still under the Cognizance and
Dijudication of the same Principle, the greater unity and simplicity is
required in that Principle or the Grand Cogitant, that performs them all, and
receives them all without confusion. And you say Page 359.. 16.
your self, Unthinking Particles of Matter, howsoever put together, can have
nothing thereby added to them, but a new relation of Position, which it is
impossible should give Thought and Knowledge to them. Upon this it may be said,
If being put together in a System, add nothing new but a new Position; then, as
it does not add Thought and Knowledge, so neither does it add a new capacity of
Thought or Knowledge. But enough, has been said concerning the Incapacities of
Matter (whether in or out of a System) to perform the Functions of a Spirit; I
will only add this as to Free Will, If Matter be capable of it, If it can
deliberate, consult, choose or refuse, then Matter is capable of Virtue and
Vice, Duty and Religion, Merit and Demerit, and also of Punishments and
Rewards; Which Hypothesis about the Powers of Matter, as to the Will, would
pervert all our rules in Moral Philosophy: as the former about the
Understanding, all in Natural.

Neither do I see a Capacity in any Part of the Body for Memory or Remembrance,
especially as to some Idea's. Take what part you please to be Cogitant and
Reminiscent, (I suppose 'twill be some part in the Brain,) all our new acquired
Idea's must work some change in that Part, and leave some Marks there for a
foundation of Memory. But we have some Idea's that have no Corporeal Marks in
the Brain, as those of Relations, Proportions, universal and abstract Notions;
Yet of these and such like, we have both Perception and Memory: And as to those
Objects which leave some Impressions upon the Brain, it is still unconceivable
how those Impressions, whatsoever they are, should be fixed and continue so long
as our Memory does: in a piece of fluxile Matter, that wastes, spends, and
changes day after day. And yet this is not all that is in Memory, for there is
a Relative Sense besides, whereby we perceive that we had formerly perceived
the same thing. Which reduplication of the Act and relative Perception the
Brain bears no part in, nor has it any Mark there, but must be the Action of
another Substance distinct from it, and from all Matter.

To these Reflections upon the Nature of our Faculties, and the Powers of
Matter, It would not be fair, nor satisfactory, to give us a short Answer and
tell us, Every thing is possible to God. It Is true, every thing that is
possible, is possible to God; but we must also consider the Capacities or
Incapacities of the Subject. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
Recipientis. And what you suppose possible may be supposed actual. Possibili
posito in actu, nihil sequitur absurdi. Pardon these old Axioms by which you
are obliged to vindicate the actual existence of such Powers and Properties as
we are treating of, from absurdity; and to make them intelligible if you would
have them received.

I formerly mentioned (in the first Letter) a general Consideration which might
justly induce us to believe that Matter is not capable of the Powers of
Cogitation. For if it were, the existence of Finite immaterial Spirits would be
superfluous; seeing Matter alone, or certain parcels of Matter (with this Power
or Impress) would be able to perform all their Operations. But I leave that to
your further Thoughts. However I conceive such a Power acting in Matter, or
impressed upon it, could not be called the Power of Matter, no more than Motion
is the Power of Matter. In Motion, you know properly so called, besides the
change of Situation, there is a Vis movens, which is not the Power of Matter,
nor any Modification of it; but the Power of a Superior Agent acting Matter. In
like manner, If there was a Vis cogitans in the Body, or in any other Matter,
it would not be a Power of Matter, nor any Modification of it, any more than
the Vis movens is. Suppose Light piercing and illuminating a transparent Body,
that Light is not the Power of the Body, but of the Sun or some other Luminary.
The Body is only Passive, whereas Power always signifies something Active.

We can distinctly conceive the Mechanical Properties of Matter, and what
results from them; but as Cogitation cannot be any of those, nor an effect of
any of them, so neither can I any more conceive the Power of Intellection or
Ratiocination communicated to certain Systems of Matter, than I can conceive
Penetration of Dimensions communicated to certain Parts or Systems of Matter;
or a Power of being in several places at once; Both which, you know, are by
some made communicable to a Body. If we grant such Arbitrary Powers whereof we
have no Idea or Conception, to be communicable to Matter, there will be no end
of imputing Powers to Matter, according to every one's Fancy or Credulity. Let
us take another instance about Occult qualities; suppose one say, That certain
Stones, which he knows, have an attractive or expulsive Power, at a Thousand
Miles distance, without any contact or pressure (mediate or immediate) upon the
Bodies they attract or expel; we must take the liberty to disbelieve or dissent
from this Vertuoso, as asserting a thing unconceivable to our Faculties. For if
we do not bound our Philosophy by some Rules, and give some Reason or Ground
for what we affirm or deny, we do but ramble in a Wilderness without Rule or
Compass: and what we call Science, is nothing but Conceit and imaginary
Suppositions.

As to the state of that Question, How far Cogitation is communicable to
Matter? We allow that a Spirit may act and Cogitate in Matter, and be so united
to some Systems of it, that there may be a reciprocation of Actions and
Passions betwixt them, according to the Laws of their Union. But still all
these Cogitations are the Powers of the Spirit, not of the Matter. Suppose in
Voluntary Motion, which proceeds from the Will, If that Will may be the Power
of Matter, then it may have the Power of Motion, or of the Determination of
Motion. And it seems to me an easier Supposition to make a Vis movens
communicable to Matter, (which I think cannot be allowed) than a Vis cogitans.
If they both be the Powers of Matter, Innate or Superadded, God and Matter are
the whole of the Universe, without particular Spirits or Spiritual Substances,
permanent and distinct in their Individuation.

And this, under favor, I cannot but think is the Mystery aimed at all along,
but concealed from us. Nor do I find any easier Key to decypher this
Philosophy, and to make it consistent one part with another, than to take that
Supposition, That God and Matter are the whole of the Universe, as a general
Ground of it. And especially of those Parts that I have had occasion to reflect
upon, or such others as depend upon them. If I have mistaken your sense in
this, It Is owing either to my want of Discernment and Penetration, or to your
Reservedness and Ambiguity of Expression. But however you may ease us in either
case, by declaring frankly what your Sentiments are as to this grand Point.
Which if you please to do, as I know the Opinion is not new or unheard of
before, (a known Sect of the Jews, and another of the Arabians, besides some
Greeks and Romans having been noted for it;) So I shall not load it with Odium,
but only examine it fairly according to the best Light I have, for a further
Discovery or Confirmation of the Truth.

'This Notion that One Infinite Mind and Matter make up the Universe, feems to
me, I say, the common Center wherein the great Lines of your Discourse meet and
terminate. And this same Notion I take to be the Root of Philosophical Deism,
properly so called, (for I do not oppose it here to Christianity or Revealed
Religion) which as it springs up, spreads it self into several Branches. You
disown and very well refute the Materialist, who would have but one single
Substance in the World, namely Matter. But as to the Philosophical Deists, who
are more considerable and moderate, holding two Principles, Matter and
universal Mind, I do not find that your Notions do at all disagree with that
Hypothesis. Nay, if I be not mistaken, this is the common source from whence
they rise, or the common Receptacle into which they run. Let us compare them a
little, if you please, to observe their Agreement or Disagreement.

The grand Principle of that Deism we speak of, I conceive is this; There Is one
Infinite universal Spirit that actuates Matter always; and according to the
different dispositions and Systems of Matter, it exercises different
Operations, Rational, Sensitive, or Vegetative. So as these are not the Powers
or Operations of particular and individual Spirits, distinct from the
Universal, but the several Influences and Effects of the universal Spirit, as
the different Compositions and Modifications of Matter will permit. This
Doctrine Virgil is thought to have expressed, and makes Anchises among the
Dead, to deliver it as an Arcanum to his Son Aeneas, in these words, Principio
caelum, ac terras, camposque liquentes, Aeneid. 6.

Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Inde Hominum pecudumque genus, Vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo ^ert monstra sub aequore Pontus.


This, you see, takes in both rational and irrational Creatures, Georg. 4.
as he had done before in a like Description; but our concern is only for
rational Natures and the Soul of Man. And if the Soul of Man be nothing but an
influx from another Principle, not a distinct permanent Substance, and the
Principle of its own Actions, whosoever goes upon this Principle, I do not
wonder if he cannot allow innate Idea's, or practical Principles in the Soul.
For there is no permanent Soul or distinct Substance to imprint them upon; They
are the Operations of another Being, and exerted according to the Dispositions
of the Body, or may be wholly intermitted when the Body is asleep. This, I
think, they speak coherently with the former Position. Moreover upon that
Hypothesis, The Soul cannot be said to be Immortal, or to act and operate after
the dissolution of the Body; for the Body then is no further capable of those
Influences.

Furthermore, in consequence of this Principle of Deism and the Mortality of
the Soul, great Doubts and Difficulties must needs arise to them about the
Resurrection. How it can be the same Man or the same Person that rises again,
when both the Body and the Soul are new. And this would bring on nice Disputes
about the Notions of Identity and Diversity. Which accordingly we find
discussed at large in the Essay, for their Satisfaction, I suppose, that go
upon those B.2. c.27.
Principles.

I will mention another Doubt or Dispute, which arises from that Principle,
viz. That the Soul is not a Substance distinct from God and Matter. From this
Position a Question springs up concerning the Powers of Matter, or whether
Matter be not capable of Cogitation. If the Soul be not a Substance distinct
from God and Matter, then all our Cogitations are either the Operations of God,
or the Operations of Matter; there being no third Substance to be the Subject
of them. This being the case, They choose (as of two inconveniences the less) to
make Matter the Subject of them, rather than God; adding this temperament, That
Matter has not this Power of Cogitation from it self, but as impressed or
communicated to it from God. Neither do they positively assert (so far as I
know) this Power of Cogitation in Matter, either innate or impressed; but leave
that as a floating Problem, which they will not determine either way. But
seeing this Controversy takes its Original only from their Principles, they
are bound to decide it, or declare which part they will take.

I have noted those Doctrines, you see, which chiefly relate to the Soul of
Man, and are found agreeable to, or consequential upon the Principles of the
Deists. If they be further tried upon the Idea of God, as you have given it
without Moral Attributes, only as a Supreme Being, Eternal, All-knowing, most
Powerful; no Deist, of one sort or other, will be excluded by this Idea, nor
any party of Men, except mere Atheists, if yet there be any such Monsters
amongst Men. So that still, in all these Principles (and these are the chief
Principles to be depended upon, in reference to Morality and Religion) there is
nothing, so far as I can observe, higher than Deism; neither do I know the
scope or occasion of some Discourses in this Essay, upon any other Suppositions
than those we have mentioned.

But I speak this with due regard always to better Information, and must take
it at present for a kind of Rationale to that learned Work, to see the
dependence of one part upon another: However, I will take the liberty to say,
that the Author cannot, upon those Principles, give us (as is pretended) a
Demonstrative Morality, as clear as Mathematics. He may give us a set of
Prudential Maxims for the Conveniences of Life, or a kind of Political
Righteousness, but will never reach what is most Sacred and Divine either in
Morality or Religion. I wish him, however, good success, that it may not be
said, Parturiunt Montes.

SIR, If you please to declare your Thoughts more freely concerning these
things, especially as to the Nature of God, and the Soul of Man, you may state
the case more distinctly, and bring it to an issue, which is all I desire. I
shall only give it a Friendly Consideration; and accordingly I request that you
would manage it with calm Reason, without Wrath or Bitterness.

Diis proximus ille est,
Quem Ratio, non Ira movet.
I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Epicurean Philosophers have given us a Method of Science, without any
other Principles than what are collected from Sense and Experience; which I
take to be the same in effect with your Method. And it may be useful indeed
within its Sphere: to make Men attend to their Evidence that it be real, and to
beat out of the Schools some empty Notions or Notionalities. But as it does not
reach the first Criterion, or the first Discriminations we make of True and
False; so also in reference to Good and Evil, those Principles fall short and
will not bear, when they come to lay a Foundation for Morality and Religion.
They can carry us no higher than Epicurus's Ethics, still within the compass
of a Temporal Felicity, and provision for it. These Authors must either go upon
a Principle of Private Self-Preservation for the Basis of their Morals, or of
the Preservation of Society; They have no higher Principle that I know, seeing
they make no Intrinsic and Essential Distinction of Good and Evil: nor include
Goodness, Justice, and other Moral Attributes in the Idea of the Divine Nature.
Nor can prove the Immortality of the Soul, or a future state of Punishments and
Rewards; And their Notion of Conscience, of Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil,
(without distinction of Natural and Moral) are so lax and general, and have so
little Sacred in them, that they seem to me to stand upon the very same level
with the rest. But if others can deduce better things from those Principles, I
should be glad to see it done.

Yet I do not account the Epicurean Philosophers to be Atheists, but rather a
sort of Deists: for there are several sorts of Men under that denomination.
Those that are mere Materialists, and own no Deity distinct from Matter, are
the very worst Deists, and scarce deserve that name or title, though they pretend
to it. Others that own an Immaterial Deity, and that Matter is not the only
Substratum of all things, are yet distinguishable into different Parties, beth
in respect of their natural Principles and Religious. Some of them will own not
only an immaterial Deity, but also particular, finite, immaterial Spirits,
distinct Substances from the Deity, but will not own Revealed Religion. Others,
on the contrary, will own both natural and revealed Religion, but not that the
Soul of Man, or any finite Spirits are permanent Substances, distinct from the
Deity; But think them only transient Irradiations or Effluxes of the Deity in
certain Systems of Matter; which hold as long as those Systems of Matter
continue, and no longer. Such the Sadducees were among the Jews, and so I Am
afraid not a few are in the present Age. I confess these have a more plausible
Plea than the rest, in my Opinion, and better deserve to be considered. We will
if you please, for distinction sake, call them Semi-Deists: or if they like
that title better, Semi-materialists. And my Business has been to show, that
upon those forementioned Principles, which I take to be theirs, neither natural
nor revealed Religion can be Established. I add revealed Religion, seeing it is
manifest that the truth and certainty of a Revelation as to us, depends upon
the Goodness, Justice, Faithfulness and Veracity of the Revealer. Which are
Attributes they do not mention, or do not prove to belong to the Idea of God.

SIR,

As to the setting or not setting a Name to my Remarks, I have given Reasons
before, and have this to superadd. If you had writ a civil Answer to my first
Remarks, as they were a civil and respectful Enquiry into the Sense and
Consequences of your Principles, in reference to those Heads I had mentioned, I
should have sent you my Second with my Name to them. But you made such an
Answer, with an overtapping Arrogance or Contempt, that it was not decent for
me (whether you would think it so as to your self, I know not) what the Writer
should be farther known. No Man is willing to be made the Subject of injurious
Speeches, how underserv'd soever. Write fairly, and closely to the merits of
the Cause, and you shall have a fair and just Answer. For I do not write for
Contention sake, nor for any other Interest than that of the discovery of
Truth, in a Matter which I'conceive to be of great Extent and Concern.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Matthew. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet street.
REmarks upon an Essay concerning Humane Understanding, in a Letter Addressed
to the Author. Second Remarks upon an Essay concerning Humane Understanding, in
a Letter Addressed to the Author; being a Vindication of the first Remarks
against the Answer of Mr. Lock at the End of his Reply to the Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

The Occasional Paper, No.1. Containing an Account of the Author's Design, with
some Reflections on a Letter to a Deist. No.2. concerning the Unfortunate Death
of J. H -- en, Esquire with a short Character of him, and Reflections on the Sin of
Self-murder. No.3. Reflections on Mr. Toland's Book, called, Christianity not
M^sterious; with Considerations on the use of Reason in Matters of Religion;
No.4. Reflections on the Ladies Religion, Addressed to the Honorable the Lady
Howard. No.5. A Defense of the Ministry, and Ministers of the Gospel, against
the Suggestions of some late Writers; with a Postscript relating to the Author
of the Reasonableness of Christianity. No.6. Considerations about the Disputes
in Religion, particularly those in which the Church of England is concerned,
for preventing the Ill Uses which diverse endeavor to make of them. No.7.
Showing the Usefulness of Humane Learning in Matters of Religion, contrary to
the Suggestions of some Skeptical Men in their late Pamphlets. No.8. Showing
the Necessity of such a Christian Discipline as is consistent with Civil Power.
No.9. Containing some Considerations about the Danger of going to Plays. No.10.
Concerning Self-murder; with Reflections on the Verdicts often brought in of
Non Compos Mentis.

A Sermon Preached before the King in St. James's Chapel, Jan. 3, School/9; by
Samuel Bradford, Rector of St. Mary le Bow; Publish^ by His Majesty's Special
Command.

The Heinousness of Injustice done under the Pretense of Equity; in a Sermon
Preached in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, before the Honorable Justice
Turton; at the Assizes holden for that County, on Monday, Aug. 8th. School. by
Lawrence Eachard, A. M. Prebendary of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the Right
Reverend James Lord Bishop of that Diocese.

Salvation every Man's great Concern; Written originally in French by Monsieur
Rapin, done into English.

Bishop Kidder's Sermons.

Bishop Kidder's Second Part.

Reflections upon what the World commonly call Good-Luck and Ill-Luck, with
Regard to Lotteries. And of the Good Use which may be made of them. Written
Originally in French by Monsieur Le Clerk. Done into English.


