SOME OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE QUAKERS (Scornfully so called by Men)
VINDICATED, And proved sound, and true, and according to the SCRIPTURES: In
opposition to the false Charges, and lying Reports given forth against the
Truth, in two printed Books, put forth by one Philip Taverner, a supposed
Minister of the Gospel, in Middlesex near Vxbridge. And hereby Truth is
manifest, and discovered, and the Controversy determined by the judgment of
Truth, between Philip Taverner aforesaid, the Accuser, and Edw. Borough,
Defendant of the Truth, who contends for the Faith of the Gospel, and for the
Word of God in the Heart, against all such Gainsayers as have the form of
Godliness, but denies the Power, and many such are in this Age.

And this is given forth for the satisfaction of all that desires to know the
Truth of the Controversy between them aforesaid, By Edw. Borough.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1658.

Some of the Principles of the QVAKERS, (scornfully so called by men)
vindicated, and proved sound and true, and according to the Scriptures. In
opposition to the false Charges, and lying reports given forth against the
Truth, in two printed Books put forth by one Philip Taverner, a supposed
Minister of the Gospel, in Middlesex near Vxbridge.
WHereas Philip Taverner one of Truths Opposers (whether through ignorance, or
subtilty I now determine not) has again appeared against me, and Truth in
Print, as in vindication of himself and his former work, who about four months
ago gave a false relation of a Dispute, but instead of mending the matter, he
has made his own cause the more vile, as may appear to such who takes a
perfect view of the proceedings, from the beginning to the end thereof; row the
intent of this my Reply is to clear the Truth further, and to take off h^s
false aspersions which he has cast upon my innocent words in my former Book,
in answer to his first. And as for the rest of his Book, which has no relation
to mine, nor to the Dispute, I shall pass it by. The Title of my first Book
was, Something of Truth made manifest, etc. To which say thou, a plausible
title to cover a railing and bitter Spirit under, that it may walk in the world
less suspected, etc.

Reply. My words are truth, for in that book truth was made manifest to many in
relation to the former dispute, to the satisfaction of many, and as for railing
and bitterness of spirit, I do deny, only I am zealous for the Lords truth, to
speak plainly by reproving them that gainsay it, and to that of God in every
man's conscience, do I desire to be manifest and seeks, not by flattering words
to cover evil, that I may not be suspected, though thou seem falsely to say it,
but let all my enemies suspect what they will, for of the Lord do I seek to
stand approved, and not of man, for the Jew inward, has no praise of man, but
of God, and as for railing language and bitter words against thee I have used
none, but speaks the truth in plainness.

The next thing thou seems to stumble at is, whereas I said, I supposed thou
had Ambitiously styled thy self, Mr. Phillip Taverner, and thou now seeks to
hide thy self from the force of my words, to the sight of the world, which
appears a little to strike upon thee, with some shame; And thou say, thou did
not prefix Mr. before thy name, but the Stationer did it, who (say thou) was
pleased to honor the man with that title, etc.

Reply. Now instead of clearing himself, he has showed more guilt of ambition
then before, and my words were, I supposed, and not an absolute charge as he
says, and had not I good reason to suppose it, that it was his ambition, being
also contrary to the express command of Christ, Mat* 23. And indeed I hardly
ever read any subscription like to it, by the greatest, and noblest of men, as
men account, and it is a thing far above humility, and not beseeming any man,
much less one that professes himself to be a Minister of Christ ^o subscribe
himself, or be with his consent, Mr. such an one, but he seems to cover himself
from ambition, because says he, he did it not himself but another, I say, I
shall not charge him here with falsehood, but I am sure it is very unusual for
any man to add any thing to another man's book, without his knowledge; I never
knew it done by any Stationer, who has had some knowledge of their ways: but
yet he acknowledges it was done in honor to him, to subscribe him Master, and
here he has Justified the thing, and showed that he is indeed guilty of
ambition, who confesses that it is an honor to him, to be subscribed Mr. by
another; for he says, the man that did it honored him with that title; and
here men may take notice what honor this my adversary looks after, even the
honor that Christ forbids, who says to his ministers, be not ye called of men
masters; but the man has honored Phil. Taverner with titling him Mr. as he
says.

The next thing treated; proves also that he is ambitious, for he pleads much
the lawfulness of titles, of civil respects, as he calls it; And this is all to
justify the title of master to himself, and thereupon has wrested diverse
scr^ptures; what though the unbeleeving Greeks, used the word Master, or Sir;
John. 12. which he has quoted* is this an example sufficient for Christians to
break the command of Christ? Mat. 23.10. neither are any other Scriptures a
warrant for any man so to do, though for a whole page he treats only as for the
lawfulness of such titles, yet in the end would shut guilt from his own door,
that he affects not titles.

For he says, this he speaks not that he would have it so done to him; and
this his seeming justifying himself proves himself guilty, knowing that he had
given truly occasion for people to judge he would have it so, and in the end
would blind the minds of the simple with words of seeming humility, that he
would not have it so done to him, as if he cared not for it.

And whereas I said in my first, that I am without any prejudice toward the
man (viz.) P. T. he says I must give him leave to question it; first, from my
railing words against him; secondly from my scornful pity expressed, etc.
says he.

Reply. I have no prejudice against him, God is my witness, and he may question
what he will, who is in the unb^lief; for its manifest by his former, that he
quest^ons where he has no just occasion, showing much prejudice in himself,
for he said in his first relation, commenting upon some of my words, if by such
words, I meant so* then it was truth; but if I meant so, then it was false; and
was not this a perfect sign of prejudice in him, who had not just occasion to
except against the words as they lay; nor could not condemn them but upon
giving his own Interpretation of them first; whereupon I said, in my first
answer, page 14. Alas poor man* must I be judged upon thy own meaning, etc. and
yet in these words I showed no scornful pity to him, though he fa^sly suppose
it, and say it, and so while he cannot believe that I am without prejudice
against him, he has showed himself guilty of prejudice toward me, and my
words, to be seen, and justly believed by many.

And whereas he says, it is doubtful how far I own the Authority of the
Scriptures, because I say in my first, we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures have had hope: have had hope says he, now it seems because I place
my words, we have had hope, his unbelieving doubtful heart questions whether I
own the Authority of Scriptures, and would falsely conclude, that through the
comfort of Scripture we have no hope now, and says he, are you now flown so
high that you need not? etc. page 3. and therefore I may now answer further;
yea through the promise of the Lord, declared in Scripture, we have hope at
this present, that God will bring down, and overthrow all such that deceives
the people, who are made Ministers by man, and of man, at Schools and
Colleges, and all this set maintenance by Tithes, and casting people into
Prison, and spoiling their goods to maintain Ministers, as this day in the
nation, many hundreds have been cast into prison, and many hundred pounds worth
of Cattle, of bedding, and all kind of goods have been distrained for to
maintain the Ministry, I say we have hope according to the Scriptures, that God
will bring down all this, and your preaching for money, and bargaining with
people for so much the year, and your preaching what you have studied for, from
the Scriptures, by a glass in a steeple-house, where the Mass use to be said,
God will confound all this, and poor people shall be delivered from the mouths
of those deceivers that makes a prey upon them, and preaches for hire, and
seeks for their gain from their quarter; and these things with many other* we
hope at this present, wherefore think not in thy self, we now do not hope; for
we both do and have had hope, through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures.

Whereas I charged P. T. in my last, that he had wronged both me, and the truth
in his Relation, etc. which he says in his answer is false, and he says he
does not apprehend me and the truth, so well agreed, that it is possible to
wrong us both ot once* etc. page the 4.

Reply. That he wronged me it appears, in his not relating all that I said at
the dispute (the ground of this quarrel) not by half and more I know, and in
relating more then himself spoke by far; and let sober men judge, whether he
did not here worng me, in relating a thing that passed between us, and relating
much more then ever he spoke, and much less then I spoke, if the truth of that
matter (were it wrong or right matter) and my self also be not by this kind of
dealing wronged, I appeal to all honest people whilst both he and I am silent;
so the false dealing and wrong in his first book, is upon him still according
to my charge unremoved, and the lie in this his last book, in that he says, I
say falsely, when I have spoken the truth, which is a lie in the highest degree,
in saying when I spoke the truth, that I spoke falsely; and his proof in that;
the truth and I does not agree, is; because I said in my first, the Saints have
no need of Scriptures to teach them, but the Spirit of the Father leads, and
teaches into all truth.

Reply. My words are Justifiable, for it is the Spirit that leads into all
truth, John. 16. and the Saints need no man to teach them, but they have the
anointing within them, and they know all things by the unction, 1 John. and the
Spirit of the Father is given them, by which the Scriptures were given forth,
and the Lord is the teacher of his people, and they need not any to say to
them, know the Lord, Jer. 31. yet they that witness this, do not make the
Scripture of none effect, but owns it in its place, yet not as their teacher,
for then they should deny the new covenant, Jer. 31. and then something besides
the Spirit leads into truth, and they have something to teach them besides the
anointing, but if this be all the proof that can be given against me, that I
and the truth does not agree, I doubt not but all spiritual men, will see the
emptiness and weakness, of the witness against me; and will be more confirmed,
rather then shaken, that I and the truth does fully agree, though P, T. speaks
otherwise falsely against me. And as if I had contradicted the Apostles words
which he quotes against me, who says, whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, which Scripture I do own, and no way
contradict; its the Error of his Judgment, which so judges, for even they for
whom the things that were written, were for their learning; yet they were led
into all truth by the teachings of the Spirit, and they were taught of the
Fathet, and what was written to them was not written, because they knew not
truth, or to teach them truth, 1 John 2.21. let him learn what this means.

The next thing he notes whereas I said, I then proved (at the dispute meaning)
by many Scriptures that some were perfect in this life, 1 Cor. 2.5. even
perfect without sin, John. 1.47. 1 John 3.7. and to gain say this, he has
brought, ^ John 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us; and says he, who speaks truth in this* E. B. or the
Apostle? as if I had spoken contrary to the Apostle* Solomon also (says he)
te^s us, there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not,
which also he brings as a witness against what I have affirmed.

Reply. Its true I held forth a state of perfection to be waited for, and
attained unto, upon earth, and I am not ashamed of my principle, neither is it
found too light, for that Scripture. 1 Cor. 2.5. does testify that some were
perfect upon earth in the days of the Apostles, and if they were so, the same
is to be waited for, and witnessed in this age, for the hand of the Lord is not
shortened, and that Scripture, 1 John. 3. whosoever abides in him sins not,
and whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, ver. 6.9. does clearly
manifest there is a state upon earth free from sin* wherein power is received,
and felt over all temptations, and over the devil, even such an estate, that
the wicked one cannot touch such that are born of God, and this was the thing I
held forth, and do vindicate against all opposers; that the Saints may wait
for, and witness upon earth to have power over sin, and over its temptations
and free from the commiting of sin, by the power of the second Adam living, and
dwelling in them, and thus must thou believe, P. T. or else thou believes not
Scripture, nor that any are born of God, or abides in Christ; if thou believe
not that, then confess thou errs in Judgment, who art unbelieving of what the
Scripture bears witness of; Therefore tell me plainly if thou believe that
there are any that are born of God, and abides in Christ, then must thou
believe such does not commit sin; else thou denies the Scripture, and what I
held forth herein I do not contradict the Apostles, nor Solomon's words; for its
true the Apostle said, if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves; but art
thou so blind that thou do not see, he speaks there of a state before
confession of sins, and the next words, says the Apostle, if we confess our
sins he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness, so I do agree with the Apostles words, and do not
contradict them; for I do say if any say they have no sin, before they do
confess their sin, and forsake their sin, and be cleansed from it, I say, they
are liars, and the truth not in them; and I also say, if that after a man have
confessed his sin, and be cleansed from it, and have his sin forgiven him, and
witnesses that he is born of God and does not commit sin; I say he speaks the
truth also, and the truth is in him, and though Solomon did say there is not a
just man upon earth that does good, and sins not; yet is my affirmation true
notwithstanding; for Solomon forgot the Lord, and his heart went after many
strange women, and became a transgressor, and in that state did not know the
birth born of God, which does not commit sin, for he was but under the
Administration of the law, which does not make perfect as pertaining to the
conscience, and paradventure in that state he being erred from God, he did not
see any that did not sin; these things will be plain to some, though perhaps
thou may shut thine eye against them, and Solomon was not our example in
conversation, I am sure, nor hardly in doctine; and thus I have weighed thy
text, which thou seems to say before, I have not weighed, and my principles are
proved sound, and thou and thine too light, and the wind of the Lord will
scatter them.

And P. T. confesses, every real hearted Christian may be, and is in Scripture
called perfect.

Reply. Then wherefore does he oppose me, who testifies the same thing, and he
now confesses even that every real hearted Christian may be, and is called
perfect in Scripture, and is not he here guilty in that he Charged me falsely,
page the 21. of his last, with going rounds like unto a horse in a mill, who
sometimes denies perfection, and sometimes confesses it, to be attained in
this life, but he is forced in the end to confess to the truth, and to justify
me.

And also the Scripture does testify the Saints were already perfect and
complete in Christ, while they were in the life upon earth, Col. 1. though
there be a time, wherein all the Saints do complain of the body of sin, in
their warfare, and travel, yet there is a state also, wherein they have put
off the body of sin, and are the servants of righteousness, and free from sin,
Rom 6.22. But P. T. shows little experience in those states, as of the travel
under the body of death, and also the victory over it, and so what he speaks,
is but by guess from other men's words, and then it is no marvel, if he err in
judgment and bring one Scripture to contradict another, not having the
infallable spirit that gave it forth, nor feeling the states, nor the passing
thorrow these conditions declared therein, for there is a time of traveling,
and complaining under the body of sin, and its burden, and a time of freedom
from it, and victory over it, yea, even in this life upon earth.

And whereas I said in my last, many of the Saints daily receive more and more
of Gods wisdom, and of his power and life, revealed in them, wherein they grow
up to Gods from strength, to strength: Now says he, but whether he does not
own some to have attained so high, that there can be no addition, is a query,
my soul, (says he) has not been able to enter into his secrets, in this thing,
because my words were, many of the saints, etc.

Reply* My first words, it seems he cannot contradict, but owns them to be
true, so I need not defend them, only he supposes a question, in which there
is not much edification to be answered, and I have no secrets, in what I spoke,
for to the Children of light, my words are plain, though to P. T. and such they
may be parrables, and secrets; but as for my own particular, I now here answer
the question, and further reply, I do grow up in wisdom, and knowledge daily,
and never knew so much of P. T. deceit, as now I do, since, and at that
dispute, (the ground of this our debate) so I thought good to let him know,
that I do grow in truth, which does daily discover more and more, deceit in
him, and them that opposes truth, and so also grows in the knowledge of his
error of Judgment, and Ignorance, that I may condemn it, and judge it.

And whereas, I said the light, which every man is lightened withal by Christ,
is sufficient, to bring up every man to believe in Christ, that loves the light
and walks in it, and unto such is grace added, and increased daily, etc. as in
the 16 page of my first, more appears.

In opposition to this, to over throw it, as he supposes, he has nominated
that Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.14. the Natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discrened, etc.

Reply. Now my words are true, and no contradiction to the Apostles words,
except to such as are blind, that cannot discern between light and darkness,
and such will judge falsely, and out of an evil mind make an appearance of
seeming difference, where there is none, for the light, that lights every man
that comes into the world, is Christ, John 1.9. and that Christ the light that
lights every man that comes into the word, is sufficient to bring every man,
that loves the light, and walks in it, to believe in Christ; these are my
words, and the intent of my mind, and would any man, that were not stark blind,
make any opposition against this doctrine, or bring a Scripture to prove the
contrary? which Scripture I own, and does no way contradict, for the natural
man does not perceive the things of God, nor know them; yet this is not
contrary to what I say, that Christ Jesus lights every man that comes in the
world, which light, (Christ) is sufficient, and he changes men from Natural to
spiritual, as they are brought to believe in Christ that has lightened them;
and he opposes me, as if I should say, or hold forth that the Natural man
perceives, and knows the things of God, and that the natural man has faith;
which I never spoke, nor entered into my mind to say; so he has drawn his
evil consequence from my words, and then confounded his own Conception; but my
words remains untouched, for my saying and intent is, that Christ lights
every man that comes into the world, and his light is sufficient, to give
faith, and to change a man, from natural to spiritural, and to give him the
perceiving and knowledge of the things of God, and of his spirit; and my words,
nor intent is no contradiction to the Apostles words, though P. T. falsely
judged so, for want of better understanding, I suppose rather than through
subtilty at this turn; and thus my principle is proved sound, and the title of
his book a lie.

And whereas I said, that Christ wrought righteousness perfectly without us,
and also fulfils righteousness in all that believes, and no man is justified by
one of these, without the other, or that has not the other, page 12. of my
first.

He says, whether I do not confound justification, and sanctification, he
leaves all rational men to judge, etc.

Reply. That Christ wrought righteousness without us, is not denied by him, nor
that he fulfils the righteousness of the Law in the Saints, he cannot well
deny, let him read Rom 8.4. and that no man is justified by the righteousness
that Christ wrought without, who believes not, nor is converted to God, but in
the power of Satan; this all the Children of God believes, and knows, that
none are justified, by Christ's righteousness without, but who are converted to
God and has received Christ, and he is in them, for else they are rebrobates,
and not justified; and so I am not ashamed of my principle, though he would
slander it, to be too light, for he that has not Christ, Gods righteousness
within him, is a reprobate, and not justified, by any righteousness without;
neither do I confound justification, and sanctification, which he falsely
charges me with, for they are one in Christ, for he is made unto us
sanctification and justification, and the man, that is in the pollutions of the
world, unsanctified, is not justified, but condemned, so none are justisted by
a righteousness without them, but them that are sanctified by him within; this
I own, and do not deny, and men that are in the save corrupt reason, with him
must not I be judged by, and also I do justify, if any work be wrought by us,
in the strength and power of grace, and not in our own strength, then it is the
work of Christ in us, the work of Gods own righteousness, and that no work or
word is justified, but what the spirit of Christ, leads unto; and though P. T.
ignorantly commenteth upon these words, yet are they words of truth and
righteousness, and all that he says against them, proves not the contrary.

And whereas, I did ask him, which he had ignorantly affirmed in his Relation;
Whether that righteousness which Christ works in us, in his strength and
power, and not in our own, is called our righteousness? which he seems to
answer, but he has mis-understood my words, for I meant not Ours by enjoyment,
but Ours in the sense the Prophet speaks, when he said our Righteousness is as
filthy Rags; I know the Righteousness that Christ works in us, by his Spirit,
and the power of his Grace, is Ours by enjoyment in the second Adam, as the
gift of God to us, but not Ours in the first Adam, in the righteousness of the
Law, in the state not converted, and that was the strength of my Query, where
that Righteousness wrought in us, by the Spirit and strength of Christ, and not
in our own, is called our Righteousness, ours as in the first Adam; but I see
thou have not understood the meaning of my Query, for weakness of
understanding, and then how should thou rightly answer it.

Also I Queried, How Christ working Righteousness in us, by the power of grace,
not by our own strength, can be called the righteousness of the Law, which he
had affirmed; now I meant the righteousness of the Law in the flesh, and not in
the Spirit, I know the working of Christ, both in us, to will, and to do, by
his Spirit, and strength, and power of Grace, is the fulfilling the
righteousness of the Law by Christ in us; but it is not the righteousness of
the Law in the flesh wrought by us, as unborn again; but to this thou have not
answered, but have answered thy own conceiving, and not the innocence of my
Queries.

And whereas he stumbles, and is offended, because I said, No man is justified
in any word, or work, but what they are lead unto by the Spirit, and those
words and works the Spirit leads unto, are justified, and no other words or
works, and from this he would falsely conjecture, I hold a justification by
works; and by something without, or besides that which Christ wrought without.
I say no, by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh living be justified, but yet
he that moves and leads into words and works of Truth, and Righteousness,
the same does justify the Creature in the words and works which he is lead
unto, and this is not in opposition to the Apostles words, which he seems to
bring against me, Romans 5.8, 9. Whiles we were sinners, Christ dyed for us, much
more being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from the wrath; this is
not contrary to what I say, for we do own the blood of Jesus to justify, but
yet not such who are not cleansed by it, and lead by the Spirit into all truth,
but it is they that are justified only who are lead into all Truth by the
Spirit, such are justified by his blood in the Spirit, and saved from wrath,
who are born of the immortal Word, but they that remain in sin are not
justified, nor saved from wrath.

Then he Queries, Whether I shut pardon of sin out of doors? I answer no, for
they that are lead into all Truth by the Spirit, their sins are pardoned and
forgiven, and remembered no more, but blotted out, and cannot be read, for they
are cleansed from it, and commits not sin; then he asks, Whether I grant two
formal causes of Justification, the one forgiveness of sin, the other inherent
righteousness; I say, both the cause and the work of Righteousness is in God,
his free love and mercy, which is over all his works, and they receive the work
of it, and the gift of it that are lead by the Spirit, as the effect thereof,
and none else, though he ask, Whether forgiveness of sin has its rice from
what Christ works in us* or from what Christ has done and suffered for us? I
say, whatsoever Christ has done, and suffered without man, while man has not
received Christ, nor the work of Christ in him, but remains in the first Adam,
in transgression, the true work and ground of justification, he knows not, nor
has not, neither knows the Mediatorship between God and him; then in the
conclusion of this matter, P.T. says, Thus far to show, E. B. and the truth
are not so well agreed, but he that cleaves to one must forsake the other, etc.

Reply. Hold Friend, come back again, what have thou proved yet any thing
against me, save that I hold the truth: thou have drawn a conclusion too soon,
without sound evidence, and thou must not be judge in thy own cause; neither
have thou proved me and the truth to disagree ever a whit, as just men may
judge; it appears thou art the man that seems to be righteousness in thy own
eye, and justifies thy self, and would condemn the righteous; and though thou
say, we do not agree, viz. E. B. and the truth, yet thou have not, nor never is
able to prove it, for all that are sanctified are justified, and none are
justified, but them that are sanctified, though not as a cause, yet as the
fruit and effect, which will appear in that man that is justified.

The next thing he observes, whereas I said, It is true, a public Dispute I
had, the time and place mentioned, with a company of Priests, and this same Ph.
Taverner was one of them, etc.

First, P. T. in answer to this has pleaded for the honorable Name of
Priests. Reply. Yea, the Name is honorable; who are come to the Priesthood
that was made after the power of an endless life, to which P.T. and the
Generation of Priests are not yet come as they make manifest; but that
Priesthood was not my meaning, neither did I speak scornfully and reproachfully
against any that labor in the Ministry of the Word, as he falsely charges me,
line 34, 35. but the people might know who I meant by that word Priest, for
Ministers of the Gospel, I could not call them that are not so, without offense
to my Conscience, because I am taught to speak the truth in all things; but
Priests I may call them, such I mean as disputed against Christ, and spoke
against him, the Priests that were subverted from Gods Law, and that are
persecutors of the innocent, such Priests I mean, and lawfully and truly such
Priests I may call them; And as for laboring in the Ministry of the Word,
which he signifies as if they did; do not they labor to get peoples Money, and
Tithes, the tenth of Corn and Hay, and Eggs, and Pigs, and Stipends so much a
year, or so much a Sermon; if it be not thus with some at least, let the
Country thereabouts judge; and what was the meaning that P. T. himself was
about removing from one Parish to another, a little while since, except for
money and hire; tell not of the Ministry of the Word, till ye repent and
reform your selves by denying your Hire, and Tithes, and old Papish ways, and
Houses called your Churches, and all your practices of Popish Priests, for your
Garments yet smell hereof, and your wages give evidence that you are of the
stock of the Papish Priests, Priests that persecuted Christ to death, and not
of the stock of the Priests truly called and ordained under the Law, keeping
the Covenant, nor yet Priests in the Gospel administration, for I know you
deserve not the Title of Priests, upon neither of these accounts; and as for
scorning, with which thou chargest me; thy charge is false, yet am I brought to
glory in the Lord over all the false Prophets, and Deceivers, rejoicing with a
holy derision, even as the Virgin, the Daughter of Sion despised and laughed to
scorn, Sennacherib, Isai. 37.22. and in no other sense.

And whereas I said to the people about Draton, concerning their Teachers,
Cease, O cease from your Teachers without you, and hearken to the voice of the
Lord, from them who are dumb Shepherds, and preach for hire, that take gifts
and rewards for Preaching, etc. as in the 17, and 18 pages of my first; to this
he says, and Queries, Why am I a teacher of them called Quakers, and says my
charge is high, but do not I charge it salsely upon some who are as far from
the guilt of it as my self, and thus he goes on, page 19.

Reply. Good reason I have to bid you cease from all their Teachers without,
even as the Prophet, Isa. 55.1, 2. I answer I am no such kind a Teacher as
preaches for hire, and divines for money, and for great gifts and rewards, and
that does make merchandice of Souls, yet am I one that turns people from
darkness to light, and from Satan's power to God, and to the anointing, that it
may dwell in them, that they may need no man to teach them; and such were the
Apostles, and them that are sent of Christ; but such Teachers I would have them
to cease from, where people are always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. and such Teachers are you about Draton, as
well does appear, and between these two kind of Teachers there is a great
difference; and though my charge is high, yet is it just, and I charge none
falsely herein, for who can clear themselves from the guilt of it, of that
Generation, if any, I condemn them not; but can P.T. do it? ask his Neighbors,
has not he sums of money by the year, Tithes, or other wages for preaching?
try him, give him nothing for a year or two, and then if he preach to you, and
never complain for want of wages, and money, then I will believe he is clear,
and then he may better boast than he can now; and as for diverse of that
Function in that County, they have cast men into Prison where they yet lie, and
taken suit of them at Law, and taken their Goods, because some could not for
Conscience sake give you Hire, and Tithes, and Money; and are these free, or
guilty of my charge? let the Lord judge, and all his Saints. He says, He does
not plead for all who go under the name of Ministers in England, he fears there
is many of them no better than Wolves in Sheeps clothing, etc. Then why does
he not come out and cry against them, but remain amongst them, in their
practice, for wherein can he clear himself of any one thing which they are
guilty of, which he confesses are Wolves in Sheeps clothing; was not his Call
the same with theirs? and is not his practice in Ministry and maintenance
generally the same with theirs? if he have ought to say to clear himself, we
will answer further, otherwise all men shall judge, that while he accuses some
of Englands Ministers to be Wolves in Sheeps clothing, himself is found also
guilty, except I say he can make appear a perfect difference between his Call,
Practice, and Maintenance, and theirs, which he is never able to do, or to
justify, that he is not of the same nature, and by the same Spirit, but
contrary to theirs that he accuses, and fears to be Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, and I have as much ground to suspect him to be one of the Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, as he has ground to suspect his own companions, and
Generation to be such; and in that he says some of the Quakers have been found
guilty of Blasphemy, and that some of them are found vain, light persons, or
heady, and high minded; he does here secretly charge and prove nothing, for
Blasphemy we are come out of, and have denied all lightness after the flesh,
and high-mindedness, and if any such come among us, they are denied, and are
not of us till they be converted to God, and turned from all evil; but this
his secret charge against others, is but that himself may seem clear; then he
asks, Are all guilty of preaching for Hire, and divining for money, etc. and he
bids me not condemn the generation of the righteous, and then confesses, they
take that which the State allows, or that which they have given by persons, and
justifies it, and says he, it is not a preaching for hire, etc. page 19 of his
last.

Reply. All that I charge to be guilty are so, for I charge not the guiltless,
but ask the country people; ask them how many of their teachers are clear, and
has not money, Tyths, or other things for preaching; and I have taken heed of
condemning the righteous; and yet dare not let the guilty go unjudged and
unreproved; and therefore them I do reprove; and now in the end he has
justified preaching for hire, though he in the same page seemed to deny it; but
whether is that a maintenance according to Gospel ministry; as practiced in
the days of Christ and his Apostles; or whether that comes not under the
account of preaching for hire, in taking gifts of the State, and gifts of
persons, which thou justifies; no such maintenance did Christ allow to his
ministers as to take sums of money yearly for preaching, nor such things never
were justified by Christ: but into whatsoever house you enter, eat such things
as are set before you, says Christ: and that is Balaams practices, to take
gifts of the State; or of great men, for he would have taken the gift of
Balaac; so by their own account the best sort of Englands teachers, (for some
of them thou pleads not for) goes for gifts and rewards, as the false brethren
did in the days of the Apostle; for though you would seem to clear them of
preaching for hire; yet have thou proved them guilty, of preaching for gifts
and rewards; and is not their taking gifts from the State, and persons, which
thou justifies, a perfect preaching for gifts and rewards, as ever the false
brethren, which the true Apostls declared against; and so out of thy own mouth,
they are proved such, (even the best of them which thou vindicates) as goes in
Balaams way, preaching for gifts and rewards; and is it not time now for people
to cease from you, who are found by thy own confession, in Balaams way, and the
way of the false Apostles; preaching for gifts and rewards from persons, and
from the State; and so out of thy own mouth I am justified; and your selves
condemned.

Then whereas I said, who are dumb Shepherds, which do not gather you to God,
etc. And he says, there are many who lift up their voice as a Trumpet to tell
people of their sins, etc.

Reply. It appears true through all the nation, that people are not gathered to
God, for does not wickedness a bound, and people show forth an unconverted
state, and what though many may out of Hypocrisy, and for ends to themselves,
cry against sin in others, and live themselves in the same, people hereby is
not profi^ed at all; for such as have run, and not been sent, does not profit
the people, for while themselves live in that which they cry against in others,
the power of the Lord is not with them, to convert sinners; but for a better
discovery of the teachers of this generation, I refer the Reader to a book,
called, A just and lawful trial of the Teachers, etc. wherein they are set
forth what they are at large.

The next thing he has observed; is where I charged him in my last, to have
given a relation of much more than he spoke, said I; I believe four times as
much; and much less then I spoke at that dispute; and at this he seems to be
offended, yet confesses himself guilty, but not guilty so much as four times;
well, but many that were there present who have not forgotten the matter, may
truly seal to my charge in this particular; and he seems not to clear himself
at all, but is forced to confess himself guilty by silence, that he related not
so much by far as I spoke; and yet called his relation a faithful account; but
was thereby proved unfaithful, though now he would seem to cover himself and
blame me, for charging him too deeply; but my words remains true upon him; that
his former work, was neither perfect nor altogether honest; and in this he has
no whit amended it, but the rather made his weakness more manifest, as the
honest reader may judge.

Then whereas I charged him, with a vain, light scornful Spirit, because his
first book he called, the Quakers Rounds, and he would excuse himself from my
charge, and says, that it was a name according to the nature, etc.

Reply. My charge on him was true, for his title did savor of a scornful
spirit, for the name Quakers, was given in scorn and derision, and he to that
end do use it; and as for going rounds, of which he speaks, himself is the most
guilty; as before I have showed; in denying a thing and then confessing it.

And whereas I charged, that his former was not a faithful account, though he
called it so; and I proved my charge which he is not able to remove, that it
was an unequal and false account, by relating much more then himself spoke, and
much less then I spoke; and this he confesses still, and that I am sure made it
a false account and untrue, and he clears not himself of it; though he say,
Christ spoke many things at several times which are not particularly related;
yet Lukes relation, and John's relation was true, etc.

Riply. Their relation was true, in that wherein they took in hand to relate,
they did relate truly; but he has taken in hand to relate, that which he has
not done truly, as in my first, I did make appear, as may be seen, its called,
something of truth made manifest* etc. to which I refer the Reader, to
understand more of P. T. his folly; and the manifestation of truth.

And wheeras he again charged the Quakers, with a Spirit of jeering, and scorns
and jeers are not a fruit of the Spirit, says he, etc.

Reply. He here again charges falsely; for we know that Scorning and jeers after
the flesh are not works of the Spirit, nor fruits of it; but that we have
denied and its cast out; neither do we scorn, or jeer any, saving as in Isa.
37.22. Then he no less then confesses his wrong dealing, who in his last,
changed R. G. word, from called, to owned; which word is of much consequence in
that place; but would cover R. G. by saying, that R. G. did not undertake to
prove the Scriptures considered as mere writings; but the thing contained in
the Scriptures, to be the word of God, etc.

Reply. Here P. T. has endeavored to mend the matter, by his conception and
meaning, given to R. G. words; now the words of R. Goodgroom was, he said, he
would prove the letter, the word; and upon that brought his Argument; and is
not the letter mere writings, and nothing else; but when they see they cannot
make good their own words, then they turn of, the strength of reproof, by, they
meant so, or they meant so, and no man ever yet could, or can prove in all the
Scriptures, that the letter (the writings) are called the word; but as I still
confessed, that which is written of, is the word, and the writings are the
words that declares of the word, which was in the beginning; but P. T. would
fain reconcile this difference between us; say they, the writings, the letter
are the word; say I, that which is written of, is the word, now betwixt these
are great difference, as spiritual men may judge; as much as between a dead
Trumpet, and a liveing breath sounded through it; nay, its hard to reconcile
that which is contrary in nature, they must leave preaching for money, and
cease to take Tithes and gifts for preaching, before I can be at unity, and
another birth must speak and live in them, and that which now lives in them
must be slain, and their Crown laid down, before reconciled I can be to them or
they to me, though I have no envy against persons, more then the Saints had
with them that opposed the truth, nor no weapon shall I use against them;
saving that that is Spiritual, and the sword that goes out of the Lambs mouth,
and all the many Scriptures which he quotes p^. 23. does neither say nor
signify, that the letter (the writings) are the word; or so called, though
Moses, Deuteronomy. 5.5. said, he would show them the word of the Lord; did he then
show them the letter, the writings, the Scripture; I say no, therefore he did
not call the writings and the letter, the word of God as you affirmed, and
seeks now to prove; but thou perverts Scripture, and proves nothing to purpose,
and though many times the word of the Lord came to such a Prophet, and such a
Prophet, as thou have proved, in Hosea, Joel, and others; yet did the writings,
and the letter come to them; or that which the letter and writings declares of;
let wise men judge, that nor all thou can say, does prove that the writings,
the letter, is the word of God, or that ever any of the holy men of God called
them so; so that till better proof be given which I never expect; I need not
revoke any thing that I have said contrary, viz. that the letter and writings
are the word, or by the holy men of God so called, but still I say the
writings, and letter are not the word; but the thing written of, is the word of
God, that lives for ever. Then in that I charged R. Goodgroom with saying, when
I had my Bible in my hand at the dispute, I had the thing signified in my hand,
said he; which thing P. T. in his first relation had much falcified, but now he
seems to acknowledge the thing, and excuses it, by supposing it was a slip of
his tongue, the highest matter of offense in it; as for the words, not only my
self but diverse others do well remember them spoken by R. G. thy fellow
disputant, and had he or you then confessed a slip of the tongue, it had gone
no further, but in that thou in thy first relation, gave a wrong account
thereof, and had laid down the thing quite otherwise then he spoke it, this
made the matter more a transgression, and thy account to be false; neither am I
ready to catch words from the mouth of my apponent, as thou charges me, but
that charge is justified against me and the truth, I must needs make use of it,
to show the folly of such men, that will so do, even out of their own mouths
often, and by their own words, to confound them, and would thou have me to give
away a just cause through n^glect of hearing and taking notice of such foul
words, as to say, I had the thing in my hand that was signified of in the
Bible, when I had the Bible in my hand; and so set deceit a top on me, for want
of repoving evil; I am otherwise taught, do thou judge what thou will; and
herein my principles are found to agree with the Scriptures, for it says, a
man shall be justified by his words, and by his words shall he be condemned.

And as for my answers to his queries, raised from some words of mine written
in a book, called, the Standard, etc. my answer say thou, is little else then
asserting the same thing over again, etc. now I say its needless here, to
transcribe the Queries and answers over again, but let them be looked in my
first book Iled, something of truth made manifest, etc where it may be seen
that my answers are sufficient, and laid down to the satisfaction of all
reasonable men that desires to be resolved; though thou say, there is as little
evidence of truth in the last, as in the first; but does not at all discover
the falsness of them in any particular, which had been right for thee to have
done, and not to have charged evil in general upon my answers, and prove
nothing; but who will believe him except such as takes his words for an oracle,
for them that have received the good undestanding cannot believe him.

Then in the conclusion, he charges me with harsh kind of censoriousness;
because I said, what can be in the heart of such a man that can draw so bad
consequence from such upright words; when in his former he had concluded, that
I held forth giddy doctrine, and weakened the authority of Scriptures to beget
undervaluing thoughts of them, and such like, because I had affirmed the truth,
in saying, the devil and Pharaoh spoke something that's written in Scripture,
and had I not reason to question what is in his heart, who had the boldness,
without fear to conclude so evil against me as he did, not proving the contrary
to what I said; and in that I did charge darkness and blindness upon him, so I
do and may still till he repent, for does he not accuse me falsely in many
things, as in saying my principles are too light, etc. but proves not
particularly his charge; and in his first book accused us, as if we had a Pope
in our bellies, which words are both lies, and scornful; and are not these
things true signs that he is in darkness and blindness; and so my charge is not
false upon him.

Then he says he will not judge E. B. hastily, etc. Answer, has not thou
falsely judged me already in many things, as I have showed, yea and the Lord in
time may let thee see, thy judgment is false, and awaken thy conscience to
repentance; and then shall thou confess I have done thee no wrong, but the
wrong dealing lies at thy door; so that by what is said, the title of thy book
is a lie and utterly false; which is, some principles of Edw Buroughs, called
a Quaker, examined and sound too light.

Reply. Now in this I shall not be judge altogeh^er in my own cause, but leave
this to the view of sober men, and require their judgment when they have read
this soberly over, what one particular instanced by him, is proved to be
unsound or too light, for according to the testimony of the holy men of God in
Scripture, thereby may I confirm the truth of what I have, and do hold forth;
and to every man's conscience do commend my self to be approved in the sight of
God; and good report or bad report of men I regard not, but treads over them
both; and wherein the truth is wronged I am bound to give my evidence for it,
and against its opposers; and that is the very end of this my present work, to
contend for the truth and not for mastery; though truth does give me mastery
over deceit; and to hold forth the same faith, light, and truth, which the
Apostles witnessed before the Appostacy, which has been clouded in all this
dark night of Appostacy, which has been over the world, for many ages since
the man child was cought up to God, and the woman fled into the Wilderness,
spoken of in the Revelations, but now the light is made manifest, and the glory
of the Lord is revealing, and the day is dawned, and the night is over to many;
and the subversion of this Ministry now in England, is clearly seen from what
the Ministry of Christ was in the days of the Apostles. And now as concerning
this controversy, between Phill. Taverner, and my self, who ever is not
satisfied herewith, but desires a full and true account of the matter, may
peruse his first book, called, the Quakers Rounds, etc. with my first answer,
called, something of truth made manifest, in opposition to a false account,
etc. And then his second book, called, some principles of Edw. Buroughs, etc.
and then this my last, let them be all read in order and soberly, by such as
are not satisfied about the matter, and I doubt not but thereby you may be
resolved, who is in the truth and who is in the error, and they may see that my
last book he has not faithfully answered, but passed by many material
particulars, and in something has no way seemed to clear himself of what I
have truly charged upon him, but he remains under the guilt of my charge, and
to the sight of Christ in every man's conscience, and to all whose judgments
are thereby guided, I do refer my self to be judged, and what I have written,
I leave to be judged.

And diverse other things there are held forth hy Phill. Taverner, which I have
said little to; but they are recorded as his principles among a great number of
the Priests and professors, in a book answered, to go a broad, called, the
Priests and professors principles, and the Quakers answer to them; whereby all
that desires further to be satisfied may, in reading many hundreds of
particulars, sayings, and affirmations of doctrine, held forth by preaching and
print, by the Priests, which are answered, and the error of them shown; to
which I refer my reader to know more, if what I have here written be not
enough, for the manifestation of truth is my crown, and life, over all the
world.

London, 20, of the seventh month 1658.
FINIS.

