THE Seaman's Spiritual Companion: OR, Navigation Spirituallized. BEING A NEW
COMPASS FOR SEAMEN.

CONSISTING Of Thirty-two Points; Directing every Christian how to Stear the
Course of his Life, through all Storms and Tempests; Fit to be Read, and
seriously Perused by all such as desire their Eternal Welfare.

Published for a general Good; but more especially for those that are exposed
to the Danger of the Seas.

By William Balmford A Well-wisher to Seamen's Eternal Welfare; And Recommended
to the Christian Reader by J. F.

To which is prefixed, a Preface by Benj. Keach, the Author of W^r with the Devil

They that go down in the Deep, and occupy in the Waters, ^e^ Thy Wonders,
Psalm. 10^. 22. London, Printed for Benj. Harris; and are to be Sold at his Shop
at the Stationers Arms in Sweetings-Rents in Cornhil, near the R^^al-Exchange,
1678.

Licensed,

January 3d. 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANG.

TO THE Ingenious SOCIETY OF SEAMEN, The Author wishes all Happiness in this
World, and Eternal Felicity in the World to-Come, through Jesus Christ, our
LORD, etc.
INgenious Seamen, who for honest Gain,
Often rides Tryumphant over the Liquid Main;
Whence does a far more plentious Harvest flow,
Than from the Husband-Man's industrious Plow:
To You, who through the Winds and Waters pierce,
To you alone, I Dedicate my Verse.
If this small Piece but so effectual prove,
As it is from me the pure Effects of Love;
Then shall I think my Labor, Cost, and Pain,
Will be rewarded with a treble Gain.
And that my Love and Labor may be blessed,
One thing, kind Friend, I humbly do request,
That once a day thou will devote thy Heart;
One Quarter of an Hour s^t apart,
To think of God, from whom thou have thy Breath
And seriously to ponder of thy Death.
1.
Concerning God, think 'twas his mighty hand*
Which did Create both Heavens, Sea, and Land:
Think that it is God, to all Things Being gives;
Yea* ends the World, while he for ever lives:
Without Beginning, yea, or end of Days;
Both was, and is, and shall remain always.
2.
Add to thy Thoughts of God's Eternity,
Some serious Thoughts of thy Mortality:
Think with thy self; My Father's gone to Dust
With all mine Ancestors; and thither must
My self return; I see there is no Redemption
Of High and Low, all dye without Exemption:
The High and Mighty, all expires and dies;
The Wicked, and the Godly Man, likewise.
Concerning Death, think in the second place,
How short; Ah, how uncertain is my Race!
Both Health and Strength to day, a Man may have
Yet ^n the Morrow, followed to the Grave.
Man's Life's uncertain, shorter than a Span;
In one poor Hour, the strongest stoutest Man
Is by an unexpected stroke of Death,
Commanded to surrender up his Breath:
No Man that ever lived on Earth, had Power
To limit Death one Minute of an Hour.
But Seamen are (Alas!) of all Men, most
Uncertain of their Lives; for Death Rides Post
Upon the Wings of every churlish Wave;
Our Cabbins, oftentimes, becomes our Grave.
Death's Soul-amazing Aspect's in the Skies;
Seamen behold when Tempests do arise;
Then Death does threaten loudly every Minit,
To sink our Ship, with every thing that is in it.
Rocks, Seas, and Sands, and Tempests, seem to strive
Which sh^^ld be first to bury thee alive.
Unto thy Thoughts of Death, with Soul's Affection,
Add thou some serious Thoughts of Resurrection:
Think neither Earth nor Waters can detain
One Soul; for all that Dies, shall Rise again,
And come to Judgment, all both High and Low;
For God has said it, and it must be so.
The serious Thoughts of this, will profit more
T^an all the Treasures of the Indian-Shore.
The serious Thoughts of future Resurrection*
Leads thee to Faith, and Faith unto Perfection;
When Unbelief of Glory will bereave thee,
And all the Golden Mines of Indies leave thee.
How did our blessed Savior confute
The Sadduces, who ventured to dispute
With Him about the Resurrection? They
Could not bring forth another word to say.
You err (says Christ,) and do not understand
The holy Scriptures, nor God's mighty Hand.
But Seamen do behold his boundless Power,
And see his Wonders almost every Hour:
Oh! may the Power of God inflame your Hearts,
And make you credit what his Word imparts?
Oh! spend each Day one quarter of an Hour,
In thoughts of Death, and God's-Almighty Power
To make you live again, and Conquer Death,
As well as at the first to give you Breath:
So shall this Poem have its VVished-End,
And you will rejoice his Heart, who is your Friend.
William Balmford

In Commendation of this ensuing Poem.
COme you brave Souls that love to cross the Main,
Who run sad hardships for a little gain*
Would you at last, a Voyage undertake,
Which will you Crown, and ever happy make?
Let me kind Sirs, then like a Cordial Friend,
This little Poem to you Recommend;
'Twill teach you how to Sail to the Land of Light,
Whose glory's such, it will amaze thy sight:
'Twill bring you to a City paved with Gold,
Whose sparkling beauty Mortals cannot behold.
Sirs; never any Souls did thither Stear,
But Crowned was as soon as they came there*
And I Will assure thee, can thou thither get,
A Crown of Glory on thee shall be set.
Ah, who is it that would not look about,
When such a Voyage they may all find out?
Read thou this Book with Scales pulled off thine eyes,
And thou may know which way thy Country lies:
Oh then I Will tell thee, that thou may not fail*
That through the S^^aits thou must resolve to Sail*
With Grace, thy Ship must b^llanc'd also be,
Or soon thou wilt sink to th'bottom of the Sea.
And Christ too for thy Pilate thou must take,
Or never else will thou this Voyage make:
And of two dangerous Rocks thou must beware;
The one's Presumption, the other is Despair.
Another thing, expedient is to know;
Thou must set out whilst Winds of the Spirit blow.
Faith is the Cable-Rope, to which make fast
The Ancher, Hope; which rightly thou must cast
Into the Rock of Ages, in the Vail,
And you will be safe in time of strongest Gale;
And never a loss by Shipwreck you will sustain,
Till you the Crystal-shore with Triumph gain.
Have thou a mind to Traffic for Salvation?
Then learn the Art of Sacred Navigation:
This Art well learnt, and also understood,
Thou may ride safely over the Mighty Flood:
Thy Weather* beaten Vessel may be tossed
Upon the Waves, but never shall be lost:
Yea, though upon the churlish Rocks it hit,
Yet shall thy Vessel neither sink nor split;
Stear but by Heaven's appointed Compass, and
Fear neither Winds nor Waves, nor Rocks, nor Sand:
Here Is all things for thy Voyage necessary,
That thou may Sail, though winds be quite contrary:
Here is a Prospect for thee, to discry
Thy Sacred Port, and view thine Enemy;
Satan, that Pirate that does most annoy thee,
Yet shall he have no power to destroy thee:
And that thou may be in thy Voyage blessed,
(And come at last to thy desired rest)
Is his desire, who does here recommend
T^^s Poem to thy use, who is thy Friend.
Benjamin Keach.

TO THE READER By a Gentlewoman, who was an intimate Friend of the Authors, in
Commendation of this Poem
IT is not common for the Female-kind,
In Printed papers to expose their mind
To public view; yet if I here transgress,
I hope my fault will seem so much the less,
Because I never did so much before,
And, Peradventure, never may do more.
These lines, kind Reader, that I hear commend,
I had the advantage first to see them Pend,
And hear them read; the matter so delighted
My ravished Senses, that it has invited
Me, to commend these Poems which I know,
To be of Soul-concern to High and Low:
There Is not a Man upon the Earth so high,
But may upon this Subject cast an eye:
He that does think himself too high to know
His Maker, while on Earth, will be too low
For God to know, when he would be regarded;
While such as knows God here, will be rewarded.
He that does think himself to know so much,
That he need know no more; it is unto such
That Paul, that good Apostle, is so bold
To tell them, they know nothing as they should,
Who think themselves too high to be concerned
With any thing that here is to be learned;
Will be too low to offer his Repentance,
Or stand in Judgment, or reverse the Sentence
Of, Go you Cursed; Wherefore let none disdain
To look upon this Piece, because it is plain;
So much the rather may you be contented,
To look upon this Piece that is here presented;
Because the matter that it does contain,
Is no new Doctrine, no Fanatics strain:
It Is Catholic, Apostolic likewise,
That, which no sober Christian-man denies;
It is the knowledge of the Lord most high;
One God in Essence, three in Trinity:
To know that God made Man upright and good*
To know likewise that Man no long time stood
In this so just, so perfect good Estate,
Before he did from thence degenerate;
To know that Man was tempted by the Devil,
To break God's Law, till when he knew no Evil^*
To know that Man was sentenced to Dye,
And Christ was promised immediately
To wound the Serpent, by whom Man was slain,
And to restore fallen Man to Life again;
To know that Christ was very God indeed,
And very Man, made of the VVomans Seed,
To know that Christ by God's appointment died,
And was by Pontious Pilate Crucified;
And in the Grave did for a time remain;
And on the Third Day He did Rise again:
That unto Christ all Sovereign Power was given,
Both in the Earth, and also in the Heaven,
To know I say, and rightly understand,
That all the World is now at Christ's command:
To know the Father and the Son likewise,
To know the Holy Ghost, that Sanctifies,
And fits the Soul for Death and future Glory;
These are the things the Author spreads before ye.
My hearts desire is, the Author, he
May be rewarded in Eternity;
In everlasting Joy, where Saints shall sing
Continual Anthems to their Heavenly King,
Where God himself* will wipe away all tears;
Where he no more shall be perplexed with fears;
Of stearing right unto that Holy Land,
Where Saints and Angels in God's presence stands:
Yet while he on these restless Seas remains,
That he might be assisted in his pains,
My hearts desire is, he may Inherit
The gifts and graces of God's holy Spirit,
That may descend into him like a flood,
That he thereby may do his Country good.
Thus, with my hearty prayers to God, I rest,
Desiring his endeavors may be blessed,
Unto that use for which they were intended*
Then shall I think my Friend is well be-friended.
SHe that does this Unpolished piece commend,
Was willing that it should obtain its end:
No pains she spared to give these Poems Birth,
But with desire sought to bring it forth;
And to that end that nothing might prevent,
Gave her assistance for encouragement:
May these my labors to thy use be blessed,
For which her Love, her Zeal, her Heart expressed.
Courteous Reader,
I Have for thy ease and pleasantness in Reading, drawn up this brief Table;
containing in it the chief Heads that is Treated on in the First Part of this
Book, because the first part is not divided as it ought to have been, nor as
the Second and Third Part is: I have therefore used this Method to every
particular matter that is Treated on in this First Part; I have given thee
Directions in what Page to find them, that so thou may readily turn to that
matter thou art most desirous to inspect. The First Part of this Book is an
Introduction to the Art of Soul-Navigation, and ought to have been so Entitled.

The TABLE.
THat there is a true resemblance between a Ship at Sea, and a Christian in
this World, and between the Sea and the World, page 1, 2, 3* The like true
resemblance between the Word of God and the Sea-mans Compass, the Seas resemble
this world in three particulars. 1. In the unconstancy of its motion. 2ly. In
the Salt gus^ the waters of the Sea has. 3dly. In the Violence of the Waves,
p. 4, 5* A Ship at Sea resembles a Christian in this world, in three
particulars; First, In being liable to Leaks, p. 6, 7, 8. In being liable to
run upon Sands, and so broken, p. 9, 10. In being liable to be split upon
Rocks, p. 11. ^e Rocks explained, p. 12, 13. ^ the Second Part, called
Speculation, begins with an Introduction to Speculation, p. 14, 15, 16. ^e four
Cardinal Points Treated of: The North compared to God; the West to Christ; the
South to Holiness; West to Death. p. 17. ^ripture grounds for this Allusion, p.
18, 19. ^eculation explained; the first part of it, being the true knowledge of
God, p. 21, 22, 23. ^ow Christ must be known, p. 24, 25, 26. ^f Holiness, p.
27, 28. ^f Death, p. 29. ^he certainty of the Resurrection from Death to Life
again, as the Sun moves from West to North, and from North to East again; so
Man rising from the Grave, goes to God, from God to Christ his Judge, p. 30.
The Blessed Estate of the Righteous, p. 31, 32, 33. The sad State of Sinners,
after Resurrection, they must return back again from Christ their Judge, to
their Western Point, which is the Second Death, p. 34, 35, 36. A general
Application, p. 37, 38.
ERRATA.
Reader,
THere is some (but not many) Faults escaped the Press; which, because some
wrongs the Sense, I have noted, omitting suc^ Literal Mistakes as do not wrong
the Sense.

PAge 2 line 12 for worth read World p 9 l. ^9 f hi^ r. God. p. 10 l 2 f. sold
r S^uls. Ibid, ^. S^^^ Some's. p 11 l. 7 r. It is a sign of Death. p. 57 l.
22. ^ ^^ssuated. p. 68 l. 27 r. External.

THE ^eaman's Spiritual Companion: OR, Navigation Spiritualized.
A Ship at Sea that on the Waves is tossed,
In danger every moment to be lost,
^a true emblem of man's restless state,
^ce he by sinning did degenerate.
Ship for aptness as it does excel,
^ is it anciently approved well.
^ot only for its rareness of invention,
^t for its plainness to our apprehension.
^ere be but few, if any, that is so low,
^d shallow of Conceit, but see and know.
^at as it is with a Ship whose Costly prize,
^he Rich Lading of some Merchandise.
^ating at Sea when Dark and Silent Night,
^s Stained the Heaven and obscured the Light.
^thout its Card, Compass, and likewise,
^t knowing where its Port or Haven lies.
Nor how to steer or bend his Course thereto,
Being be-wildred in the dark. Just so
It is with Man since his unhappy fall,
Without a guide can find no path at all.
Man's body is the Ship his Soul likewise,
Is that unvaluable Merchandise.
A Pearl whose worth exceedes both weight an^ measure^
Its price is far above all earthly treasure.
He that shall lose his Soul, although he gain
The world with all its wealth, he will sustain
A loss far greater than can be esteemed
By earthly man or by the worth redeemed.
Of all the treasures that is under heaven,
Naught for the Soul can in exchange be give*
This World's the Sea, and as by Nature we^
Come into it, we neither know nor see
Our Haven, unto which we ought to bend
And steer our Course; nor can we apprehend
The usual means by which we are directed
In this our Voyage, till it be perfected.
Heaven is our proper Haven, it is the end
Of all our Labors, thither we ought to bend
And steer our Course, that we the better might
With hope of happy issue steer aright.
To be our perfect Rule, God does afford
The blessed Counsel of his Holy Word:
And to his Holy Word he adds beside
His Holy Spirit for our perfect Guide.
Lo thus as with a Compass night and day,
We are directed to find out our way.
Sail by this Compass, and we shall be sure
Whatever Storms and Tempest we endure,
Our Voyage will be crowned with good success*
We shall not miss our Port of Happiness.
It Is an unerring Rule, but yet alas
By Nature we are blind the time we pass
Upon this Earth, as in a Sea of Trouble,
Till Death dissolve our Bodies; and this bubble
^f we compare it with the splendid light
Of everlasting day, its but a night;
A night of darkness rather than a day
Of perfect light; we cannot find our way,
Without our Compass, whence this may be learned;
That as a Merchant thinks himself concerned
To use his best endeavors to secure
^is floating Vessel, that he may insure
^is Merchandises: So he that bears the prize
^f his Immortal Soul's, concerned likewise
^bove all things to use his best endeavor
^o save his Soul, which lost, is lost for ever.
A Christian in the Gospel is compared
^o Merchants that do seek no less reward
^han precious Pearls; which that he may find out,
^oth compass Sea and Land, whirls round about
^he Massy Globe through many a stormy blast*
and thinks himself well satisfied at last,
^ obtains the treasure that he craves;
though he indures the fury of the Waves,
^n he but bring his Vessel safe to Shore
^ his desired Port, he seeks no more.
Man is the Merchant, and his Port does lie
Within the Confines of Eternity.
This World's well termed a Sea, and if we eye
It as a place of Waters, we may spy
The same unconstant and unstable motion,
As men behold within the restless Ocean.
The various changes that this World affords,
With Neptune's often changes well accords.
The tossing to and fro of its affairs,
Filling men's hearts with daily fears and cares,
Is like the raging waves resistless might;
Which often puts the Seaman to a fright.
Threatening to rend his crasie Vessel, and
Intomb his C^rcass in the restless Land.
The feared evil and the hoped for good
In worldly things, is like the ebb and flood;
They go and come, their flux and reflux we
To turn and return like the Tide we see.
Sometimes this world does promise present go^
And then it seems like to the Sea and flood.
And when we think we shall some good obtai^
Is like the Tide, returns back again.
Nothing so certain as uncertainty,
Earthly enjoyments make them wings and (...)
And as the waters of the Seas retains
A brinish taste, the same Salt just remains
In earthly things in great or lesser measure
Abates the sweetness of all earthly pleasure.
Sometimes the waves mounts up our Ship on
As if its Top-mast-head would pierce the Ski^
And presently its tumbled down again,
^s if in Hell it now were to remain.
^ such a case a Saint that is in this world
^ost to and fro in such a fury hurld,
^ made Sea sick, and nothing now is more
^ Saints desire than Heaven its happy Shore.
^ Saint sometimes may have a present gale,
^he Waters smooth, the Wind fills out his fail;
^he Wind stands fair, the Raging Seas likewise,
^re all at peace, and now the Seamen lies,
and quickly comes to his desired shore,
^hen others that perhaps set out before,
^eeting with Tempest at the Sea, was driven
^uite from their Port and lost. Some go to heaven
^s with a prosperous wind is quickly hurld
^ut of the trouble of this evil world;
and of such sort young infants be, whose stay
^on this Sea sometimes is not a day.
^hildren also that leave this world before
^ey have committed sin, comes to the shore
^ a short time, and meets with never a storm;
^ey neither do nor think of any harm:
^ay we believe record that is given,
^ese are undoubtedly the heirs of heaven.
^eed from all sorrows and tempestuous weather,
^rist as their Pilot does conduct them thither;
^hil^st men and women, being more mature,
^ these tempestuous Seas great storms endure:
which gives them cause sufficient to desire*
^ leave these troubled Seas, for fear they tire
In length of time, and upon Rocks be driven
And split themselves, and lose their way to heaven*
2. And in the second place our bodies may
Be fitly termed a Ship, because as they
When floating on the Seas do spring a leak;
So't fares with man, so frail he is and weak;
As through a leak the Sea does make its way,
Forcing the weary Seaman night and day
To ply the Pump, least if his strength should fai^
The waters should so mightily prevail
To sink his richly laden Vessel, and
Bury both Ship and Lading in the sand.
The Seaman therefore spares not his pain,
Till he his longed for Haven do obtain.
So it is with Christians, Nature being weak,
While in this world, are liable to leak.
And if a Christian in his labor fail,
The waters of this world will so prevail,
That Ship and Lading will undoubtedly
Endanger sinking to Eternity.
The leaks are these, the Saints that shall inheri^
Eternal life, is flesh as well as spirit.
The world presents thee with its golden pleasu^
And would persuade thee there is no greater tre^su^
To be enjoyed; the senses now invites
The flesh to taste, which draws in these deligh^
Like as a leak draws water at the Seas
And sink the Ship, so do such leaks as these
Draw in this worldly pleasure, until they
Be fill*d so full the Vessel's cast away
And Lading lost; which is the worst of all:
And by this means came our first Fathers fall.
Eve's eye beheld the Fruit, and so admired,
Presents it to the flesh, the flesh desired.
Man being made of earth, by nature weak,
Not minding as he might to stop the leak;
He lost his Vessel as he well deserved,
Although its hoped his Lading was preserved.
This leak sunk Achan, his eye-delighting pleasure,
As by a leak, did let in such a measure
Of Avarice, that using no endeavor
To stop that Leak, his Ship was lost for ever.
And in a word, the naked truth to speak,
Most mischiefs makes their entrance at this leak.
The sense of Seeing first does act its part,
Presently brings the object to the heart.
The heart, whose office it is to stop the leak,
^f it neglects its part, these waters break
unto the Ship; runs in without control,
And sinks the Ship and overthrows the Soul.
Then keep thy heart with diligence and care,
Let not thy eye nor ear thy heart ensnare.
^fe'r thine eye invite thine heart to pleasure,
Think how uncertain is this earthly treasure.
What true content what solid joy can I,
Take in this world, alas I am born to die.
^uppose I find some pleasure for too day,
^oo morrow death tells me I must away,
^o earth from whence I came; the grave must keep
My mouldring body till I wake from sleep.
I leave my pleasure and I leave my sorrow,
I sleep too day and shall awake too morrow.
And when I shall awake I shall be hurled,
Immediately into another world.
And then shall live again and stand before
The judge of heaven and earth and die no more
This state shall be a state of joy or pain,
From which I never shall be moved again.
If for this worlds uncertain pleasures, I
Should lose that joy that lasts eternally,
How costly would these pleasures be? What rat^
Should I pay for these toys, whose longest dat^
Admits no longer measure then a Span;
Whose largest confines is the life of man?
Such serious thoughts as these they will no doub^
Stop all these Leaks and keep vain pleasures out
The third resemblance that there is between
Man's Body and a Ship, may thus be seen,
Its not the empty Ship, that men so prize;
But for the sake of its rich Merchandise.
And as a Ship contains within his hold
The Merchants treasure, so man's precious Soul
That is far richer than the Golden Ore,
The Merchant fetches from the Indian Shore,
Is in his Body; wherefore man beware,
Of Soul Shipwreck, use Diligence and Care.
To keep thy Lading safe; Slack not thy pain,
For that once lost thou wilt never find again.
Thy Lading being lost, there is no indeavo^
Can save thy Vessel, but it sinks for ever.
Into a burning Lake, a Lake of fire;
Whose torments ceases not, nor flames expire.
O man be careful whilst thou have a day,
Thy want of care will cast thy Ship away.
The Carcass of a Ship, when all its store
Is buried in the sand, is of far more
Esteem and value, than the Body when
Its precious Soul is gone from thence; for then
The Body's nothing but a lump of Clay,
Sleeping in Dust until the Judgment Day;
When all must wake to joy or else to sorrow,
Unto a dismal night or joyful morrow.
A Ship at Sea is liable to harms,
As well by Rocks and Sands as sudden Storms.
A Chrstian while upon these troubled Seas,
He has his Rocks and Sands; and upon these
He sometimes runs aground and sometimes hits
Upon these Churlish Rocks until he splits.
His slender Vessel, which with great endeavor
Is hardly saved from perishing for ever.
Sins and temptations is a Christians Sand,
On which sometimes he runs aground and stands,
And cannot move; the sins of Christians heels,
Like red sea sands, takes off their Chariot wheels;
Weakens a Christians Faith, he scarce can know
Whether he moves one step for Heaven or no.
A Christian that is with his Sin defiled,
He Is at a stand scarce thinks himself a Child.
It is but faintly that he calls him Father,
But like the prodigal he chooses rather
The name of Servant; unto such a stand
Does sin put sold Sons, lost on such a sand.
And other sands there be of no less danger,
To which a Christian must not be a stranger.
They are temptations of every kind,
That oftentimes do much afflict the mind.
As when a Christian sees Blasphemers flourish,
While Righteous ones is rather fit to perish.
It runs the soul on ground, he scarce can say
That he is in the right and perfect way:
This sometimes made the best of men mistrust,
And judge the generation of the Just.
That soul that runs himself on such a sand,
Is often times put to a perfect stand.
'Twas this made righteous David thus complain,
Surely, says he, I Have washed my hands in vain.
O soul beware, this is a dangerous sand,
This put good David unto such a stand.
That till the springtide of Gods love did flow
Into his Soul, his faith was grown so low,
He there stuck fast, in danger to miscarry;
Until he went into Gods Sanctuary.
Whose holy streams Did give his soul such strength
That he got off that dangerous sand at length.
Christians have rocks as well as sands, and they,
Do seldom miss to cast the Ship away.
I Will mention two, but they shall be the Chief;
And yet but two, because I will be brief.
Presumption and Despair, on these two Rocks
Whoever runs with violence and knocks,
If on the first of these his soul but hit,
It Is very seldom but the soul is split.
When men presume to sin, and yet will dare
Presumptuously to promise equal share
With best of Saints in everlasting joy;
How many thousands thus themselves destroy.
It is a sign, says the Physician,
Who when he minds his Patients disposition,
Finds him so stupifi'd, he does not know
Whether he be distempered or no,
Though every one about him gives him over,
And leaves expecting that he will recover.
The dying man feels nothing, has no fears,
Whilst his relations dews his bed with tears,
And sees him dying, though he sees no danger;
Sees death approaching, while the man's a stranger
Unto the thoughts of death, presumes all is well:
And thus presumptuously some goes to Hell,
Laughing at sin, while others under deep
Sad apprehensions of their state, can weep;
Beholds him dying, that sees no such thing.
Sees death has stung him, though he feels nothing.
The choicest Christians floating on the Seas
Of swelling pomp, may run himself with ease
Upon this Rock; he is not fiercely driven
By any storm or tempest sent from heaven,
But with a soft, fair, sweet, and gentle gale
Which drives him fairly, filling out his sail
He sucks the sweetness of external pleasure,
Gods temporal blessings and man's lawful pleasure:
If well improved, he looks on every side,
His Cup is full, he runs before the Tide,
Meets with no tempest, neither dreads a storm;
And if such pleasant gales as these do harm,
It is because men think themselves secure,
Neglect the making their salvation sure,
For want of diligence and constant care,
They Are on this Rock before they be aware.
When earthly favors, like a swelling Tide
Puffs up the mind, and fills the heart with pride;
Instead of thankfulness he now begins
To cast a pleasant glance at smaller sins,
And never sounds his heart, to see how nigh
He is the Rock, but unadvisedly
He still proceeds, takes not the least regard
Unto Gods Word, but as an useless Card.
First smiles at sin, it is pleasant in his sight,
At last he does commit it with delight.
Lo thus Gods mercies may for want of care
And due improvement, prove a hurtless snare,
And run a soul upon this Rock, while he
Is so becalmed, he does no danger see;
Wherefore dear hearts if God Almighty bless
Your outward man, your care must be no less,
No less in watchfulness, no less in prayer,
Least temporal enjoyments proves a snare.
O search no less into Gods Holy Word,
Because the Lord such plenty does afford.
Gods Word will tell thee, That where much is given,
Much is required; poor souls may miss of heaven,
When earth affords them such a plenteous store
Of temporal things, their hearts can wish no more.
A second Rock there is, of which beware,
While some presume all is well, others despair
Of being saved, and think it is is in vain
To seek for that they never shall obtain:
And being overwhelmed with despair,
Neglect that sacred remedy of prayer.
Neglects the use of Scriptures sweet direction,
Which says man must make sure of Election.
It Is not a holy sanctified life
Will satisfy the soul, or end the strife
Despair has made, despair will act its part,
And like a Tyrant will usurp the heart;
And tells the soul his sins is scor'd in heaven,
And are too numerous to be forgiven.
And thus torments the soul with endless grief,
And leaves the soul quite hopeless of relief.
It Is not a smooth-faced but tempestuous Seas,
That runs the soul upon such Rocks as these;
It is some darling sin, some bosom evil,
Some strong temptations that our Foe the Devil
Does with the best advantage that he can
Make use of for the overthrow of man.
But that thou may safely arrive at last
At thy desired Port, and not be cast
Upon the Churlish Rocks, and escape the sand,
Thou must endeavor next to understand
That holy Art of Sacred Navigation,
Which is the Subject of our next Relation*
CHAP. II. Wherein is laid down the Three Principa^ Parts of Spiritual
Navigation.
Here Sacred Navigation is held forth,
Fitted to the Body of Divinity;
That holy Seamen sailing on the earth
May rightly steer to bless*d Eternity.
Since to the World the term of Sea is given,
Through which the soul must make its way to heaven*
And Christian Seamen, whose body is likewise
Termed a Ship, their Souls the Merchandise,
Saints then stands i'need to bend their meditation
To learn the Art of Sacred Navigation;
Or else they will never rightly understand,
To steer aright unto the Holy Land.
A Seaman may be made to act his part,
And be expert at Sea by humane Art;
But Art makes not a Saint: Man may be taught
By Art to whirle a Ship this world about,
With speed and safety to the Indian shore.
Whose pleasant banks abound with Golden Ore*
And yet unskilful, cannot understand
To steer aright unto the Holy Land.
Whose dust's more worth than pearl, whose sacred mould,
Is far more excellent than Indian Gold.
Whose treasure is not liable to rust,
Like Gold, whose first Original is dust.
To know I say, and well to understand
To steer our course to fair Emanuel's land,
Requires more Skill than humane Art can teach;
It is a mystery Nature cannot reach.
The Art's Divine and is divinely wrought,
Yet God prescribes a way how't may be taught.
Whoever then would learn this Sacred Art,
He must deny, come out of, and depart,
His Bark of Reason, he must lay aside;
At least not trust to it, so as to confide
In humane Wisdom; least he should miscarry,
He must repair unto the Sanctuary.
The sacred Scripture must be thy Instructor.
The holy Spirit also thy Conductor,
The best Informer of a Christians heart
In this so sacred soul-concerning Art.
Or else he will sink into that Deep Abiss,
That Lake of Fire where no bottom is.
Where endless misery and sore distress,
Must be his Port, instead of happiness.
He that would steer his course to heaven right.
Must have a clear, a true, and perfect sight,
Not only of that Sacred Mystery
Christ's Glorious Kingdom, but of Divinity.
The Art and Mystery of Soul Navigation,
Is a divine and sacred Spectulation.
This sacred Art does teach the Soul to know
Where heaven lies and how to steer thereto.
The first part of this Sacred Art I call
Speculative, the second Practical.
The third Affectionate, with all these three,
The Spiritual Seaman must acquainted be.
As Light was made first in the Old Creation,
So in the New the first is Speculation
Or Sacred Knowledge. A man must first receive
Thngs in his understanding, then believe;
Then must he practice according to direction,
Knowledge and Practice will inflame affection.
Thus having opened each several part,
Of this Soul-saving Navigable Art,
Our next work will be to treat upon
Each part distinctly, teach them one by one.
The whole discourse no further will extend,
But to unfold these three, and then twill end.
The first part therefore of Soul Navigation,
Being Divine and Sacred Speculation,
Knowledge I mean, that precious beam of Light,
Whose rising in the Soul does put to flight.
The evening mists, makes shadows fly away,
And in the Understanding makes a day.
Gives that being that never yet has been.
Discovers that which never yet was seen.
That Spiritual Seamen therefore may discern,
What Is necessa^y in this Art to learn,
The Seamans Compass shall the cafe decide,
And for instructions shall be our guide.
As in the Compass Four Points there be,
Four Points in Christian Compass you shall see:
^he Four general Points that is most of all,
^oted by Seamen as the principal,
^ North, the first in the Compass, and the rest
^ollows in order thus, East, South, and West.
^od in our Christian Compass first of all,
^ to be eyed as the principal.
^o God alone man first must cast his eye,
^o Dread and sear his Sovereign Majesty.
^y the North Star the Seaman is Directed,
^o point i, th Compass profits that neglected.
^l our endeavors will be nothing worth,
^ first we eye not God, God stands for North.
^ is by Christ our mercies is increast,
^e's next the Father; Christ stands for the East*
^om East to South the Sun does make its way,
^riving at the South it is perfect day.
^e next to Christ that Christians must possess,
^is the Spirit, South point is Holiness.
^oliness is our South, and Christ is then
^ height in Christians, when most holy men.
^ext to the South is West, whither the Sun,
^akes haste and sets, and then our day is done.
^eath is our Western Point, does terminate
^r day, and put a period to its date.
^ese be the Four Points all men must eye,
^orth, East, South, West, then man prepare to die*
Now see our Scripture grounds for this allusion,
^r upon that we'll bottom each Conclusion.
^s a Notion generally received,
^d as unquestionably it believed
That fair Jerusalem that famous Town,
Isreal's Metropolis, the worlds renown.
Was placed in the midst o'th earth and hence it wa^
As most conclude it all was came to pass.
All places bear their true Denomination,
As they were placed or stood for situation
Relating to that City, whose great name,
Did fill the earth with its renowned fame.
Jerusalem thus for the Center eyed,
I will remember that on its North side.
The City of the mighty King was placed:
The mount of Olives also on the East.
Which mountains as it first did entertain
Our blessed Lord, so when he comes again,
Zachary the Prophet gives a full account,
His feet shall stand upon that Eastern Moun^
And on the South Side did mount Sion stand,
The sacred mountain of that holy Land.
Mount Calvery the place of Death, this mou^
Was situate on the West; on this account
I am encouraged to make this allusion
Scriptures not contradicting this Conclusion,
that East should stand for Christ, and Stouh ^le^
without excepting stands for holiness,
And West for death will never be denied,
But why the North is unto God applied
May at the first to some seem not so clear,
But that the truth thereof may still appear,
Mark what good David says, observe the wor^
Of that most faithful Servant of the Lord.
When David sets Mount Sions Beauty forth,
She is, says he, the joy of all the Earth:
She Is beautiful, says he, for situation,
Which he makes out by this clear de^^nstration,
The mighty King, says David, does ^eside.
^n fair Jerusalem, on the North side
Of sacred Sion; to whose glorious King,
The Nations shall their wealth and glory bring.
Hence 'twas that speech concerning Lucifer,
Who would exalt himself above the Stars
Of God Almighty; Esaias adds besides,
^s further Demonstration of his pride,
That Lucifer presumed himself so great,
That he would make the side o'th North his seat.
^ut he whose high aspiring thoughts did swell,
^' usurp Gods place, is tumbled down to Hell.
^he North, which if as some suppose to be
^he Mount Moria, it will well agree.
That Sacred Mount in Canaans Holy Land,
^id also on the North of Sion stand:
that still the North in Scriptures is applied,
^o God alone as properly his side.
^hese words of David next I Would have you mind,
which you in Psalm the 75 may find,
David excluding both West, South, and East,
from giving honors, making not the least
Mention o'th North, says honors do proceed,
from God alone as if it were agreed,
and taken for a grant on every hand,
that for Gods proper place the North does stand.
Since then the language of Gods holy word,
With this our notion does so well accord;
I hope I may presume without offense,
With awful fear and holy reverence
To make a serious and divine inspection
Into the Sacred Art; taking direction
From Holy Writ: which we will make our guide*
Not on the right or left to turn aside.
And now with seriousness we will conclude,
The North with God most fitly does allude.
It Is God alone we first must seek to know,
The Word and Spirit will direct us how.
When first therefore thy Vessel launcheth forth*
Into these troubled Seas upon the Earth;
Assure thy self thou art not like to make
A happy Voyage if thou undertake,
To stear thy Ship to fair Emanuels Land,
Before thou know and rightly understand
God thy North Star, whom thou must alway^ eye
When thou sets forth toward eternity*
Know God is first, it is he first gave thee breat^
And he is last and has appointed death,
That fatal messenger to call thee hence,
To give account to him for each offense.
Know God is merciful and just also,
He sees thy ways and did thy secrets know.
Let no such foolish thoughts possess thy mind,
To think there is no God, be not so blind;
The Heavens are his witness, day and night
Do speak throughout the World; their beams ^ ligh^
^ills every place: By this the Nations know
There is a God, whether they will or no.
The very Heathen do the same confess,
^y light of nature they can do no less.
^is acts of providence bespeaks the same,
They all set forth the glory of his name:
^is mighty hand that framed every Creature,
^oth in the Earth, the Air, and in the Water;
Gives food, as well as being, unto all;
Of every thing he is the original.
He feeds the Ravens, when to him they cry,
He is and was from all eternity.
^his knowledge, although true, is not alone;
^e is not only God, but he is one.
^lthough there be Gods many, says St. Paul,
^o us there is but one, he is all in all.
God must not only thus be understood,
^ut we must know him for our chiefest good:
That good thou do, or ever shall enjoy,
Comes from himself alone; he will not destroy
His handy work: Man's ruin does proceed
from man himself; it is man that does that deed.
It Is in and by the Lord we must obtain
^ternal Life, Life does in him remain:
^his thing is needful to be known by these,
That sail for Heaven on these troubled Seas.
To know God thus, is of as great concern,
^s for a Seaman his North Point to learn:
and in the third place, thou must learn to know,
^od in his Holy Attributes also.
His Attributes of Power, Mercy, and
Of Justice; also thou must understand,
We read, when God Almighty did proclaim
His ever honored and his Name;
In Exodus the thirty fourth we find
His Name is gracious, merciful, and kind:
In him long suffering, patience, does abound
Sin pard'ning grace in him is to be found.
Reserved mercy is laid up in store,
For such as love him, grace for ever more:
As thou must know he is merciful, thou must
Know as he is God Almighty, he is just*
To those that hate him, he will be severe;
A guilty Conscience he will by no means clear.
Though Heavens in his right hand, is as rewar^
To such as do his righteousness regard;
Yet in his left hand is a flaming fire,
Consumes the wicked in his burning ire.
His wrath once kindled, he that reads his nam^
Must read him then a soul-consuming flame;
More bright than Phoebus in the Southern skies
Like to devouring fire in his eyes.
His voice is like a soul amazing thunder,
That fills the massy earth with dread and wonder
But now I think I hear some make reply,
If thus I do behold his Face I die:
His terror frights me, O I am undone,
I am unclean, O whether shall I run?
If Holy Angels be not pure, how then
Can I be saved, that am a sinful man.
If God be Holy, thou must be no less;
Thou must behold Gods Face in Righteousness:
Then I Will assure thee when thou do awake,
His Image will full satisfaction make:
By wake I mean thy being raised from Grave,
When thou a full and perfect sight shall have,
Of that great glory Moses could not see;
With which thou then shall satisfied be:
And that thou may his Beauty then behold,
With joy remember that thou have been told
He is a Holy Spirit; wherefore he
In Spirit and in Truth must worshipped be,
By that pure Light that in the Soul does shine;
Proceeding from the Spirit of God Divine:
And by the strength and vigor of thine own,
Must thy unfeigned Love to God be shown.
Alas, say some, this is but fruitless talk,
For that no man can thus unspotted walk:
Show me the man that never does transgress,
Or him who thus sees God in righteousness.
^f none but man thus holy can enjoy
This blessed state, Gods presence will destroy
The universe; the best of men do not
Live without sin, none is without his spot.
To this I say, the God of Earth and Heaven,
Considering man's weakness, has given
His Son, his only Son, whom he has set
To be our Surety, and to pay our debt:
Christ is our Eastern Point, he is that Light
Whose morning brightness does expel the Night.
All you that sail for Heaven, be sure you learn
To know this Eastern Point; it is your concern.
And first remember, Christ has quit that score
That Adam left to pay; it shall no more
Be reckoned for: for he has paid that debt,
Which on our score for Adams sin was set.
Behold the Lamb of God, behold I say,
That blessed Lamb that took our sins away;
That holy Lamb of God, the King of Kings,
That did arise with healing in his Wings:
He pleads the cause of such as do transgress,
And willingly he is our righteousness.
It Is Christ alone, it is he alone, I say,
That by his glorious rising made a day.
Till this bright Eastern Morning Star did rise,
All the whole world in dismal darkness lies.
He like the glorious Morning Sun came forth,
And visited all corners of the Earth.
How dismal is the dark and silent night,
How comfortable is the morning light:
Here is thy comfort soul, do what you can,
Christ is that pure, perfect, holy man;
He' as done exactly what thou should have done*
And God accepts thy doing in his Son.
Know for thy comfort God is reconciled
To sinful man, by Christ that holy Child.
A body was prepared him for thy sake,
For nothing else could reconcilement make:
Thy weakness in Christ is all supplied,
By him alone thou must be justified,
christ does not only fill the world with light,
^ut as a way-mark guids thy steps aright
unto the Father; tells thee there is none
^omes to the Father but by him alone.
The third thing in this Point thou art to learn,
and make thy chief concernment to discern
^^ is that ownness and sweet unity,
that is between the Soul and Christ, whereby
christ and thy Soul is made entirely one,
^y the indwelling of the Spirit alone:
^^ is the Spirit alone that does unite
^hee unto Christ, the spirit gives thee light:
^^ fills thy soul with light, thy heart with praise,
^y which thou may behold those golden rays
which darts into thy soul, gives thee a glance,
^f thy adoption and assurance.
^hus knowing North and East, the South does follow,
^ext to be known; it is the spirit does hallow
and sanctify the soul and change the nature;
Converts the man, and makes him a new creature.
^enewed in himself, he is born anew,
^o all unholiness he bids adieu.
^e that does put on Christ will surely find,
^o great an alteration in his mind:
^here's nothing now with which he is so delighted,
As holiness, which he before had slighted.
The love of Christ casts such a warm reflection
upon the soul, it stirs up his affection.
^his Soul like Mary's melted into tears,
^ith which she washed Christ's feet, thought not her hairs.
Although her ornament, too good to foul,
To dry his Feet; his love so melts her soul:
Her sins were many, made her love abound,
Because so vile a wretch had mercy found:
What I, says such a soul, who no eye piti'd,
Defild with sin, and are my sins remitted:
Shall I be guilty of so great a folly,
That Is washed from sin; and shall I be unholy?
He whose dear love did take away my sin,
Will hate and loath me if I sin again.
When Christ did clear that sinful woman's score
He gave charge she should sin no more.
How miserable was thy state, when he
At first had thoughts of pity upon thee?
Polluted in thy Blood he passes by,
Beheld thee, and did cast a gracious eye
Of Pity: Did both grace and mercy give
Said to thy loathed soul, O sinner live.
Upon thy head he puts a crown of gold,
And makes thee fair and lovely to hehold;
Then does present thee as a Virgin clear
Before the Father, does espouse thee there.
Thou must be holy now and sanctified,
Laying thy former sins and lusts aside.
You heaven born souls, think and remembe^ how
Unsuitable it is, how much below
A Saint it is to sin; whose holy dress,
Like to a sacred garment, must express
Whose Spouse thou art. O do not give consen^
To live in sin; sin stains thy ornament:
^o'iness is Saints luster makes them shine,
^^ tells thine enemies thou art divine.
^ow high is Christ advanced in Christians, when
^n mortified does make them holy men.
^hrist's like the glory of the Southern Sun,
^t height in Christians when this work is done.
^ Christian now is in a line direct
^o God the Father, may have full aspect.
^ook from the South, the North is just before ye,
^o Saints in holiness may see Gods glory:
and hence it was that Abraham did discover
^he glory of the Lord: From hence moreover
Moses that holy man of God, contemns
^ll Egypts glory; counterfeiting Jems.
Moses by faith, sees holiness rewarded;
^hinks Egypts glory not to be regarded:
^e did esteem of Isreal's distess,
Above the glory that he might possess
^n Pharoahs Court; his faith bore evidence,
unto that Heaven promised recompense.
But secondly consider, as the light
^s contrary to darkness, day to night:
^o sin and holiness do hate each other,
and in one place they cannot dwell together:
^ut as the Sun, when shining bright and clear,
Does make nights sable shadows disappear.
And as the gloomy shadows of the night,
Does put the Suns fair pleasant beams to flight:
^o where true holiness does take possession,
^here's no allowance for the least transgression.
Nor is there any place for holiness,
Where sins usurping power does possess.
Sometimes we see the Sun appears so bright,
As if no darkness now could stain its light.
But presently we see a Cloud arise,
And then the Sun is hidden from our eyes.
Just thus it is with a Saint, a little folly,
O how it stains him that is reputed holy:
If once a Christian do contract a blot.
His former holiness is quite forgot.
A Saint whose conversation is upright,
'Twill put whole legions of his sins to flight
Let Christ our blessed Eastern Star shine clear
Within thy soul, and sin will disappear.
Thus have we given thee a brief relation
Of three first Points of Sacred Speculation:
Of North, of South, of East, the next must be
Our Western Point, which take with brevetie:
God is our North, and Christ our Morning Sun;
Holiness our South* at West our day is done.
As Moses counseled Israel, so do I,
First* learn to live, and yet prepare to die.
That faithful servant of the Lord, whose breath
Propounds to Israel both life and death.
I have, says Moses, set before your eyes
This day, both life and death, may I advise
Or give you council how to make your choice
Could I persuade you to obey my voice,
You should not die, says he, for I would giv^
You counsel to obey Gods Word and live.
^th life is but a momentary space
^f times most fwift, yet most uncertain race!
and that as certain as you draw your breath
^th open air, so certain is your death.
and yet your death, no other but a sleep,
^our Grave no other than a place to keep
^he broken pieces of your brittle clay,
which are reserved till the judgment day:
^hen your dead corpse shall live again, and never
shall be dissolved, but remain for ever:
^hen do the thing, says Moses, that may be
^f soul concernment to eternity.
Death is our Western Point, by death we pass
^ut of this world; return to what we was,
^o dust again: Sentence of death was given,
^hen men transgressed the sacred will of Heaven.
The certain wages disobedience brings,
^^ death our night of silence, whence four things
^^ to be noted, needful to be known,
^y spiritual Seamen, which I thus lay down:
First Death is certain, every soul must taste
^f death, or else be changed first or last.
^he stroke of death can never be avoided,
^owever some may vainly be persuaded.
^ur lives, our days, our Suns resplendant light,
^ill set in death, will terminate in night.
therefore in vain, some foolishly assay,
^o flatter death and send it far away:
from youth to manhood, and from thence to age,
^or death must act its part upon this Stage.
Though man would flatter death, it never stays
Death strikes the child, the aged man; betray^
The hopeful young man, even in his prime,
And gives him not sometimes, a minutes time,
Uncertain when, but certain death will strike
Respecting Kings and Beggars all alike.
But in the sccond place, it is as plain,
Our Sun that sets in the West will rise again.
From God we pass to Christ, and Christ does bless
That serious soul, brings it to holiness.
Which fits man for his Western Point, from whence
By death he is brought to God, his N. from thence
He Is brought unto his Eastern Point again,
He Is raised by God, through Christ, and does remain
Now in a state of perfect holiness,
Which he shall then eternally possess.
His Southern Sun is always now at height,
It Is always noon and never will be night.
No Clouds shall now his perfect glory stain,
His day is perfect and shall so remain.
No Western Point, no dying any more,
No setting of our Sun, as heretofore;
No shadows nor eclipses shall obscure
This glorious day, it always shall endure.
Sin and temptations, which now interpose,
Between the glorious Face of God, and those
Which from some present glimpses of his Grace*
Like Moses longs to see his glorious Face;
Shall now like Clouds disperse and fly away,
By reason of the glory of the day.
Those sighs, sorrows, and those clouds of fears,
Which sin now raises, those soul-melting tears,
Which sin now causes, for which Saints complain,
They shall be all disper'd and none remain
No Satan then the tempter, now remains,
^n darkness and in everlasting chains:
O happy he, thrice happy he, I say,
That does arrive at this so glorious day.
He now is freed from sorrow and distress*
From thirst and hunger, cold and nakedness:
From all his persecutors he is set free,
He Is with the Lord, and evermore shall be:
The glory that his eyes shall then behold,
One thousand part thereof cannot be told.
It Is not in man that lives upon the earth,
To find out words to set his glory forth.
But that some glimpses Christians may behold,
Scriptures compares it with refined gold:
To precious Pearls, whose excellence and worth,
Exceeds all other treasures in the earth.
When John that Evangelical Divine,
By Heavens high appointment did design,
To leave the Saints a copy of their joy,
The Lord presents it to his Servants eye,
Who in a Vision did behold such glory,
That faith must help a man to read the story:
The glory of this vision was so great,
As that the highest pitch of man's conceit,
Can hardly reach: the strength of man's desire,
Can scarcely reach so high, but never higher.
He sees a City that to' th Saints is given,
Made by the wisdom of the God of Heaven.
Nay furthermore, our Author adds beside,
The City was adorned and beautified;
Like to a Bride in splendant rich array,
Decked for her Husband on her wedding day
Strong is that place, glorious that habitation,
Where God Almighty lays the first foundation
Great must the splendour of that glory be,
Where Gods most sovereign blessed Majesty
Improves his sacred wisdom in adorning;
Bright is that day that has so clear a morning*
Blessed is he that feels this warm reflection,
In the clear morning of his resurrection.
Eye has not seen, nor can man's heart conceive^
This sacred glory, yet we may receive
Some glimpses of this glory, if with care
Spiritual with temporal things we do compare
Suppose that all the worlds united power,
Should as one man attempt to build a Tower,
Whose Heaven aspiring top should reach so high,
As men might make their dwelling in the Sky.
Should all the wisdom that the Lord has given
To all the world, residing under Heaven,
Be now improved with united power,
To beautify as well as build this Tower;
With sparkling Diamonds and burnisht Gold,
Rich for their value, glorious to behold:
With precious Jewels beautified all over,
While pure Gold the Streets thereof did cover.
How fair and beautiful with splendour clear,
Would such a glorious place as this appear.
That famous Temple Herod once erected
^ fair Jerusalem, how it affected
Titus the Roman, when he did behold
The Sanctum Sanctorum beautified with Gold:
^e stood amazed, lifts up his hands to Heaven,
Desires of the Lord to be forgiven
His great offense; to God protesting still,
That glorious Temple fell against his will:
Wherefore he cries aloud, calls out amain,
^o spare that Holy Temple cries again;
^ spare, says he, that glorious place, it is pity
^ should be ruined with this wicked City.
^et was this Temples glory not so great,
^o answer to the height of man's conceit:
^or may the height of man's conceit compare,
^ith what this Vision did to John declare:
^welve thousand furlongs was its measured height,
^he glory of the Lamb did give it light.
^he Suns resplendent rays, when shining clear,
^ould give no light, it had no luster there.
^o night was there, no cloud nor sables shade,
^his is the glorious day the Lord has made.
that tongue or pen can give a true relation
^f new Jerusalem, the habitation
^f glorified Saints; whose full perfection
^all be completed at the resurrection.
But last to the West, ^^ve this to say,
^ere is eternal night as well as day.
Thugh God in Christ, do bless the Sts. with light,
God out of Christ prepares perpetual night,
For wicked men and Devils no exemption:
In life there is, in death there is no redemption,
All men must die, we know it to be true,
Daily experience does this matter show.
There Is none exempt from death, the very best,
Choicest of Christians, pass from South to West.
The good man dies, the wicked dies also;
Both good and bad from West to North must go.
The good man shall be raised,* so will the evil,
The Angel must be judged, so will the Devil.
The difference lies here, the Saints perfection
Is at the highest after resurection.
It Is then their everlasting day begins,
It Is then they turn their backs of all their sins.
But with the wicked it is nothing so,
From their North Point to West again they go:
Depart they must from Gods eternal light,
With go you cursed to perpetual night:
But Oh! what heart can think, or tongue express
Their endless woe, their grief remediless.
Consider Christians joy, you need not borrow
A better Pensil to paint forth their sorrow:
Consider but the comfort of the light,
From thence behold the terror of the night.
If naught but darkness should their souls oppress,
It would be sorrowful and comfortless:
It Is utter darkness, not the smallest beam
Of light, which makes their sorrows so extreme.
Those very eyes, while on the earth was blessed
With natural light, shall now be dispossessed
Of all the incomfort; what they undergo,
Being in darkness, aggravates their woe:
The lustful eyes which in the earth delighted,
In naught but filthiness; is now be nighted;
Shall never see a pleasant object more,
But weep and wail, and never shall give o'r.
Be warned you swearers for these tongues of yours
That in blasp^eming spends your precious hour^:
Uncessently shall then blaspheme Gods name,
For very anguish, in tormenting flame:
And yet in darkness, you that can hear God cry
Repent you sinners, wherefore will you die?
That scorns his bounty, and refuse his grace,
While God with patience waiting, gives you space.
You that can hear the God of Heaven complain
At your destruction, yet rebel again:
You that have griev^d the Lord, you now must bear
Your endless grief, your cries he will not hear.
Your ears, which while on earth, could give consent,
To hear Gods name blasphemed and be content;
Shall now hear sighs and lamentable cries,
While you are sharers in these miseries:
Your hearts, with which you hated every word
Spoke to you by the Servants of the Lord;
With horror and amazement shall be smitten,
While all your former wickedness ^s written
^n your tormented conscience, which will smite you,
and with its aggravation shall affright you*
And in a dreadful manner shall present
Before your face that hellish regiment
Of all your former sins you have committed,
From which you might have been acquitted.
You then have time too much to see your folly,
But none at all to labor to be holy.
Your day is past, your dreadful night is come,
Your Sun is set, and darkness is your doom.
This is the last considerable thing,
Relating to the West that I shall bring.
But yet before we pass to the Second part
Of this soul-saving Navigable Art:
These four things that we have lastly read,
Shall once again before your eyes be spread;
But very brief, and for no other end,
But that I may more seriously commend
Them to your thoughts; as highly your concern,
Rightly to weigh, to understand and learn.
North stands for God, and that you first must know
From God to Christ your Eastern Star you go,
God out of Christ is clothed all in ire,
Behold God so, he is a consuming fire.
To God by Christ, your souls must have access,
And Christ conducts thee unto holiness
Thy Southern Point; from whence cast but thine eye
Unto thy Western Point, and learn to die.
Four things is in thy Western Point laid down,
All very necessary to be known.
First thou must die, thy rising sun must set,
In The West, it is certain, do not that forget.
From West to North, from death to God you go,
By God through Christ, thou art raised again also:
After which time, thy sun will set no more,
Nor yet decline, as it has done before:
But if thou do not die a holy man,
Thou will be far more miserable than
Thou wast before; thou must go back again,
From North to West, for ever to remain
In that black night, which never sees a morrow,
Where thou will find no period of thy sorrow.
One word of use and then I shall have done,
Walk not in darkness while you have the Sun
To be your guide. He that walks in light,
May see to take and choose his steps aright;
But he that walks in paths of darkness, neither
Knows how to guide his steps aright, nor whether
He is a going. God has provided well,
Why should your precious souls go down to hell.
What pity it is, that man that noble creature,
Whose well composed form and comely feature
The Son of God did not disdain, I say,
What pity it is he should be cast away.
And that you may not want a full direction,
To bring you unto Heaven, Saints perfection;
The next unto this Art of Speculation,
Must be the practick of Souls Navigation:
In which discourse I shall my self confine,
To the Seamans Compass, only more divine;
And shall accordingly present to view
Our Practick Points, in number thirty two.
Thus having given you a full relation
Of the First Part of Sacred Navigation,
Which is speculation; I now proceed
Unto the Second Part, which is indeed
The Practice of a Christian, after he
Has been instructed to a good degree
In the true Knowledge of the Deity;
One God in Essence, three in Divinity.
Distinguished thus, the Father and the Son,
And Holy Ghost, three yet entirely one.
Having his understanding lightened.
^o know therefore the Son of God must shed
^is precious blood, be made a Sacrifice,
And that it is the Spirit that sanctifies
And fits the soul for Death. I say again,
After a soul this knowledge does obtain,
He Is fit for notion; these things being known,
Which must be first, yet must not be alone.
These be the Four Chief Points, we must divide
Each Quarter into Seven Points besides.
North.
Your First Point being North, you must endeavor
By Light from God to steer your Course, if ever
You do intend to steer your course for heaven!
Steer by this sacred light which God has given
The Holy Scripture; let them be thy guide,
For want of which many has turned aside.
Make Gods Commandments thy Compass and
Thy light to steer to fair Emanuel's Land.
We need not wonder why some do miscarry,
Who lays aside their Compass. and contrary
Unto the sacred Rule Gods Word lays down,
Does steer their Course by fancies of their own.
Good David steered by this, thy Word, says he,
Is both a Light and Lanthorn unto me.
The Prophet Esaias, speaking in the name
Of great Jehovah, does command the same,
That from Gods Law they should not turn aside,
But make his Testimonies all their guide.
Unto this sacred truth Paul testifies,
Who says the Scripture makes men wise
Unto Salvation; and to this agree
The sayings of our Lord: O search, says he,
The holy Scriptures, there thou wilt be directed;
No safety where this Compass is neglected.
It is the mischief of our present day,
And the true Cause why many's cast away,
Satan that roaring Lion goes about,
To shipwreck souls his work it is no doubt;
To make men question and at last deny
The Holy Scriptures just Authority.
The Holy Scripture is more useful far
Unto a Christian, than the Northern Star
Is to a Seaman; who sometimes can steer
Some Leagues, although his Compass be not there
But Christians cannot steer one course aright,
If not directed by this Sacred Light
Which does proceed from God the mighty Lord
And shines forth from his most Holy Word.
He that does throw the Holy Scriptures by,
Under pretense to steer more certainly
By Natures various and uncertain light,
Instead of steering of his Course aright,
Is like the man who throws his Compass by,
That he may steer by the uncertain tide
Of his conjectures, and when all is done,
He does but light a Candle to the Sun.
The Scripture is that Light, whose glorious rays
Proceed from God, by them direct thy ways.
North by East.
North by East the second Point must be,
Learn this Point well, and thou shall clearly see
From that bright beam that from Gods Word does shine,
Whose ever-blest Authority's divine.
When man by breaking Gods Command became
The Author of his own rebuke and shame,
Justly provoking God, who gave him breath,
To lay on him the punishment of Death.
Man though unworthy, so much favor found
From God Almighty, that he did propound
A way to save him, who had thus undone
Himself by sinning: God propounds his Son
To free poor man from Deaths eternal stroke,
And take from off his neck that heavy yoke;
And to restore lost man to life again,
That he for ever living might remain.
In steering to this point it does behove
Thee to remember Gods most precious love
In all soul matters now direct thine eye,
To Gods free promise and on that rely.
The Sun whose glorious presence fills the earth
With its desired light, moves from the North;
So Christ our Rising Sun, whose glorious face
Makes glad the earth, proceeds from Gods freed grace,
The Suns first differenced motion and the least,
From his full Nothern point is by the East.
The first appearance of Gods love to man
Was in the promised seed; there first began
Gods love to show it self: this promised seed
^s Christ, the Son of God, who is indeed
Our Rising Sun; to him direct thine eye,
To him do all the Prophets testify.
Take Counsel of Gods Word, let it advise,
Gods Word will teach thee to be truly wise.
When worldly men, to get themselves possessed
Of earthly treasures, run from East to West,
from youth to age, until grim Death betrays
Them to their graves; they pass away their days.
To search the Holy Scripture let thy mind
Launch forth into these deeps, and thou shall find
^uch treasures as on earth thou can not have,
though earth set open to thee her golden cave:
Treasures that will endure after death,
That will not leave thee when thou leave thy breath*
That man which labors for Earths empty pleasure,
While he neglects the seeking of that treasure,
Is like a Merchant that to the Indies trades
Only for pibles, while other Merchants lades
With Golden Ore; like him that trades for sand,
While others with rich treasures fills the land.
When thou have learned this point, thou may proceed^
And learn the third point with like care and heed*
Mind this third point as highly thy concern.
North North East.
It Is North North East that thou art next to learn*
This point is just in the middle, placed between
The North and North East point, as may be seen
In The Seamans Compass; it is five points at least
Nearer the Nothern point than it is the East.
God in propounding Christ for man's salvation,
That Act of Grace sprang from his mere Compassion^
Unto his Creature Man; that God I say
In making Christ, that promised seed, the way
Whereby poor man may be restored again
To life eternal, ever to remain.
He Is the Chief Author of man's happiness,
And Christ the way by which we have access
Unto that glory: Do not envy then
At the prosperity of wicked men;
All their joy continues but a day,
^Tis but a moment, and they must away;
While vainly they imagine all is well,
They leave their pleasures and go down to hell.
North East by North.
North East by N. this point is one point nigher
Our Eastern Point, and therefore does require
That care and diligence be daily shown
To learn this Point as Scripture lays it down.
That God's the Author of our further joy,
^n saving him who did himself destroy,
He did not only thus propound his Son
To be man's Savior, but when that was done,
That man the better might believe the same,
and be supported while the promise came;
That this his promise might be kept alive,
^n every Age he did the same revive.
^els Noah from whence the promised seed should spring,
That unto man should this salvation bring.
Confirmed the same to Abraham again,
^n terms more full he did himself explain;
That all the earth should of his love partake,
and be redeemed for his mercies sake.
^ut yet more fully unto Israel,
^ho did in Egypt under Pharaoh dwell:
When by his powerful and mighty hand,
He Would brought them forth from the Egyptian lan^
He did present their Savior to their Eye,
In Types and Figures, that they might thereby
Have real ground to exercise their faith,
That all the world, as holy Scripture says,
Might look up unto him, and saved be
By faith in Christ, whose blood was shed for the
If thou be careless here and do not learn
To know this Point, thou hardly wilt discern
The pleasant Banks of blessed Canaans shore,
Which if thou miss, thou art lost for ever more.
North East.
Now learn thy fourth Point 'twixt N. and Ea^
For in thy Compass so thou wilt find them placed
Man's saved by the Word of God indeed,
Which Word of God is that same promised se^
In Gods appointed time this Word became
Flesh in our form, St. John affirms the same
He took not on him Blessed Angels nature,
But Abraham's seed, the shape of humane Cre^tu^
A sinless man into the world did come,
Not by the will of man, but from the Womb
Of a chaste Virgin, came he to fulfill,
What was decreed in the Fathers will;
That he might purchase man's eternal good
By no less price than his most precious blood.
This is that Lamb of God to whom is given,
All sovereign power both in earth and heaven
^gels in heaven are at his Command,
^d earthly Potentates shall not withstand
^s mighty power; to him all knees shall bow,
^gels above, and Mortals here below.
^om this Point therefore thou may understand
^at God the Father does by Christ command
^ee to submit unto his easy yoke,
^ else thou must submit unto the stroke
^ Gods offended Justice; which be sure
^hether thou will or no, thou must endure.
^ey Christ as thy Leader, O neglect
^ot this Command, if ever thou do expect
^at heavenly consolation from above.
^t Christ, and not thy Lust, command thy love.
^rve not thy lusts, which leaves thee at thy grave;
^t serve the Lord thy Savior, that can save
^y precious soul; and if thou do rebel,
^n cast both soul and body into Hell.
stretch not forth thy hand, be not so bold
^ take a Comfort, touch not, take not hold
^on a Gospel Promise in no case,
^til a Gospel Precept thou embrace.
^bserve the word that holy David spoke,
^e'll not adventure, nor presume to take
^ld of a Promise, till he stretch his hand
^rth to take up a Precept and Command.
^y hand, says David, while his heart consents,
^e lifted up to thy Commandments.
vain men cry for mercy, and expect
^r help in storms, that do in calms neglect
To yield obedience to that Sacred Word
Of him whom God has made our Sovereig^ Lord
God by his holy Prophets spoke his mind
Once to the Fathers, but has now confined
The world to hear his Son; no other voice
Is man to make the object of his choice.
Therefore observe this Fourth Point with hee^
And to the Fifth Point we will next proceed.
North East and by East.
North East and by East, this does next ensue,
All you that sail for Heaven take a view
Of God and Christ, see how they both agree
In ones eye how unanimous they be.
In seeking after man's eternal good,
God freely sends his Son, that by his blood
Poor man might be redeemed from Death: likewis^
Christ freely did become a Sacrifice.
How wilingly did Christ lay down his life,
That he might put a period to the strife
That sin had made 'twixt God and his Creation
That freely brought about poor man's Salvation
If God and Christ with such a joint consent
Sought thus to free man from the punishment
Of Death eternal, and that man might live,
For ever happy, Christ did freely give
His Life a ransom; was it the Fathers pleasure
At such a rate to purchase endless treasure
For mortal man? Then suffer not thy lust
To hanker after Egipts Golden dust,
^ich flies away like chafe before the wind,
those place in seeking for thou can not find.
(...) longest date is but a mortal day,
^st Threescore years and ten it will not stay.
^d often times it threatens to bereave thee
^ heavenly treasure and at last does leave thee,
^member Moses, that holy man, how he
^spised Egipts wealth, thought the degree
^ Son in Phraohs Court was much below
^e meanest servant in Gods house; to know
Crucified Christ's a glorious thing,
^mpared with any earthly crowned King.
^ath puts an end to Kings and kingly glory,
^cause their honors is but transitory.
^ longer King the body being dead,
^ath sets the Crown upon the Christians head.
Death a Christians Crown begins its date,
^ich once begun will never terminate.
^is Life is short, uncertain, and impure,
^ at Life is certain. holy, does endure.
^ell let not this Fifth Point neglected be,
^ not forget that God and Christ agree
^ bringing Man unto this life again,
^o had himself by his trangression slain.
^ristians that sail for heaven, do not fear
^e raging Seas, for Christ your Pilot's there.
^ not afraid because thy Vessel's poor,
^ou'rt safer there than if thou were on shore
^ stately Palaces with sumptuous Feasts,
^ongst thy sins, those soul devouring beasts.
It Is better go to heaven in foul weather,
Through many dangers, if thou get'st but thithe^
Than in a pleasant gale to swim to hell,
Where gentle winds do make the canvass swell.
East North East.
The next Point East North East learn carfully
This Seventh Point does bring thee very nigh
To Christ thy East, mark what his servant says
Err not, be not mistaken in thy faith.
Concernin^ Christ, that soul that here mistakes,
Does run himself upon a rock, and makes
The worst of Ship-wracks; like to Alexander
Who erring from the Christian faith, did wander
In paths of Darkness: let Philotas be
A mark of information unto thee.
That by this Seamark thou may understand
How nigh thou art the rocks, and escape the sand
Remember well the greatness of Gods grace:
Do not forget his love in any case.
Not to some few, but all without exemption*
God did propound his Son formans redemption
No man shall die because God did not give,
His Son to suffer Death that he might live.
But for this cause God would have cleansed man's spot*
In Christ's dear blood but man believed it not
It Is unbelief that causes man to die,
That, Christ himself does plainly testify.
God loves the World but all will not believe it,
Christ died for all, but some will not receive it.
This truth shines clearly, but some will refuse
To walk therein and many rather choose
To walk in Darkness: this is condemnation,
Says Christ our Lord, that purchased man's Salvation.
That God is real in what he does say,
Shines like the Sun it is as clear as day.
But that the Lord with words makes men believe
Christ is there Savior only to deceive
Their understandings. Oh that men would see
How dreadful dark such apprehensions be.
He errs in faith that thus forsakes the light;
He needs must fall that wanders in the night.
But Secondly a man may err in faith.
That make what men, not what the Scripture says,
Their rule to worship by, though God commend
The Holy Scripture to us, to the end
That man might search them and in searching find
What Is there revealed of the fathers mind.
And do the same, that so they may obtain,
Eternal peace when they shall rise again.
^ err not here in faith, and that thou may
Escape Shipwreck here, observe what I say.
Search but the word of God, and thou will find
The Apostles did foresee vain man inclined
^o much to Atheism, there would arise
^ain men that would Gods sacred Word despise*
^aving of Scripture man might live without them:
^ea venture to deny the Lord that bought them.
Which mock at Heaven, and without regard
Of God or Christ, do scoff at Saints reward:
Who of the Resurrection say, in vain
Do men that die hope to rise again:
These be the men of which the Apostle says
They Are turned aside, and as concerning Faith,
Have erred; here let thy Faith be sound,
For want of care here thou may run aground
And split thy Ship, and sink into that Lake
Of everlasting Fire, and partake
With damned Spirits in eternal woe,
Where fearful and where unbelievers go.
Thirdly, remember this and understand,
That thou art to obey to ^^rists command;
It is not Moses nor Elias neither,
Nor Holy Angels take them altogether;
That God has made thy Leader, to be brief
Christ is thy Leader and Commander in chief:
If I or Angels says St. Paul do bring
Another Gospel, teach another thing;
Believe it not, whatever men shall say,
See how't agrees with Christ ere you obey:
Inquire if Christ command it first of all,
In Person, or by Apostolical
Decree; If neither of them do command,
God never will require it at thy hand.
Wherefore be sound in Faith, in all these three
Forenamed particulars, as thou shall be
Directed by Gods Word, to which I Will leave thee
As to a guide that never will deceive thee;
And this be sure, if thou do not steer
Drectly on this Point, bur errest here,
In matters of thy faith thou makes a poor
And slender Voyage though thou comes safe to shore.
But that I may these errors yet explain,
In this short breviate read them once again.
A man may err in faith in three respects,
All which produce most dangerous effects.
In not believing universal love,
It is a dangerous error, and may prove
The ruin of thy soul, but secondly
He errs in faith, that does presumptuously
Deny the use of holy Scripture, and
Presumes to say that men may understand
Gods mind without them, from a light within;
This is an error and a dangerous sin;
Denying use of Scripture is the ground
Of all the erors that do now abound.
Men err in Faith, that do not understand
That they are wholly under Christ's command.
But run to Moses Law to be directed
In Gods true worship, as if Christ neglected
To leave his Gospel Churches a supply
Of Laws to rule, and Rules to worship by.
East by North.
The next Point unto this thou art to learn,
Is North by East, a Point of high concern.
As Christ for man, by Gods degree was slain,
So Christ by God, is raised to life again.
And as Chist by his Death did reconcile,
Man who by sinning, did himself defile.
Unto his maker, and has now appeased,
Gods wrath, who justly might have been displeased
With man for ever, but now reconciled,
He does in Christ adopt man as his Child,
And make him heir with Christ in that possession,
Whose endless glory is without expression.
So Christ does by his glorious Resurrection
Raise man from death to life; his imperfection
Is Changed into a pure perfect state,
Which once begun, will never terminate*
Mortal shall put on immortality,
And man thus raised to life shall never die.
Christ by the Word of God he overcame
Satan that was the cause of sin and shame.
And that a Saint may do it God does afford
Every Child of his the self same sword.
He that thus Conquered Satan by his breath,
Has by his Resurection conquered Death,
Man's fatal enemy that first anoy'd
The Sons of Adam, is at last destroyed.
The Son of God is Captain, King, and Head,
And is the first that rises from the dead.
Whence we a certain testimony have,
That we should be redeemed from the grave.
The grave yields up her dead so must the deep,
The Trump must sound and all must wake from sleep;
Some unto dismal Darkness woe and sorrow,
Some to eternal light and joyful mo^^ow.
Sin causes Death, both temporal and eternal,
Then fly from sin, as from a foe infernal.
The Second Death, is a perpetual dying,
Attended with Sorrow and continual Crying,
Whoever then would wisely undertake
A prosperous Voyage for his soul to make,
And escape the second Death sin does procure,
And all the sorrows sinners shall endure,
And would arrive at heaven: fear no weather,
Storms is no hindrance in your Voyage thither.
Fear naught but sin, there is nothing else can harm,
You may get good advantage by a Storm:
Eschew but sin, and storms will drive you faster
To your desired Port; there is no disaster
That thou can meet with in this restless ocean:
Fly but from sin, resist it in its motion,
And do not fear, for thou art safe enough;
Thou Wilt find thy crasie Vessel weather proof.
It Is neither whisling Mast nor rattling Pum,
The noise of storms or tempests that may come;
*It Is neither leaking Vessel or Lee shore,
Nor sinking Ship, all these and many more,
Like seeming dangers, that will lose thy prize;
Or hurt or hazard thy souls merchandise.
There Is naught but sin I say that can deceive us,
Of our souls trafique sin will quite bereave us.
He that does fear and fly from sin shall never
Perish in sinking, no nor sink for ever.
Although his body sink, his precious store,
His soul I mean, shall surely come to shore.
Then fly from sin as from a Serpent, least
Sin sink thy soul; which brings us to the East:
To Christ I mean, whose precious blood was spilt
To save thy soul and free thee from the guilt
Of all thy sins, if thou will but obey
His precious voice now while it is too day.
East.
Next is our Eastern point, that equal space
*Twixt North and South; stablish thy heart with grace
Grace is the only balast thou can have,
It is by grace that God will sinners save;
Not of our selves: so says his servant Paul.
Christ is the gift of God given for all.
Stablish thy heart with grace, and not with notion,
Which fills the head and not the heart with motion.
It Is neither gifts nor high expressions can
Upon right grounds establish any man.
Grace is that balast makes thy Ship go steady,
But high aspiring notions makes men heady.
How many floating and unwary Souls,
Wanting this balast, is tossed about and rouls.
Now here, now there, no place of rest they find;
Are tossed and turned about with every wind.
And almost overset with every wave,
And can no solid satisfaction have.
Sometimes their curious fancies casts an eye
Into Gods Secret Counsel, thinks to spy
Themselves inrol'd there, without respect
Unto the terms on which God does elect.
Not once remembering that the Lord does choose
The Godly for himself, and does refuse
Ungodly men: presumes they are elected,
And therefore saved, while others are rejected
By a divine unchangable decree;
And therefore must not, cannot saved be.
Here eye all passages* and you shall find
Where airy notions do possess the mind,
Instead of Grace a Tempest does begin
Quickly to rise, the flesh does lust to sin,
While conscience tells the flesh it cannot be:
Allow me this, says flesh, it pleases me.
Not so, ^aith conscience, thou will be defiled.
O no, says flesh, I Am an elected Child*
Can sin, can any thing that is in me,
Dissolve, make void, or alter Gods Decree?
No no, says flesh, my name is writ in heaven,
My sins and weakness is all forgiven.
In this confused hurry is the mind,
That Is filled with notions, tossed with the wind
Of vain conceits. He sins at such a rate
Till he concludes himself a Reprobate.
And now he sinks, and in a dreadful case
Despairs; but had this heart been filled with grace
Instead of these his airy notions, he
Had been from stroms and winds and tempests free
Where grace does fill the heart, it thus begins
With every sinner, O forsake your sins
And there is mercy; but grace tells him plain
That being cleared he must not sin again.
For sins against thy will, Christ entercedes,
And at the throne of grace for mercy pleads.
Be thou but faithful, do thou but act thy part,
In hating sin, hate it with all thy heart,
And God is gracious; if thou do persever,
God freely will accept of thy endeavor.
Faithful endeavors, though they be but poor,
God will accept in Christ, who keeps the score.
If thou presume to sin, thy former debt
Shall on thy score the second time be set.
Here does the Riches of Gods Grace appear,
In setting Saints and sinners free from fear.
Sinners that leave their sins, are not rejected,
Such as presume to sin, are not elected.
The Grace of God, that has appeared to all,
To Saints and sinners both, does daily call
First unto sinners, that they would repent,
And then to Saints, that they be innocent,
And persevere in holiness; and then
In being holy they will be happy men.
O be established here, as't does behove thee.
And neither wind nor weather will remove thee.
East and by South.
East and by South is next, and thus begins,
Thou being taught before to leave thy sins
By true repentance and by heart contrition,
Christ now requires of thee heart submission
To all his holy Ordinances, and
To every Gospel Precept and Command.
But first of all thou must believe that he
Is very Christ that shed his blood for thee.
Believe that God in Christ is reconciled,
And freely does accept thee as his Child.
And willingly he sends none to hell,
But willful sinners, such as do rebel.
Give up thy name to Christ, that thou may be
One of that Noble sacred family,
Come laden with thy sins and throw them down
And Christ will give thee rest, he will not disown
The true repentance of a heart that is broken:
Believe and be baptized, it is token
That Christ has washed thee and has clear remitted
Thy former sins and now thou stands aquitted.
And by this means thou wilt be insinuated.
Into the Church of Christ, and stand related
To him as one of his; he will behold
Thee now as one belonging to the Fold.
He is thy Shepherd, and thou art his Sheep,
You Are under his protection, he will keep
Thy soul from danger, if thy heart be staid
And stablished with Grace, the Lord has said
Such shall be kept in perfect peace indeed,
Whose minds are staid on him Now let us proceed
Unto our next Point East South East, let us see
What is required next to Baptism.
East South East.
Sinner thou art conducted now by grace
Into Christ's Church, that thou may keep thy place
And be preserv^d unto the Judgment day.
Observe therefore what the Lord did say
To his Disciples, while he did remain
Upon the earth; tells them he will come again,
But until then, says he, I recommend
You to the Comforter which I will send.
The Holy Ghost in all things shall instruct you,
And unto everlasting truth conduct you.
The Spirit shall to your remembrance bring
Each sacred truth, and teach you every thing:
But this remember, Christ does tell thee plain,
Which way thou may the Comforter obtain.
The way which Christ prescribed is fervent prayer,
With faith unfeigned, these such companions are
They will not miss, but will obtain the prize
For which they seek; for God will not despise
The earnest suit of humble contrite ones,
Whose prayers are ushered in with sighs and groans,
Prayer is I say Gods own appointed way,
By which our Lord has promised to convay
The holy Spirit; ask and it shall be given,
Says Christ our Lord: your Father hears in heaven*
^f earthly Parents give out of there store,
Good things unto their Children, how much more
Will God out of his rich and boundless treasure
Give those that ask his Spirit such a measure
As he does see sufficient to supply?
The Spirits Office is to sanctify.
^t's a true earnest that we shall inherit,
Eternal life. He that enjoys the spirit,
^lthough the smallest measure, shall possess
The matchless treasure of true happiness.
^t fits the soul for future glory, and
He sails directly to the Holy Land,
That will observe this Point; and furthermore,
Such shall discover fair Emanuels Shore,
By the white cliffs of holiness that lie
Along the Coasts; let not thy watchful eye
Behold another object. Would possess
The Holy land, mind naught but Holiness.
While others do a saving Voyage make,
Thou do a sacred Voyage undertake.
^t is affirmed by holy men of old,
Unholy persons never can behold
The face of God, but with great discontent,
With dread, with horror, and astonishment,
Unholy persons shall be sore affrighted
With that with which the Saints shall be delighted.
While Saints sing praises unto God on high,
Delighting to be hold his Majesty;
Unholy persons shall both cry and call,
Unto the Rocks, say to the Mountains fall;
Yea fall upon us, hide us from the face
Of him whose counsel we would not embrace;
Though often he did entreat: this Lamb of Sion
Is now become a soul devouring Lion.
His presence is a terror, does affright,
Oh that we might be hidden from his sight.
When the Dark cliffs of sin thou do espy,
Say to the soul it is not the country
That thou art sailing too; learn this Point well*
Dark ways of sin is the true paths of hell.
South East and by East.
This is a Point thou also must endeavor
Rightly to be instructed in, if ever
Thou do intend the Port of happiness
Shall crown thy Voyage with a fair success.
Then fly from sin, as from a Serpent, and
Let not thy Lusts bear rule nor have command
Within thy heart; suffer not sin to sway,
Take heed thou never do thy lusts obey.
Yield not thy members instuments unto
Unrighteousness, but unto God, and know
To whom thou give ear with diligence,
And do submit and yield obedience,
Thou art a servant there; whether it be
Of sin to Death unto eternity,
Or of obedience unto righteousness,
Which with eternal life the Lord will bless,
If to Gods Holy Spirit, thou subject art,
And suffer it to reign and rule thy heart.
Thou art a Servant unto Righteousness,
And God Almighty will in mercy bless
^hy true endeavors, and thy sins will die,
And grace will live, so shall thou mortify
All thy corruptions, there shall none remain
^o harm thy soul, much less to rule and reign.
^et there is one thing I would have thee mind,
Know that the very best of men will find
That Satan, that Degraded Seraphin,
Will use all diligence to tempt to sin.
^f Christ the Son of God was not exempted,
^ut by the subtle Serpent must be tempted,
^hen poor imperfect man may well be sure,
that from his malice he is not secure.
^ut God Almighty has prepared a Sword,
which Christ made use of; it is Gods Holy Word.
^ith that resist him and he will fly away.
^or where Gods Word is used he dares not stay.
^e can but tempt thee, he can do no more,
^e cannot force thee, God has shut that door*
^ill sin in its conception, let it never
^ome to the birth; a very small endeavor
^hen stops sins progress when it first appears,
^nly t'intice the eyes or reach the ears;
^re it convey its poison, or impart
^s secret counsel to thy yielding heart.
^ake David's Counsel, in my heart, says he,
^l hide thy word let this thy practice be,
^en will thy sword be quickly at command
^r thy defense. Good Joseph did withstand
Sins early motion, when it first appears
With soul-inticing words, t'inchant his ears,
Fair beauty, that might captivate his eye,
Good Joseph yields not, but makes this reply,
How shall I sin, if thus I shall transgress
Against the Lord, and do this wickedness?
He nips sin in its bud before it spring,
Behold sin here a subject, grace a King,
Triumphant in his heart; but furthermore
Let me advise thee daily to implore
The Lord for help, give diligent attention
To hear Gods word, 'twill help thy apprehensio^
When rightly it is divided, God will bless,
And thus thou wilt steer thy course to happiness.
South East.
You that will trafique for the Holy Land,
Must learn this Point also to understand,
It lies directly 'twixt the South and East:
And of as high concern as all the rest.
This must be understood, thy righteousness
Will stand thee in no stead at all, unless
Christ to the Father do present thee holy,
Thy best performance will be but folly.
For he that does the very best he can,
Has cause enough to say, Lord what is man,
A poor imperfect Creature, whose endeavor,
Comes short of what is required? Man can nev^
Be capable the Kingdom to inherit,
By all that his performances can merit.
^is Christ whose righteousness must stand instead
^is he that has the kingdom purchased.
^et must thou strive with all thy might and main,
and then this benefit thou shall obtain:
christ is thy advocate at Gods right hand
^o plead thy Cause in Heaven he does stand,
and God beholds thee in a Holy dress,
and beautifully clothed in Christ's righteousness;
and neither spot nor wrinkle does appear,
^r Christ presents thee as a virgin clear,
^otless and sinless; but least thou from hence
^ould think the good Apostle does dispense
^ith sin in Christians at the highest rate.
because they have in heaven an Advocate.
^o Answer this objection first of all,
^e does prohibit sin in general.
^hildren, says he, for unto such I write,
^n not with approbation and delight.
^n not, says he, or do not let the fact
^f any sin be properly your act.
^t if against your will at unawares
^ou be entangled in Satan's snares,
those watchful eye observes when he may
^ith best advantage silly souls betray,
^inding in thee some want of watchfulness,
^ere takes advantage, tempts thee to transgress.
^ this despair not; but with heart contrition
^umble thy self to God; thy heart submission
^od will accept in Christ, who intercedes
and with the Father for forgiveness pleads.
Those be the souls Christ presents holy,
Who are afraid to be defiled with folly.
South East and by South.
This Point in the Christian Compass also thou
With care and diligence must learn to know,
The more of Christ thou know and do possess,
The nearer art thou unto happiness.
Sailing upon this Point, thou must beware
And with all diligence thy heart prepare
For Holiness, for now thou drawest nigh
Thy Southern Point, the Sun grows very high.
Esteem nothing for holiness that stands
Directly opposite to Christ's Commands.
Let Christ's directions ever be thy guide,
And from his Precepts do not turn aside.
Let no vain* shows of holiness allure,
What man counts holy Christ accounts impure
All Holiness is mere imagination,
That is not built upon the true foundation.
When Saul the first of Isreal's Kings was sent
By God to execute due punishment
Upon the cursed Amalike, his eye
Must pity none, all are condemned to die.
Both man and Beast, Gods great command was s^
He must not bate one jot or add thereto.
But here observe how he did miscarry,
Pretending holiness he acts contrary
Unto that dread Command that God did give*
He spares King Agag, suffers him to live.
2. Let Christian boldness strengthen resolution,
Not to comply, for fear of Persecution,
With Forms of Holiness, that Men invents,
Nor fear the Evil of Man's Punishments;
But patiently endure, for Christ's Sake,
Your Persecutor's Rage: Heaven will make
Amends for All. Good Moses had regard
Unto the Recompense: The Saint's Reward
Was more to him, than Egypt's painted Glory,
Whose Pleasures fades; whose Joys are transitory.
The Sorrows of few Years will soon expire;
But who can dwell with Everlasting Fire:
^ndure all things, rather than decline
^he sacred Cause of Christ. The Golden Mine
^ies deep: He that would find the smallest Measure,
He must not pass for losing Earthly Treasure.
The Seaman fears no Storms, shrinks not for Weather,
that trades to the Indies, if he gets but thither;
though Mast and Yards be broke, and Sales be rent,
and Vessel leaks, he is very well content:
^he Riches of the Country makes amends;
^uch less, must Spiritual Seamen, (that intends
^'arrive with safety, at that happy Shore,
those Treasures far exceeds the Golden Ore,)
^rink back for fear of persecuting Hands;
^r to please Man, neglect the Lord's Commands;
Or mix God's holy ways with Men's inventions,
To save thy Life, or escape Man's Reprehension.
If Seaman venture Life for Indian Dust,
That Thieves may steal, or may consume with Rust;
The Spiritual Seaman, then, may well lay down
Both Life and all things, to obtain a Crown
That never fades, but will endure forever,
When Days shall cease to be: Wherefore, endure
In sailing on this Point of Holiness;
Upon the Law of Christ, to lay the stress
Of all your Holiness; on that Foundation,
Who ever build, shall never miss Salvation.
South, South-East.
This fifteen Point o'th'Christian Compass, here,
Is South, South-East; on that, thou art now to stere*
Christ is thy Eastern-Point; let him Him possess
Thy Heart, as Author of thy Holiness.
It Is not enough, to have Christ in thy Head,
Brain; Knowledge will not stand in any stead.
If in thy heart, Christ, as thy King, abide
To Rule and Reign, thou will be sanctified.
It Is Christ in thee, the hope of Glory can knocks
Make thee a holy, and a happy Man:
Behold! he is at the door! he stands, and
He calls and waits, till thou unboult these Locks
That hinders his Admittance. It Is thy Part
To open first; His, to possess thy Heart:
If in thy heart, he finds Admittance, he
Will enter in, and will abide with thee:
He Will sup with thee, O Rich and bounteous Guest,
That thus invites Himself, and makes the Feast!
He that so sweet a Guest does entertain,
Will find his Interest trebled back again:
For thou shall sup with him: the King of Kings,
Will entertain thee, where the Angels sings
Sweet Hallelujahs, to the God of Heaven*
To whom, all Honor, Laud, and Praise be given.
Make sure of Christ, therefore; use diligence,
To have by thee in store, good Evidence,
That thou art Christ's, and he has firm Possession
Within thy heart; It Is not a bare Profession
Will witness this; but if thou will, insure,
Know where Christ truly dwells, the Heart's made pure:
No Love there is to any Sin at all,
Though in Appearance, it seems very small.
If Sin, through weakness, such a Soul surprise,
There Is nothing, under Pardon, satisfies.
He Is not contented, till his Peace be made
With Christ, whom he has grieved: He Is now afraid
Of sinning any more: Every offense
Produces from him double Diligence.
In temporal Merchandise, we use to say,
It is a low and undervaluing way
Of Trading, to insure: But in this Case,
It is dishonorable, low, and base,
Not to insure: They most this Trade advance,
That is the deepest in Assurance.
South by East.
This sixteenth Point, in the Christian Compas^ here
Is South by East; when ever thou do stear
Upon this Point, thou must with Care endeavou^
To learn this Point in the Compass, right. If ever,
With safety, thou arrive at Happiness,
As East's by South, know Christ by Holiness:
So nearly's Christ to Holiness related,
That by no means, they can be separated.
Esteem such Principles, as do profess
To set up Christ, apart, from Holiness.
But frothy Notions, vain and fruitless, folly;
None can Love Christ, that loves not to be Holy
Holiness is Christ's Essence; Oh! how then
Can he be served by unholy Men?
Forms without Power, is but empty things,
Mere Shadow, that no satisfaction brings,
Stirs up Contention, and continual Strife:
It Is Acts of Piety, that is the Life
Of all Religion. God charges Israel
With wickedness; yea, while they did excel
In all Eternal Forms of Worship, and
Exact Obedience unto each Command:
Observing all their Festivals; likewise,
Observant in their dayly-Sacrifice,
And in their solemn Meeting: Ne'rtheless,
The Lord esteems not this for Holiness;
For all this while, Equity was neglected,
And with the Widdow's Cry, they are not affected.
The Poor and Needy still they do oppress,
And are unmindful of the Fatherless;
The Hungry (also) did refuse to feed;
Nor clothed the Naked, when they stood in need;
To Sick, and such as did in Prison lie,
They showed no Pity in their Misery:
And while they cry, The Temple of the Lord!
Their Prayers and Sacrifices are abhorred;
Their solemn Meetings finds no Acceptance,
Their holy Incense is Abomination.
And for this Cause, because they lay the stress,
Upon these Forms, apart from Holiness;
Unholy Persons knows not God aright,
Nor are their Prayers accepted in his sight:
But Christ, and Holiness, must go together;
They Are inconsistent, one without another:
Take heed, I say, thou be not one of those
That vainly think, and foolishly suppose,
That if for Ordinances they appear,
Christ of necessity must needs be there;
Although they be unholy Persons, and
Do daily in the way of Sinners stand:
And some there are again, as full of Folly,
Who vainly do suppose, if they be Holy,
Christ in his Ordinance may be slighted;
But know this Point, that Christ is so united
Unto his own Appointments, that whoever
Shall undertake Christ and his Laws to sever,
Shall miss that Port, to which they did intend
To Sail at first, and lose their wished End.
Christ's sacred Laws is not within the reach
Of Natures Teaching: Christ in his School does teach
His own Appointments: Would thou stear arigh^
Upon this Point? It Is Christ must give thee Light*
Half of thy Compass thou have now past over*
Where Sixteen Points thou fully may discover*
To every Point thou have a brief Direction,
Until thou comes at South; where Sol's Reflection*
Most powerfully does heat the barren Earth;
By which it is made fruitful, and brings forth
Fruit in abundance, to all such as dwell
Upon the Earth: So, such as do excel
In Holiness, has Christ full risen there,
And in his greatest splendor, shines clear.
The Southern-Sun does cast his fair* Aspects
Upon the North, who back again reflects:
So God, in Christ, beholds with great Delight,
The holy Man, as perfect in his sight:
The holy Man, from this so sweet Reflection,
Beholds the Face of God with true Affection.
I have (says David) set the Lord before
My Face; I shall behold him ever more,
As my Salvation, my Redeemer; and
He is (says he) always at my Right Hand.
True Holiness fixes our sight upon
No other Object, but one God alone.
The Southern* Sun, did never yet send forth
His pleasant Beams more strongly to the North,
Than sanctified Souls do cast an Eye
Unto God's Heaven enthroned Majesty:
The Soul is then exhalted in it is height,
When God is kept directly in its sight.
South by West.
Two Quarters of our Compass we have past;
And to the Third, we are arrived at last:
This Point we are now upon, is South by West,
As needful to be known, as all the rest.
The Sun full South, makes Noon; it is then at height:
But South by West, gives notice, that a Night
Will quickly follow: The Sun will now decline
Till't come at West, and then 'twill cease to shine.
That Death's thy Western Point, do not forget;
Thy Southern-Sun, 'twill have a time to set:
There Is none that lives, and shall not taste of Death;
The Holiest of Men, must yield their Breath.
It Is the deserved Wages of our Sin;
It was Transgression, that first brought it in.
Death comes with such an Universal Stroke;
The Holiest of Men, must bear its Yoke:
Abram, that faithful Man, expires and dies;
And so does Jacob, and his Sons likewise;
Moses and Joshua, and good Samuel,
Elisha, David, all which did excel
In Holiness; yet Death must act his part;
Impartially must throw his fatal Dart:
Pains are the Messengers that Death will send;
Sickness and Weakness, brings thee to thy End:
Yet when we look on Death Coelestially,
In such a case, a Christian cannot dye;
He only sleeps, his Death is but a Night;
The Trump will wake him in the morning light:
The holy Fathers, all, are said to sleep;
Their Graves, as in in a sacred Bed, does keep
Their breathless Bodies, which must there remain,
Till God restore both Breath and Life again:
Yet, with respect to Man, this is a Death;
Because all Men surrender up their Breath
To God, who unto Man (at first) did give
A comely Form, and Breath to make him live:
Yet wicked Men often take away by force,
That sacred Breath, contrary to the course
That God appoints. If here you do not mind
To stear aright, although against the Wind,
Your weather-beaten Vessels may be driven
Upon the Rocks, and split; but God has given
Such true Directions, that thou needs not fear;
For Holiness directs thee how to stear
Upon this dangerous Point, and not miscarry,
Though Waves be rough, and Winds be quite contrary.
South, South-West.
Seventeen Points already is expressed;
This Eighteen Point draws nigher to the West:
An useful Point, and needful to be known
By all that do the Christian Compass own.
Death is the King of Terrors; does arrest
All sorts of Men, spares not the very best:
^t is not Holiness that will excuse
When Death sends forth his Summons: Men may use
Means to prolong their days; but yet they must
Direct or indirectly, come to Dust:
Directly all Men taste of Death, we know,
because the Lord has said, it shall be so:
^ut holy Men do often yield their Breath
^t Tyrant's Pleasures, who conspire their Death.
Abel a holy Man, and yet must dye
^y Cain's enraged causless Cruelty.
wicked Man cannot endure the sight
^f him that is Just, because he brings to light
^is wicked Deeds, and secretly reproves
those sinful Lusts his Soul so dearly loves:
and for this cause, did Herod lay his hand
upon John Baptist; and at his Command,
^e holy Prophet must be put to Death,
^d to the Cruel Tyrant, yields his Breath.
^r my Names sake (says Christ) you shall be hated,
^en of those to whom you stand related:
As Natural Brethren in the Flesh; or rather,
As Children dear, unto a tender Father:
Yet these Relations (being wicked) brings
Their Children dear, before the Face of King
And Governors, who with their Rulers, will
Imprison some, and other some they will kill:
Thus did the best of Men, by wicked Force,
Ere God's appointed time of Nature's Course
Be fully spent* -- This Point well understood
You may ride safely on the raging Flood
Of earthly Troubles; but without Endeavou^
To learn this Point, you may be lost for ever,
Both Ship and Lading: Holiness will guide y^
Upon this Point, no danger shall betide you:
For Holiness prepares the Soul for Death,
When God directly takes away thy Breath,
And frees thee from the fear of Death likewis^
Which wicked Men maliciously devise.
South-West, and by South.
South-West, and by South: Behold! how t^ Point li^
This Point you must be sure to learn likewise.
Death is a Terror! it can be no less,
When it is not usher'd-in with Holiness.
If thou would dye in perfect Peace, be sure
Thou persevere in Holiness: Endure
Faithful to Death, and thou shall surely have
A Crown of Life, on the other side the Grave:
But if upon this Point thou stears not right,
Thy hope't-for Morning will be turned to Night:
Thou will by storm beset, and fiercely driven
On Rocks and Sands, and never come to Heaven.
South-West.
South-West's the 20th Point o'th Compass, and
Even between the South and West does stand:
^his is an useful Point; and therefore, thou
Must labor to be skilled therein: And know,
Tho Death with his impartial Sithe cut down
The best of Men, that ever yet was known;
Yet to the Saints, Death's but an Agent, sent
On an Embassage; and to this intent,
To tell the Saint, That now the Sun grows low,
And Night draws on; and now it is time to go
To his desired Bed, where he must rest
From all his Labors. Such a Saint is blessed*
Who, while he lives, all Filthiness abhorred;
And when he dies, Death finds him in the Lord.
Store up therefore, before you go from hence,
Some solid and well-grounded Evidence,
That thou art in the Lord; and when you dye,
Then take this Cordial, that thou have laid by;
One dram thereof, will stand thee in more stead,
Than all the World: Then, Blessed are the Dead,
Will be a sweet and comfortable Sound;
And make your Joys, though dying, to abound.
Oh, what a Comfort is it now to dye,
When Souls can (rightly) to themselves apply
The precious Promises God does afford
Within the Volumes of his holy Word;
Even this Promise that the Lord does grant
To Man, as Terms of the New Covenant:
Their Sins, and their Iniquities, no more
Shall be remembered, as heretofore.
In the first Legal Covenant, they were
Still called to remembrance every Year.
That Soul that sees himself by Christ remitted,
And also knows, he freely stands acquitted;
When others mourn, he can rejoice and sing:
The worst that Death can do, is but to bring
^im Tidings, that he is going to lay down
An Earthly, to enjoy a Heavenly Crown.
He freely in his arms can Death embrace:
O happy he, that dies in such a Case!
The happy Tidings that grim Death does bring
To such a one, does take away the Sting.
Death only is a Terror unto those,
That do themselves to Righteousness oppose:
When such a one does look Death in the Face,
O then he cries out for a longer space;
But all too late: Death will not be denied:
The Day of Grace is past, thou'st mist thy Tide
Well, to this Point, I now shall say no more
But only this; Get Evidence in store,
That thou art in the Lord; that Death may be
A Messenger of Joy and Peace to thee.
South-West, and by West.
South-West, and by West: this Point must also be
Well taught; and also, learned by every He
That Launcheth forth upon each raging Wave,
^n hope he shall a happy Issue have.
Oh, let me lodge this Errand in thy Breast!
Now thou art drawing near unto thy West;
Know, that as Righteousness will not excuse
A holy Man from Death: So, they that use
To spend their Hours in wickedness and strife,
Shall not thereby prevent another Life:
For, live they must; Man's Life is purchased
By Christ's dear Blood, that on the Earth was shed:
Yea, tho their Lives have been so vilely evil,
That they have striven to exceed the Devil
^n Wickedness; yet shall not that prevent
That Life, in order to their Punishment.
Could Wicked Men, by Sin, prevent that Day,
How would they sin their very Lives away?
But that they cannot: For God did create
Man in a pure, good, and perfect State:
And God, who of Man's Life was the first Giver,
Appointed means, that Man might live for ever;
And gave to him the Tree of Life to eat,
A sacred Fruit, a Life-preserving Meat.
Man did procure his Death at second-hand,
By wilful breaking of the Lords Command;
But God, not willing to cast Man away,
Prepared for his Life another Day:
Christ, by the Name of the Woman's Seed, wa^ give^
That Man, who died on Earth, might live in Heaven
If after this, Man stubbornly Rebel,
Though Man shall live, yet it shall be in Hell;
A Place prepared for Satan's Punishment;
Yet must Rebellious, Disobedient,
Be sharers with him, live in endless Woe;
His Life being purchased, it must be so.
Wherefore, mind this Point well, that so yo^ may
Steering by Compass, rightly find your Way.
West, South-West.
Beholding Death, as it at first came in,
(As the deserved Wages of our sin)
It has a dreadful Sting, that none can bear:
The Approach of Death, does fill Men's Heart with fea^
It Is called, The King of Terrors! well it may!
And therefore, Man from Death would fly away
It is the Holy sanctified Man;
Yea, such a One it is, that only can
Say unto Death, Where is thy Sting, O Grave?
Where is that Victory, you are wont to have?
True Sanctity is such a precious thing,
Makes Death all Honey, takes away the Sting^
It Is not devouring Monsters of the Seas;
Nor Sword, nor Fire by Land; it is none of these
Nor Hell enraged Cruel tortures, can
Make Death be stinging to a Holy Man.
Death only stings with Poison, such as give
Way to their Lust, and do corruptly live.
that Man that lives and dies in wickedness,
Death stings his Soul with Horror and Distress.
^o live in hatred of thy sins is best;
Which brings us very near unto West.
West by South.
And that thou might the better be directed
^o learn this Point; let nothing be neglected,
That may inform thee how to stear aright;
^et Earthly things seem empty in thy sight.
^'s the vain Pleasures of this World, intices
^o frown on Virtue, and to smile on Vices.
'Twas Acan's Golden wedges Beauty did
^tice him to do that he was forbid:
^ was his Babylonish Garment gay,
that made both Eyes, and Heart, and Hand to stray.
^et not the World delude thee with its pleasure,
And thereby rob thee of Eternal Treasure.
When Men's affections are so strongly placed
On Earthly things, which is but for a blast;
and Death comes suddenly to call him hence,
How bitter is it? Man would not dispense
With Death's sharp Summons; but with might and main,
^trive to make Death call back his stroke again.
How loath to bid those present things good Night,
Which are so sweet and pleasant in thy sight?
Gardens and Orchards, with rich Treasure, an^
Fair sumptuous Houses joining to the Land.
When Death the tydeings of departing brings,
O, says that Man that loves these present things*
Shall I now close mine Eyes, and lose the sight
Of these Enjoyments wherein I delight,
And sleep in Dust, until I rise again,
And know not whether into Joy or Pain?
O Death, forbear to strike me now, and give
Me time to enjoy these Pleasures here, and live.
Thus bitter's Death to those that are in Love
With Earthly things, and not with things above*
If therefore, on this Point thou would stea^ righ^
Then let thy Heart by Earthly things set light:
Love not this World, in which thou must no^ stay*
But love that Treasure, that abides always.
So will thou be, with holy Paul, resolved;
It Is better be with Christ, and be dissolved,
Than live on Earth, where Sorrows never cease*
So shall thou go unto thy Grave with Peace.
West.
Three Quarters of our Christian Compass past*
It now remains, that we unfold the Last:
We are past the North, the East, the South; an^ no^
We Are come to West; our Sun grows very low.
The Evening of our pleasant Day is come;
Our Sun is set, and we are hasting Home,
unto the Grave, the Earth; from whence we came;
^or Dust we are, and must return to the same.
^arth is our Home, our very Home indeed;
because from Earth, at first, we did proceed:
and though we there a season do remain,
^et from the Earth we must return again.
^om West to North: From Death we go to God,
and there takes up our Everlasting Bode.
^he Body being dead, the Earth must have it;
^he Spirit does return to God, that gave it.
^arth is our Home, but not our longest Home;
^o Earth we be, yet first from God we come;
^d thither it is, we must return again;
and from that time, unchangeable remain:
^ter the Judgment's past, and Sentence given,
^ur constant Home must be in Hell or Heaven.
From North to East: Again we now must pass
^om God to Christ, who now appointed is
^ be our Judge, who will uprightly deal;
^d from his Judgment, there is no appeal.
^ Righteous Judgment he will have regard,
^ give to every one a just Reward:
^ those that in well-doing seek for Glory,
^ernal Joy in Heaven's prepared for ye:
^t unto those that stubbornly Rebel,
^ernal Wrath, with damned Souls in Hell;
^thing but anguish, trouble, grief, and sorrow,
those dismal Night will never find a Morrow.
But, forasmuch, as now we are come to the We^
We will divide this Quarter, like the rest,
Into eight several Points, which we'll lay dow^
All very necessary to be known.
And forasmuch, as now we understand,
We sail by West unto the Holy Land;
From the first minute that we draw our Breath*
We Are sailing toward West; draws on to Dea^
Let Us mind each Point in this last Quarter w^
That in our Knowledge we may there excel.
It is of absolute necessity
For spiritual Seamen, that they learn to dy^
This needful Lesson Balam understood;
He knew it was both excellent and good,
To learn this Lesson. O (says he) that I
Were like the Righteous, when I am to dye!
O that my later End like his might be!
Such Good in dying well did Balam see.
To learn this Lesson well, this Rule I Will gi^
If thou would learn to dye, first learn to live*
Then take Directions from this sacred Truth:
Remember thy Creator in thy Youth;
Begin betimes; the Morning of thy Days,
Is the fit Season to reform thy Ways.
Give God thy strength, and serve him whilst tho^ you^
Thy Senses quick, thy Understanding strong:
Defer not thy Repentance until Night,
Or Evening of thy Days; but with Deligh^
Let Childhood learn to live, and Youth likew^
So will thou find sweet Comfort when thou d^
^od calls betimes; and if thou do delay
^o hearken to his Voice while it is day,
^n unexpected Storm may suddenly
^end thee away unto Eternity,
without the advantage of another Season;
^onsult then with Flesh, or fleshly Reason:
^hy Flesh will tell thee, that thou may take Pleasure
^ little Season, and Repent at leisure:
^nswer thy Flesh; thou cannot surely say,
^hou may continue yet another Day:
and to confirm this Truth, Experience says,
^eath strikes the Child, the aged Man; betrays
^he hopeful young Man, even in his Prime,
and gives him not, sometimes, an hours time.
Death comes unheard, her Arrow's sharp and keen;
^e strikes invisibly, and kills unseen;
^ncertain when; but certain Death will strike;
^especting Kings and Beggars, all alike:
^eath's stroke is dreadful, come it soon or late;
^t being struck, Repentance out of date.
Perhaps thou may take Pleasure for Today,
^-Morrow Death does take thy Life away.
^e World, poor Soul, and all the Pleasures in it,
^nnot secure thee now another Minute:
^en hear Today, it is all the time that is given;
^ject Today, and lose thy Way to Heaven.
West, and by North.
The next Point in this Quarter, 's West by North;
^learn this Point aright, is of great worth:
Remember this, That if thou do not take
Time by the Fore-lock, when thou wast awa^
Living on Earth (I mean) pale Death berea^ the
Of Life, and of all means of Grace, and leaves the
In no Capacity to mend thy Ways:
Living thou may; but dead thou cannot prais^
The sacred Name of God within the Grave;
There Is no Remembrance, that the Dead ^ ha^
King Solomon, whom God has made more w^
Than any Man (before or since) did prize
A living Dog, tho the mean one could set (...)
Before a dead, although a Kingly Lion:
And Solomon does give this Reason why;
The Living knows (says he) that he must dye*
The Dead knows nothing: Therefore, while t^ li^
Observe the Counsel that Christ Jesus gives:
Work while it is today, the Night will have*
In which the time of working will be past:
It Is in the Day Men work, not in the Night*
Wherefore, improve thy Day, with all thy mi^
The Heavenly Hosts of Angels are delighte^
When Sinners turn before they are be-night*
Christ to Jerusalem was heard to say;
O that thou did but know in this thy Day,
The things that do concern thy Peace! But no^
The Day is past, and Darkness does ensue:
^ese things, which in the day God does reveal,
^e Night being come, thick darkness does conceal.
Well then, be careful, thou that art to stear
^on this Point; for if thou miss it here,
^ou runs the hazard of the approaching Night;
^hen Heaven will refuse to give thee Light.
^ thou would have thy Soul-Endeavours blessed,
^en mind the next Point, which is West, North-VVest.
West, North-VVest.
^t not the greatness of the Numbers sway thee,
^r let the Counsel of the most betray thee;
^e most are careless how they spend their time,
^ving their Lusts, and Satan, with their prime.
^tear not by most Examples; for thereby,
^u'lt miss thy Point, and sink Eternally.
^ Paths of Death, is like the mighty Ocean;
^en quiet, calmed, deny their Waves of Motion*
^en Seamen ride upon the smooth-faced Seas
^thout disturbance: Many run with Ease
^aths of Darkness, and are quite misled;
^ so have many thousands perished.
^ Way that leads to true Felicity,
^ke the narrow Channel, that does lie
^ at the Entrance of some Isle: A Stranger*
^nding out the Channel, meets with danger.
^ell, thou art sailing to the Holy I Will,
^ not the smooth-faced Seas thy Soul beguile;
The Pleasures of this World (I mean) which do^
Bring many thousands to Eternal Woe.
And with this Caution, I Will this Point conclud^
Go not to Hell, because the multitude
Will not seek after true Felicity;
But rather choose the Paths of Death, and dye.
It Is better go to Heaven, though alone,
Than go to Hell, 'cause thousands more are gon^
This leads us to North-West by West, where we^
Shall farther in our Christian Compass be.
North-West by West.
Instructed still, that so we may not miss
That sacred Shore, where true Contentment i^
We Are still exhorting of you to prepare,
To meet with Death, to mind your Western Sta^
We having told you, You must learn to dye,
If you would live in Joy eternally:
That you may learn to dye, we also give
You Notice, that you first must learn to live:
But for as much, as some impediments
Do threaten much, as if they would prevent
All good Endeavors; I shall now asay,
To take all such impediments away:
The two next Points that follow, will I spend
Alone, for the promoting of that End.
Obj. The Flesh objects against our first Advic^
Supposing it to be a Point too* nice.
Should thou (says Flesh) refuse to own that w^
Which most walk in, what is it Men will not say^
Thou will expose thy self to all Men's scorn,
And be as one forsaken and forlorn;
And many troubles thou wilt find beside
Thy Sorrows will be daily multiplied*
Ans. To this I Answer: It Is no matter what
Man say or think, so God reject thee not:
Man may revile, thy soul they cannot harm:
Undaunted Seamen do not fear a Storm.
It Is not whom Man, but whom the Lord approves,
That finds acceptance; wherefore, it behooves
Thee not, to let the fear of Man betray
Thy Soul, and keep thee from the narrow way.
This Channel's narrow, and is hard to find;
But Christ's thy Pilot, fear thou not the wind.
Believe God's Word, and do thou not regard
Men's threatenings, or their promise of reward:
This is his Word; Whoever does not hate
Father and Mother, Life, for my Name's sake,
He is not worthy of the smallest measure
Of Sion's Glory, Christ the Eternal Treasure:
What, shall the fear of mortal man, whose breath
Is in his Nostrils, shall the fear of Death
Cause thee to slight the way of God; deny
His sacred Truths, and fall eternally?
Let not thy life be precious in thine eyes,
But freely give it for a Sacrifice,
If God require it, as He often has done,
To bear a Testimony for his Son:
What! did the Son of God freely lay down
His Sacred Life to purchase thee a Crown?
And shall a Christian think his life too dear
To lose for Christ? Alas, thy stay is here
But for a moments time; the life of Man
At longest, is compared to a Span.
Suppose thou layest down thy life? thou do
But lay thee down to sleep awhile at most;
And sleeping, thou will pass away the Night,
To rise to Glory in the Morning-Light.
Then fear not dying, but be moved thereby,
To learn to Live, that thou may learn to Dye.
North-West.
Our next Point is North-West; this Point does give
Some brief directions, how to learn to live:
Wherefore give heed, for thus thy Point begins,
Look not too lightly upon smaller Sins;
And let small duties be in thy esteem,
As much as these that greater duties seem.
It Is true indeed, there is no command at all,
As it proceeds from God himself, is small;
Nor any Sin against that Glory bright,
Though it may seem but little in our sight,
Can be accounted small, though there may seem
Some difference in sin, in our esteem:
An idle thought to us, not to the Lord,
Does seem a lesser Sin than idle words;
Unprofitable thoughts, and words, they both
Seem lesser Sins than does a dreadful Oath:
But in God's sight, the very least offense,
If with our Wills, is Disobedience;
And Disobedience is a sin as great,
As is the Sin of VVitchcraft God does threat:
All Disobedience with Death Eternal;
The smallest sin deserves the Lake infernal:
If to the same we freely give consent,
And live and dye therein, and not Repent.
So as to Duties, some may seem but small,
Compared with others of no weight at all.
Obedience to a Minister, appointed
To feed the Flock of Christ, the Lord's Anointed,
Seems but a little duty, when compared
With that, Submission, Reverence, and Regard,
We owe to God; yet as we understand,
This does proceed from God as his Command:
Our being found in wilful negligence,
God will account it as a great offense;
A bare profession, though indeed it be
A Christian duty, it is the least degree:
It seems indeed as nothing, if we bring
It to be balanced with suffering,
Compared with Charity; a bare profession,
^s but like promised Gold without possession.
And to be brief, Christians must not neglect*
The smallest duty shows the least respect
Unto the smallest sin: a little leak
Will find a passage for the Seas to break
unto thy Vessel; and without endeavor,
To stop this Leak, thy Ship may sink for ever.
A little negligence at Sea, when Storms
Threaten the Seamen with approaching harms*
Neglecting to look out, the Ship is tossed
Upon the raging Seas, broken and lost.
Wherefore that thou may escape eternal death*
Endeavor while on Earth thou drawest breath^
By searching of God's Word, to understand
What is thy duty, neglect no command;
Hate every Sin, and quite forsake them all,
Whether the Sin thou loves, be great or small;
So shall not Death affright thee, thou shall be
From Death (as't has a dreadful sting) set free*
North-West, by North.
Our next's North-West by North: Wish not t^ dy^
Nor covet after Death immoderately.
Some under torturing Pains, to ease their grie^
Have wished for Death, thinking to find Relief
Within the Grave; and in a Pet would cry,
Let Death now strike his Stroke, that I may dye*
Others again, finding themselves distasted,
Perhaps, because some great Design was blaste^
Will presently puff out their angry breath;
And in a sudden Passion, wish for Death:
Just like to Jonah, when the Lord designed
The Ninevite's Destruction; yet inclined
To Mercy, if the Ninevite's Repented;
Jonah crossed in his Mind, was discontented,
And wished to dye; for which he was reprove*
Although a holy Prophet, and beloved.
Alas, poor Souls! you that cry out so fast
For Death, as if indeed you were in have;
Should God but grant your unadvised Petition,
You quickly would bewail your sad Condition;
And cry as fast, Oh that the Lord would spare
My Life a little longer! Oh beware,
Lest God, provoked, take away thy breath
Against thy mind: Poor Soul, prepare for Death but dye.
Before thou wish so unadvisedly,
That when Death comes, thou'st naught to do
If God be pleased to lengthen out thy days,
Be then well pleased to spend them to his Praise:
And if he is pleased thy Days shall be but few,
Be thou content, and labor to eschew,
All kind of Sin, whereby thou may offend
Him that alone can Crown thy latter End
With Happiness, unto Eternity:
Thus learn to live, that thou may learn to dye.
North, North-West.
Our next Point's North, North-West: The art now lanch't forth
Into the Deeps, and drawest nigh thy North:
Thy Days is spent, and now thy Spirit must
Return to God, thy Body to the Dust.
God is thy Northern Star, from thence thou came,
Who was, and is unchangeably, the same:
'Twas He, who at the first did give thee Breath;
It Is He, for Sin, does summons thee by Death:
It Is God, who in his Image first did make thee,
And never since was willing to forsake thee:
'Twas He that did appoint a Second Life,
To put a Period to that deadly Strife,
That Sin has made 'twixt Man and his Creator:
'Twas God that did appoint a Mediator;
Even Jesus Christ, to whom God does direct thee,
Because he is not willing to reject thee.
From North to East, thou wast at first conducted;
From God, to Christ his Son, to be instructed,
And brought into the way of Life, where thou
The things belonging to thy Peace might know:
Thy time on Earth, that short (uncertain) Space,
Has been the Day of Patience, and of Grace;
Which if thou have neglected till thy Sun
Be wholly set, the Day of Grace is done:
T'expect another Day of Grace is vain.
From North to East, thou must be brought again;
From God to Christ, thou once again must pass,
Who is appointed (not as first he was)
To be the Savior of thy Soul; but He,
By God's Appointment, now thy Judge must be.
Your Consciences, whose Checks you now refuse,
Will testify against you, and accuse
Thee to thy Judge, and none will intercede;
Thou'st not a Friend, in thy behalf, to plead:
Christ was thy Friend, whose Counsel thou refused,
And all his gracious Promises abused:
Thou that rejected Counsel heretofore,
Shall never have a Word of Counsel more.
The Prince of Peace, that sacred Lamb of Sion,
Is now become a fierce devouring Lion:
He that being filled with Mercy and Compassion,
Laid down his Life, to purchase thy Salvation;
Is clothed with Fury now, and burning Ire,
And is become a Soul-consuming Fire.
This sacred Truth is left upon Record,
Within the Volumes of God's holy Word:
'Twill be a Soul-cousening Day of trouble,
Wherein the Wicked shall become as Stubble,
Which in an Oven is consumed away;
So dreadful is that Soul-amazing Day
To all the Wicked! such as do Rebel:
Depart, depart, you Cursed into Hell!
Will be the Sentence that the Judge will give
Unto all such as in Rebellion live.
Depart to Hell, where you Eternally,
Shall be a dying, but shall never dye!
Go down to Hell! depart out of my sight,
To utter Darkness, to eternal Night!
Depart to Hell! for, as your Works are evil,
So shall you now be Sharers with the Devil!
Depart to Hell to everlasting Pain!
From whence expect not to return again.
You that can scoff at Resurrection now,
Would then avoid it, if you knew but how:
Your dismal Night will never find a Morrow;
Your Merriments will all be turned to Sorrow:
Who can express the dolorous Grief and Pain,
That damned Souls shut, up in Hell, sustain!
Where Fire goes not out, where Worm never dies,
Where cursed Oaths is turned to hidecous Cries!
Sad is the Case with Hell-confined Souls;
Who now, in stead of drinking Wine in Bowls,
Gnashing their Teeth with anguish; they must spend
Their doleful Hours in pain, World without end.
You that have spent some time in sinful Pleasure,
To satisfy your Lusts, shall find no leisure
To fix your Eye on pleasing Objects; for,
What ever you behold, you will abhor;
You will abhor, and loath your selves, because
Your former slighting of God's sacred Laws:
Your stubborn Hearts refusing to Repent,
Has brought you to this place of Punishment;
From which most lamentable State, thou never
Shall be released, although thou should endeavor.
This is the Second Death; and certainly,
It is a dreadful Death for Man to dye.
The first Death frees a Man from temporal Sorrow,
And frees him from his Labor till the Morrow:
The Second Death begins a Sinner's grief,
And leaves him helpless, hopeless of Relief.
Now, would thou not be taken in the Snare
Of Death the second time; Oh then, prepare
For Death's first Summons; let not sin dis-arm thee;
And then, the Second Death will never harm thee.
There is no way to escape the Plagues of Hell,
But in thy Living, and thy Dying well.
Two things concerning Death, I Would have thee mind;
Which if thou do, thou will the Comfort find.
First, Death is certain either first or last;
All living Creatours of Death's Cup must taste.
And Secondly, It is uncertain when;
Children and Infants dye as well as Men.
Death is a Messenger, that is sent from Heaven,
Has both his Power, and his Commission given
By God alone; and when he is sent to strike,
Respects all Ages, and Degrees alike.
Death when it does arrest, will give no Day;
Death will have nothing, under present Pay;
Nor Years, nor Months, nor Weeks, will Death allow;
Death will admit of no entreaties now:
With ghastly Looks, he stares thee in the Face,
And tells thee, Thou have here no longer space;
This Night, by Death, the Lord requires thy Soul.
Sad was the Message to that prosperous Fool,
That in his own Conceit, had lately blessed
His Soul with Peace, and many Years of Rest:
Deluded Man had not one Day to spend;
This Night thy many Years is at an end.
Thus unexpectedly are Souls ensnared*
But dreadful will it be, if unprepared.
Well, Death is come; thy Barns, and all thy Store
Thou must forsake, and never see them more:
And true it is, we see it with our Eyes,
That Death is certain, in uncertainties.
There Is not a Man among the Sons of Men,
But knows that he must die, but knows not when.
Death on his Cloudy Errand sometimes comes,
And smites poor Children in their Mother's Womb.
And sometimes he will venture to Arrest
The Infant Sucking at the Mothers breast;
And sometimes Death forbears to throw his Dart;
Till Childish practice joys the Parents heart:
So in like manner Death is sometimes known,
When Childhoods past, and Youthful Blossoms blown,
To strike his Fatal stroke; and many a time,
Death strikes us not till we are in our prime,
When Strength and Manhood is upon the Stage:
And sometimes Death stays till decripped Age.
Death blasts young Buds, fair Blossoms, dainty Flowers,
At the age of years, of months, weeks, days, and hours.
How dare thou, in Sinning, take delight;
And sin to day, that is to dye at night.
Poor Wretch! that at God's pleasure draws thy breath,
How dare thou sin that is not secure from Death!
In one moments time, poor Soul, thou can not tell,
But that this Night thou shall go down to Hell.
North by West.
Our two and-thirtieth Point draws near the North;
To Steer aright upon this Point is worth
Ten thousand worlds, ten thousand times told over;
Its real worth no mortal can discover.
As North's by West; so Death's by God, and He
The First and Last of every Thing will be.
It is from God we do receive our Breath;
By God's appointment all must taste of Death.
We told you lately, what a dreadful thing
It was, to dye the Second Death* but bring
You better Tydeings now; and to be brief,
This Point well learnt, will expiate all Grief:
It is the Tidings of a Second Life,
Beginning Peace, and terminating trife.
And that I may in this one thing, discharge
My self, bear with me Reader, if I do enlarge
Upon this sacred Point: But what am I,
To undertake a Task so much too high
For any Man? Angels desire to (...) it,
And holy Prophets never fully knew it:
When holy Men of old did stear their Course
Upon this Point, the depth thereof did force
Them to cry out, as Men astonished, and
Confess it was too high to understand:
Into which Mystery, when Paul inquires,
Instead of Satisfaction, he admires
At God's great Wisdom: Which (says he) no doubt,
Is over-high for Man to find it out.
Eye has not seen that excellent Reward,
Which God Almighty has of old prepared
For such as Love him: Heart cannot conceive,
Nor Tongue express the Glory they receive.
Some Hints the holy Prophets have laid down,
Which in the Scripture language is made known
In such a Dialect, as may impart
The Mystery of this Glory to the Heart;
And also does inform the Eye and Ear,
That to Man's Sense this Glory might appear.
These be the Terms it is discovered by;
Riches and Honor, Princely Dignity;
Silver and Gold, and precious Pearl, that Treasure
In which the Princes of the Earth take Pleasure;
Fair Houses, beautified with Gold,
And precious Pearl, most lovely to behold;
Cities whose Pavements (upon which we tread)
Is pure Gold, whose Wall is garnished
With precious Pearls, in comely order set;
The Jasper, Amathist, and Crisolet;
With Saphir, Tophas, Emrald, Chalcedon,
The Jasinct, Sardius, and Sardonix-Stone.
Thus in our Sailing upon West by North,
By these Similitudes, the Lord sets forth
The great Advantage of our Stearing right
Upon this Point; and yet this great Delight,
(With which Man's captivated Eye's ensnared)
Is less than nothing, if it be compared
With Heavenly Glory, which exceeds as far,
As Midday Phoebus does the dullest Star.
The greatest Beauty Mortals can behold,
Is Gems and Jewels, with refined Gold;
Which when the Apostle Paul compares with the
In his Esteem (behold!) how vile it is?
As if all Earthly Pomp had nothing been,
Speaking of Heavenly, says; Eye has not se^
Nor never could Man's highest Conceit impart
This Heavenly Glory unto any Heart.
'Twixt Heaven and Earthly Joy, the disproportion
Is like one Drop of Water to the Ocean;
For though one drop be real Water, yet
It Is not sufficient for Man's Benefit;
There is no Substance in so small a Measure;
And small's the Substance of all earthly Treasure:
It Is not unlike the pearled Dew of May,
Whose Morning-Substance quickly ^ades away
Like Jonah's Gourd, that sprang up in a Night;
And in another, vanished out of sight;
Exactly like a Shadow in the Water,
Which seems a Substance, but is no such matter;
Which, if a Man puts forth his Hand to take it,
Finds it a Shadow, and does straight forsake it;
Or like a Man, that dreams he does possess
Great Substance; but awakes, finds nothing less.
Could Man, with Alexander, say, My hand
Has made the Earth subject to my Command;
And to my Pleasure I the World confine,
And all the Treasures o^ the Earth is mine.
He that could make the World to bear his Yoke,
Must in a Moment, ^eel the direful Stroke
Of Death, which will remove him from his Treasure;
And in a moment, level mighty Caesar
With Beggars, that upon the Dunghill lies;
So swiftly this conceited Substance flies.
Where Is now the Man, that (...) so lately seen
Subdue the Earth? He Is as he had not been:
The seeming-Substance, in the which he boasted,
Is like a Shadow fled, and he has lost it.
Then happy's he, that on this Point does stear
His Course aright, he has need to fear
The Threats of Death; his Sins are all forgiven,
And his enduring Substance is in Heaven;
Where he shall need no Sword to keep his Right,
Or Watchman to secure him in the Night;
Where Tears shall never more offend his Eyes;
And where he never more shall hear the Cries
Of Souls oppressed; where Wickedness shall cease;
Where all his Sorrows shall be turned to Peace;
Where Sighing shall be turned to singing Praise;
Where Nights are changed into perpetual Days;
Where wicked Men shall never lay more Hands
On such as do delight in God's Commands;
Where all their threatening, and their cruel words,
(Wherewith they ^ex Christ's little Flock) like Swords,
Shall pierce their Souls with Sorrow, and their Heart
Shall never more be freed from the smart;
Whose haughty Looks the Lord will then abase,
And they, with Horror, shall behold God's Face:
They that to Mercy would not be inclined,
Shall beg for Mercy, and no Mercy find:
But they who shall in Heaven receive a Place,
Happy are they, that are in such a Case!
O happy are those Souls, whose God's the Lord!
Who Have squared their Lives according to his Word!
Blessed's that Man in Death, who in his Life
Has loved Holiness, and hated Strife.
Then Stear thy Course aright, on West by North,
Where Treasures lie, whose excellence and worth
Cannot be measured by me; nor can
Its Height and Depth be valued by Man:
It is, indeed, Man's Duty to inquire
Into its Worth; believe, and so admire.
THus in our Christian Compass we have past
From North to East, to South, to West; at last*
We Are come to North again: Our longest Day
On Earth, is measured to us by the Stay
Of Heaven's great Lamp of Light, the glorious Sun,
When it stays longest in o^^ Horizon.
But now our Sun will never lose its Light,
We never more shall see a Cloudy Night:
If while thou art on Earth, thou make sure
This sacred Treasure, thou lies down secure,
And free from Fear, no Darkness will arise,
To hide this sacred Glory from thine Eyes.
Who then would make this World's uncertain Treasure,
The Object of their Comfort, Joy, and Pleasure?
Lay Treasure up in Heaven, that may be
From Thieves and Rust, from Death and Danger free.
The height of Earthly Glory's like a Bubble,
Filled with the wind, but tossed about with Trouble;
It Is at no certain; speaks thee fair Today,
And of a sudden, it makes have away.
The P^rsian Monarch once could make his boast,
His Branches spread themselves in every Coast,
Throughout the Universe; and, in one Story,
The World agreed to Crown him with their Glory;
All People is contented he shall have
What ever his Eye could see, or Heart could crave:
The Enjoyment of all this, the Reason why
We cannot call it true Felicity,
^^its Uncertainty: Man has no Power
To keep himself in this Estate an Hour;
The momentary Dangers that attend him,
He cannot escape, though all the World be friend him:
Sorrows, as well as Pleasures, do abound
On every Hand; D^ngers besets him round;
His Enemies beholds him, and admire
His prosperous State, and secretly conspire
His sudden Death, hoping a Change in State
May make an Alteration in their Fate:
But if through Servant's watchfulness and care,
He be preserved, and escape that snare;
^here's other Dangers, that be incident
To Man, as such Care never can prevent.
The Sorrows that this Monarch does sustain,
As the true Product of some grievous Pain,
Sometime is in less, sometime in greater measure;
Bereaves him (tho a Prince) of all his Pleasure.
Death so impartially does throw his Dart,
Makes Prince and Pesant from his Pleasures part.
The Kings of Egypt, making of their Feasts
(Fit to accomodate their Princely Guests)
Did serve Death's Head, as the last Course, whereby
They were informed of their Mortality.
Thus at the end of all their Dainty Cheer,
They by Death's head, of Death admonisht were.
This is the Counsel therefore, that I give
To such as do in full Enjoyment live
Of Princely Pleasures; know for certainty,
You are but Men, tho Princes; you must dye;
You are but Clay, Death will dis-robe you quite,
And bury all your Glory out of sight:
Naked you shall arise, and stand before
The Judge of Heaven and Earth, and have no more
Advantage than the Beggar* All shall have
One common Resurrection from the Grave,
And no Respect of Persons will be there;
No notice will be taken what you were
In Men's Esteem; whether you were the Head*
Or such as was constrained to beg their Bread;
But what your Works have been. O happy He,
Tho Rich or Poor, of high or low Degree,
Whose Works shall be accepted! He or they
Shall stand in Judgment at the Judgment-Day.
All those whom Death finds in the Lord are blessed,
They cease from Labor, enter into Rest.
Thus have we run our Christian Compass round;
And if our way Canaan, we have found
Through the raging Seas of VVorldly Trouble,
Our Labors then will be rewarded double:
If we have learned to escape the Rocks and Sand,
And every Point of the Compass understand;
And upon every Point can stear aright,
Whether in pleasant Day, or stormy Night:
If we each Point do so exactly learn,
That whether we be at Mast, or Pump, or Stern,
We can behave our selves in every Place,
Like Men accomplished; Happy is our Case!
OUr Compass being finished, one thing more
Is necessary to be known: Before
Our Christian Compass we begin to con,
We must erect the Point it turns upon.
An Enlivened Conscience.
THe PIN, on which our Christian Compass turns,
which giv's quick Motio to our lifeless Urns,
It is a Conscience, touched with God's Word,
That Is quick and sharper, than a Two-edged Sword,
Which enters into the very Soul,
And does direct thine Eye unto the Pole.
God's Word's the sacred Lodestone; and therefore,
The Conscience touched therewith, will ever more
Gently be moving upon thy Affection,
With fixed Eyes to God, for true Direction.
When as the Seaman's Compass is erected,
And on his Part, no Labor is neglected;
But that he daily cons his Compass over,
Tho neither Sun nor Moon he can discover;
Minding his Compass, he knows how to stear,
And knows when either Rocks or Sands be there.
Christians, that do erect their Compass right,
(Though they be Storm beset, or in the Night)
Can find their way, their Compass being laid
Upon the Conscience; but when no use is made
Of Conscience, in the things we undertake,
We cannot think a happy Voyage to make.
Observe that good St. Paul, and you shall find
That Faithful Pilot in the self-same Mind:
His Compass he upon his Conscience lays;
In all things, he makes Conscience of his Ways.
Both toward God and Man, thou always must
Make Conscience of thy Ways: It Is in vain to trust
To any written Rule, though never so good,
And never so well known, and understood.
If thou do make no Conscience of the same,
Thy Compass serves for nothing but the Name.
Upon a painted Compass Men may look,
Or read the Rule that is written in a Book.
A Compass fairly painted on a Wall,
(Though pleasing to the Eye) serves not at all
To stear a Ship by: That must be effected,
By such a Compass, as must be erected,
And set upon a Needle, where it moves;
By this erected Compass, Seamen proves*
Their written Rule: By this the Ship is guided,
And through the raging Seas, her way's divided.
Remember therefore, if thou do intend
Thy former Compass shall obtain its End,
And thou, at last, may be secured from blame.
Be sure that thou make Conscience of the same;
That, out of Conscience unto God, thou never
Neglect thy former Compass, but endeavor
To stear according to it: Fix thine Eye
On God, who is thy North; and come as nigh
Unto thy Rule, as possible thou may;
And, out of Conscience unto God, obey
His Will in every thing, with true Affection,
As from thy Compass, thou meets with Direction^
So shall thou be made Happy in thy Choice,
And from true ground of Comfort, may rejoice*
Having within thee, that which will endure
The Testimony of a Conscience pure:
That, from thy Dove-like Innocence, thy Conversation*
Has been, in truth, without Dissimulation,
According to the Rule; unfeignedly,
Serving the Lord in pure Simplicity,
And true Sincerity; where I shall leave thee,
As with a Rule, that never will deceive thee.
A Good Memory.
A Seaman that completely is supplied,
Must with his Compass, have a Box beside,
To place his Compass with security;
The Box is therefore a good Memory:
There let thy Rules be kept, like sacred Treasure,
That thou may look them over at thy Pleasure.
These Rules are few, these Few are very plain,
^ot over numerous for thee to retain:
^ thou do get these Rules into thy Head,
^ time of need they will thee stand in stead:
When thy occasions have removed thee far,
and Storms and Tempests at the Sea debar
^hee from the good Appointments of the Lord,
^he sacred Preaching of God's holy Word;
^his being kept in Memory, lies by thee,
that in a time of want, it may supply thee.
I will not say, That thou will need no more,
^ in thy Head thou layest them up in store:
^ut this I dare adventure to assert,
^hy Head instructed well, informs thy Heart:
and if thou knows these Rules, and do endeavor
^o do the same, Happy art thou for ever:
^ such a State thou never can miscarry,
^ho Seas be rough, and Winds be quite contrary;
^ut safely shall obtain that happy Shore,
Where Pleasures do abound for ever more:
^hen will thou find no Reason to repent thee,
that for a time, thou had this Compass lent thee.
CHAP. IX.
The Third Part now of sacred Navigation,
It is the Affections, lively Meditation:
Affectionate Divinity, we find,
Is principally seated in the Mind.
DIvine Affection is a lively Motion
O'th'Soul to Godward, stirring up Dev^tion
And this Affection, thus Divinely seated,
By Meditations is both warm and heated:
So that, through Heat, it now does opperate,
And sets the Affections in a working-state.
Affections is the Soul's quick Motion, and
Sweet Meditations also does command
The Soul's Affections; and does strongly move
And melts the Affections in a Flame of Love:
Where holy Meditations is but small,
The Affection's cold, and scarcely moves at all
That therefore, I shall further treat upon,
Relating to Divine Affection;
I shall endeavor to reduce them all
Into some certain Rules that is Practical:
Practical Rules, I mean, of Meditation,
Whereby the Soul can make sweet Application
Of God's sweet Promises in Scripture found,
And that upon the best and safest Ground:
^or Meditations, when it is sweetly felt,
^s like a Limbeck, that does Heat and melt
^uch pleasant Flowers, as are put into it,
^aking sweet Drops of Water issue fro it.
Those Meditations that I now intend
^o lay before my Sea-devoted Friend,
^hey're of two sorts, on which mine Eye is fixed;
^ome purely Simple, other some are Mixed.
^uch Meditations, as most properly
^Ve here call Simple Meditations, I
^raw from such Places of God's Word, as are
^especting Seamen in particular.
^wo Scriptures for that purpose I have chose,
^Vhich Holy David did before expose
^o public veiw; that such as fear the Lord,
^ight be instructed from his Holy Word.
In Psalm the Seventy-seven, and Nineteen Verse,
^here David does that sacred Word rehearse:
^hy Ways, O Lord, are in the Seas (says he)
^hy Paths upon the mighty Waters be.
^^ from this Word thou bend thy Meditation,
^o make a Spiritual use and Application;
^his Word, which here the Holy Prophet says,
^ay well refer unto his sacred VVayes;
^elating to the World (that restless Ocean)
^r to the Saints: But if thou take this Notion,
according to the literal Explication;
^ Seaman, then, may make this Application.
1. If it be so, that God-Almighty please,
^o make his Footsteps in the raging Seas;
If God do walk upon the Waves indeed,
And tread upon the Waters; then what need
Have I to fear at Sea more than at Land,
For God-Almighty does them both command
Or why should I, at Sea, be less in fear
Of sinning, than at Land; for God is there?
No, no; God rules the raging Waves, can sti^
Their Fury, and restrain it when he will.
Though Neptunes prouder Billows do out-bra^
And threaten still to make her Womb my Gra^
Tho every moment Death come prancing by ^^
I Will fear no Evil, for the Lord is nigh me:
And yet I Will fear to sin, though Mortal Eye
Cannot discover, for the Lord is nigh.
I Will dread his holy Name that does command
The swelling Waves, and bounds them with t^ San^
I Will fear his Holy Name, whose sovereign Pow^
Commands the Sea, that it shall not devour
Their Neighboring Earth again, and does restra^
Their Fury, making them turn back again:
I Will reverence his Name, whose piercing Eye
Sees all the World at once: His Majesty
I will adore, and ever seek to please,
Who rules the Earth, and walks upon the Se^
I Will stand in awe at Sea, as well as Land,
Of him, whose power does them both comman^
2. But Secondly, Upon this same Relation
Thou may rightly form this Meditation:
^ay to thy Soul; My Soul, thus stands the Case;
^hese mighty Waters is God's dwelling Place:
Here is God's Temple; O my Soul, adore him:
^all down and worship God, and kneel before him.
^ay not within thy self, O I may live
^o come to Shore again, and then I Will give
Him my Devotions: Say, God's House is here;
^le worship Him at Sea: He Is every where:
Where is the Place in which a Man may hide
Himself from God? Behold! He does abide
^ Heaven above, where Angels hear his Voice,
and in his Presence constantly rejoice.
And on the Earth, O Lord, thou also art
With those that are of pure and perfect Heart.
If in the Deep (says David) I should hover,
Behold God's there, His Presence is all over:
He rides upon the Winds* He Is in the Clouds:
There is no Place, my Soul, where Man may shroud
Himself from God; His watchful Eye never sleeps.
^le worship God, like Jonah, in the Deeps.
Though my Relations dear, be all on Shore,
And I alone at Sea; I am before
The Lord (my Maker) here, as well as they:
^le worship God, whom Winds and Waves obey.
3. And as thou see God rules both VVind and Waves,
Know this my Soul, it is the Lord that saves
This slender Vessel, that may in one Minute,
Sink down into the Depth, with all t^at's in it.
It Is God who was, and is, and will be ever,
That gives Man Wisdom, blesses his Endeavor*
Whereby poor Man is made an Instrument
To save himself from Danger, and prevent
Himself from Ruin. Did mine Eyes but see
Into the Depth of this great Mystery,
Doubtless, I should behold great streams of Lov^
To fall like plenteous Showers from above,
Upon poor Man, that brittle lump of Clay,
That h^re has but a little time to stay:
For if the Lord do let his Love run out
Toward our Bodies, then there is no doubt,
But that his Love does very much exceed
Unto our Souls, that did from him proceed:
For what is our Bodies any more than Dust,
Made of our Mother-Earth, whether we must
Shortly return? We live a while, and dye;
And in our Morther's Womb, again must lie,
Till God from Heaven once again do give
His great Command; saying, Arise, and Live^
And Dye no more. All this exactly proves,
That Man's the Creature only that God loves;
And gives Man Wisdom to prolong his Days
On Earth, that so he might amend his ways,
In order to his Life Eternally,
That Man might live in true Felicity.
Behold, My Soul, this Mystery Divine!
How God preserving of this Life of thine,
Chiefly intends thy future Preservation;
Preserves thy Body for its Exaltation:
Will thou improve that Wisdom God has given
To save thy natural Life? And is not Heaven
Worth all thy pains? O use thy best Endeavor
To save thy Soul; which lost, is lost for ever!
Thou Art sailing (O my Soul!) to Canaans Land;
There Is many a churlish Rock, and dangerous Sand.
Improve that Understanding God has given:
Be careful (O my Soul!) thou be not driven
On Rocks and Sands: Observe when Danger's nigh thee;
And then be sure to have thy Compass by thee:
Then, tho thou be at Sea with Tempest tossed,
And meets with many a Storm, and bitter Blast;
Remember then, my Soul, the Lord is nigh thee,
And with sweet calms of Comfort, will supply thee.
Thus, if thy Meditations do run out
Upon the sacred Word of God, no doubt
'Twill bring thy Heart into a melting Frame;
'Twill heat thy Soul with Zeal, and so inflame
All thy Affections; till, at last, it prove
A servent Fire of Faith, and Zeal, and Love.
2. The second sacred Scripture, that I mind*
(Relating unto Seamen) you may find
In Psalm one Hundred seven, there read on
From Verse the Twenty* third, to Thirty-one:
Which sacred Scriptures, as it does relate
Only to Seamen, they may Meditate
On these choice Sayings; and with great content,
Wisely improve each strange Experiment.
To help thy Meditations, these two things
If carefully observed, great profit brings:
And first observe (as I did say before)
These Words relates to Seamen: Furthermore,
Consider to what end these Words are spoken;
It Is that they might behold each wondrous token
Of God's great Power at Sea, so as to raise
Up their Affections, fill their Mouths with praise,
To him that walks upon the Waves; from whence
They may store up each Days Experience.
Such Men (says David) as in Ships go down
Into the Seas, to such the Lord makes known
His mighty Wonders, while within the Deep
They do their Business: There the Lord does keep
A Court Imperial even in the Seas:
There he commands the Tempests, who obeys
His All-commanding Voice: There they advance
Their prouder Waves, their threatening Billows dance;
Whose raging Fury strikes all Hearts with fear:
They cry in their distress, and God does hear.
That it is the Seamans Duty, is most plain;
1. To eye God in his Wonders; And again,
To eye him in each Tempest; as indeed,
He is the Author: From him Storms proceed.
2. But Secondly, Seamen are ne'rtheless,
To know that He Is their Helper in distress.
3. Thirdly, In every Storm thy are to eye
The greatness of their Danger; and how nigh
They are to Death.
4thly, Seamen must know likewise,
Their way to future Joy, through Danger lies.
On these four Heads, now, let thy Contemplations
Run out on these, or such like Meditations:
Say to thy Soul; My Soul, Let not mistrust
Perplex thy Mind at Sea; thy Way is Just:
God made the Seas* and does their Waves command,
He prospers Sea-affairs, as well as Land.
Is my Employ at Sea? I Will not forsake it;
For there is no wickedness, unless I make it.
God's Hand, his Eye, his Power, is all over;
I am as safe on Sea, as on the Shore:
Great Dangers is at Sea, it is confessed;
And on the Shore, how many are distressed?
How many Men we see upon the Shore,
Leaves their Relations, never sees them more.
Wild Beasts, the Winds, the Flood, the flames of Fire;
All these, and many more, Man's Death conspire
Dangers surround us upon every Hand;
And Sin's the cause of Death by Sea and Land.
Wherefore, my Soul, if thou would be secure
From danger at the Seas, thou must be sure
Thou carry not thy Sins to Sea: Bethink thee;
The Seas are dangerous, and thy Sins will sink thee.
It was a Righteous Noah, that first did float
Upon the Seas; God saved him in his Boat:
When all the sinful World was lost beside,
This righteous Person rules both Wind and Tide.
One Sin presumptiously allowed, may be
The sinking here, and to Eternity.
The Ship, indeed, may bear it knows not what,
Because it has no Sense; but thou art not
To be so senseless: Thou must understand,
That thou cannot possess that Holy Land,
Fraught with thy sins: Sinners must not come thither,
Sin raises Storms, and makes tempestuous Weather.
2. But in the second Place: Does Fear surprise
Thy Soul, because a Tempest does arise?
Remember, then, whether thou art to fly:
It Is God must help; Lift up thy Voice, and cry
To God for Help, who only can command
The stormy Winds, and make the Waves to stand:
But when the Tempest does at first begin,
Reflect upon thy self: Perhaps, some Sin
Has raised this Tempest, some beloved Lust;
Afflictions come, but not out of the Dust.
Storms do not come by chance: While Jonah sleeps,
His sin at Land-makes Tempests in the Deeps:
The very Heathen did conclude no less;
Therefore cast Lots, to see who did transgress.
God raises Tempests to correct our Crimes,
And for the trial of our Faith, sometimes:
What ever it is, my Soul, some Cause is given;
What e're's the Cause, the Remedy's in Heaven.
Is Sin the Cause, O then (my Soul) Repent;
God hears the humble Soul, and penitent:
Cry unto God, who only can appease
This dreadful Tempest, and can calm the Seas.
Hold all thy Sails, my Soul, with fervent sighs;
^and all thy Cords with secret Prayers likewise:
Let Faith be mixed with Payer; Faith will prevail
Cast Anchor, O my Soul! within the Vail:
And when thy hand's at Helm, thenlet thine Eye
Look up to Heaven, from whence must come supply.
Rouse up from Sleep, my Soul! for that intent,
Perhaps, this Tempest was from Heaven sent,
To rouse thy drowsy Soul: Awake, awake!
Who sleeps in Sin, shall fall into the Lake.
2. Be not Foolhardy, of an Atheist's mind,
That scoffs at Tempests, and does scorn the Wind;
Laughing at Death, presumptiously out-braves,
As if his Courage could withstand the Waves:
But be thou humble (O my Soul!) and know
It Is God that makes the stormy Winds to blow:
It Is He alone, that makes the Seas to rage;
And none but He, their Fury can assuage.
Be not too foolish in thy Confidence,
The next strong Gust that comes, may fetch thee hence.
Say to thy Soul, the next proud Wave that comes
May swallow this poor Vessel, and intomb
Both It and Thee within the restless Ocean:
Let Storms and Tempests stir up thy Devotion,
In Prayer to God; who if he say, Be still,
Both Wind, and Waves, and Seas obey his Will.
3. But in the third place: Are thy Sorrows past?
And has the Lord delivered thee, at last?
Does frothy Neptunes raging Fury cease?
And are the Winds, and Waves, and Seas, at peace?
And is thy trembling Heart set free from fears?
Thy Hands from labor, and thine Eyes from tears?
O then, my Soul! forget not Him whose Hand
Has given Rest; Praise him by Sea and Land.
Forget not God, that helped you in Distress;
Let not his Mercies make thee love him less.
Was Sin the cause, that made the Seas to rore?
Forsake thy sins (my Soul), and sin no more:
Or was it to try thy Faith, God sent this Storm?
Let this Deliverance then, thy Faith confirm.
How did it fill your Hearts with joy and peace,
When first the Tempest did begin to cease?
Its first appearance was like precious Balm;
So welcome was the tidings of a Calm.
How was your Hearts refreshed, as with Wine?
Your Souls revived, as if some Divine,
Or holy Angel, had some Cordial given,
Which God, to cheer your Souls, had sent from Heaven?
You were as one now raised from the Grave;
Such Soul-refreshments did you then receive:
Your Breaches were built up, and all repaired;
Wherefore (dear Souls) do not now disregard
God's Goodness on the Seas, now you're on Shore;
But magnify the Lord for ever more:
And for his Goodness, do not prove unkind;
Let not Sea-Mercies slip out of thy Mind:
Tremble when ever you do entertain
A Thought into your Hearts, to sin again;
Or when you do forget the Lord, whose Hand
Spared you at Sea, and brought you safe to Land.
Now Courteous Reader, for whose sake I have
Exposed these Lines to view; I only crave
This at your Hands, That if these Meditations
Be over brief for your large expectations,
That you would use Industry, and enlarge
Upon the Premises, and so discharge
Your Christian Duty in this Exercise;
And then what is writ, may very well suffice
For Simple Meditations from this Text:
Mixed Meditations now shall be the next.
CHAP. X.
Wherein you have a brief (but plain) Relation,
What Seas and Ships afford for Meditation;
Which is in twelve Particulars laid down,
Pleasant and profitable to be known.
AND first consider well, how near thou art
Unto thy Death; it is but a Board does part
'Twixt Thee and Death; if that Board chance to hit
Upon some churlish Rock, and so be split;
Thou sinks into the raging Ocean, and
Thy Burying-place must be the restless Sand;
Thou needs no Sexton there to dig thy Grave,
The Sand is all the Burying-place thou wilt have:
Thy Body through the Waters make its way,
And there must lie until the Judgment-Day.
2. But Secondly, Consider with what care
The Pilot to his Compass does repair,
Because from thence he is to take Direction;
And with what careful Head and Circumspection,
He does observe his Landmarks; and likewise,
See how the Stears-man at the Helm applies
Himself to hearken, with all diligence,
Unto the Pilot's Voice; because from thence,
He Is to receive Directions how to stear:
But Oh! How careless does poor man appear,
That is concerned in Soul-Navigation,
Although it do respect his own Salvation.
Although we hear the Pilot call and cry,
What little heed takes Man to stear thereby.
Oh* how industrious is Seamen here,
To escape from Shipwreck; while we, void of fear,
Hazard the Shipwreck of our Souls, and trust
All will be well, though we obey our Lusts.
Oh, what is the matter Souls! what does condence
Our Hearts? and why are we so void of Sense,
To value less the shipwreck of our Souls,
Than of our Ships, that carries in their Holds
nothing, at best, but what is transitory*
those full Enjoyment's but a fading Glory.
Now, let the Seaman's Diligence and Care,
^o save his Ship, provoke thee to beware
^hou do not lose thy Soul through negligence*
^or loss of which, there is no Recompense.
3. With what a strong unsatisfied Desire,
^o all the Ships crew, after Land enquire:
^Vhen he at Top-masts Head, at last, does spy
^and, tho far off, How welcome is his Cry?
^ of good Cheer, dear Sirs, and faint no more!
^onder's our Harbor! I discover Shore!
^e're past the worst, our Danger now is over!
^ear up, dear Hearts! Cheer up! I do discover
Our wisht-for Port, from whence our hop't-fo^ Gai^
Will recompense us for our toil and pain.
Does Seamen thus desire to des-cry
Their Ports at Sea? O then, my Soul, say; Wh^
Thou art so lazy, and do not look out?
Alas, my Soul! I fear, I am in doubt.
Thou Art too secure. Do not understand
The Excellency of that Holy Land?
Methinks thou should much desire to hear
The Watchman tell thee, That thou drawene^
That happy Port of fair Emmanuel,
Whose boundless-endless-Treasures do excel.
Seamen have their prospective Glasses by them
By which, things at a distance is drawn ny the^
Faith is that true Prospective Glass, whereby
Things at a distance is drawn very nigh.
Abram looks through his Prospective-Glass,
And saw Christ's Day long time before it was.
Through this Prospective-Glass thou may b^ho^
Jerusalem, whose Streets is pure Gold;
Whose Walls is precious Stones; whose Glo^ brig^
Is Christ, the Son of God, that gives it Light
Whose Beauty, when thou sees it, will delig^ the^
Whose Riches is sufficient to invite thee,
To venture all the Loss thou may sustain,
That thou that sacred Country may obtain:
Abram did see it far off, and did rejoice;
Moses beheld it also, and made choice
^'endure Storms, abide tempestuous Weather;
And, Happy Moses, if he gets but thither.
Is not this Country worth thy observation?
Or set thou so lightly by Salvation?
^ook out, dear Souls, and hear the Watch-man's voice!
^ehold the Glorious Country! and rejoice
that you can see the Country, tho not nigh:
^bserve your Compass well, and stear thereby;
^ill thou arrives at Canan's sacred Shore,
^here Pleasures will attend thee ever more.
4. But in the Fourth place: Thou may there observe
that Care the Seaman takes to preserve
^ch Rope and Cable, that it may hold fast
^e Anchor, that the Ship may not be cast
^ Rocks, or Sands, or forced in any sort,
^ Storms or* Tempests, from their wished Port.
Hope is the Anchor of the Soul: No Storm
^here Faith to Hope's united, can do harm.
^ith is the Cable; and if so be thou find
^ith not sufficient to resist the Wind
^ strong Temptations; mark what Scripture says,
^y Hope is strengthened, when thou adds to Faith.
^mptations (like a Tempest) raises strife.
^d but the Virtues of a Holy Life
^to thy Faith, thy Hope will never fail;
^ then thy Anchor's cast within the Vail:
^ere will thy Anchor hold both firm and sure;
^d this thy Anchor keeps thy Soul secure.
5. How does the Seamen, when the Wind's contrary
Wait with Desire, and with patience tarry
Till the unconstant Wind do change; no less,
Does want of Winds bring Seamen to distress.
Calms and cross Winds, do both alike presage
The ill success of an unprosperous V'age.
A Spiritual Seaman's thus becalmed, when ^eac^
Has this Effects, to make his Lusts increase*
Ephraim had Peace allowed him, as a fa^or*
But its Effects was, that an evil savor
Made Ephraim to stink: Wherefore, the Lord
His own Inheritance has often abhorred.
Good David in a Calm did suffer more,
Than he had done in all his Life before.
When God gave David Peace instead of Strife,
Then Lusted he after Vriah's Wife.
When Israel was at Peace on every side,
This was the time, that they did most backslide.
Thus Calms, we see, have done us many harms
As ever did cross Winds, or hasty Storms:
Then pray, with Seamen, that you may be neithe^
Harmed by Calms, cross Winds, or storm^ VVeather
When thou art over-mastred by Corruptions,
They are like cross Winds, making Interruptions
Observe these cross Winds, and use Diligence
Seamen, sometimes, can with cross Winds dispense.
They Will work against the Wind, and so must thou;
But yet observe when the Winds do blow
With a fair Course; observe these gentle Gales,
And then be sure thou spread out all thy Sails.
By fair Winds here, I would be understood,
To mean the Holy Ghost, that promis't Good;
Which breaths into thy Soul, and gently moves
To every Good, and every Sin reproves.
When ever thou perceives that sacred VVind
To breath into thy Soul, be sure thou mind
^ts holy Breathing: If it do invite thee
To Holiness, let Holiness delight thee:
^f it reproves at any time for Sin,
Be sure thou take no Delight therein.
When Spirit's Breathing calls for thy Affections
unto the Scriptures, follow its Directions.
Thus if each sacred Gale of VVind thou eye,
And close with every Opportunity,
And let no fair VVind slip in any sort;
Twill hasten thee to thy desired Port.
6 What Pains a Seaman takes in a Storm,
To keep his Vessel, and himself from harm?
Some tend the Sails, while other some do stand
By this and the other Rope: There Is not a Hand,
At such an hour find a time to cease,
But as the storm, their labors do increase.
^ome ply the Pump, while others stand to sound,
And all to keep themselves from being drowned.
Why then poor soul do thou securely sleep,
Till thou with Jonah perish in the deep:
How many a Storm poor soul have thou been i^
Yet not so much as wakened with thy Sin?
How do the Waves like mighty Armies com^
Threatening to send thee to thy longest home?
How often has that pale Messenger of Death,
Been threatening to take away thy breath?
And sleeps thou yet, poor soul! O hear the noi^
Of God in Judgment, whose tempestuous Voy^
Once shook the Earth: If thou wilt not now awak^
E're long he will both Earth and Heaven shake
Then will it be Tempestuous round about him
Then woe to them that now do live without hi^
This Tempest now is sounding in thine Ears,
And can thou sleep with Jonah free from fears
Awake poor drowsy Soul; at last bethink the^
Or else thine own Iniquity will sink thee.
Rouse up! rouse up! and ply thy Pump my Sou^
My Vessel leaks, waters has filled it Hold:
Empty thy self my soul of all vain pleasure,
If ever thou intend to save that treasure;
Thy precious soul I mean, that is more worth
Than all the fading Treasures of the Earth.
Seamen in Storms* they must be sure to mind
Their Sails, or else some cross contrary wind
May sink and over-set; they may be driven
On Rocks or Sands: so you that sail for Heaven fil^
Mind your Affections, labor to be skilled
In these your Sails, and know with what they
^ with vain Pleasures, thy affections be
^ill'd full, they will sink thee to Eternity:
^ut if with holy breathings, then no Storm
^an be so strong to do thee any harm:
^torms drive thee faster to thy wished Shore,
^here thou shall never meet with Tempest more.
7. How does each Mariner, while he takes care
^or the preserving of his own affair,
^mprove his pains alike for all the Crew?
^he safety of the whole is in his view:
^f that provision any person makes,
^o save his private Cabin, all partakes:
^ach one's concern is so with others mixed,
that it does make a harmony betwixt
that little Commonwealth. O then, what cause
^ast thou my Soul, to slight the Sacred Laws
which God has in his Holy word made known?
that is to make another case thine own.
When thou art seeking for thy own Salvation,
^emember, O my Soul, the whole Creation.
^od has to man an Universal Love,
and would have none to Perish: Let this move
^y heart to pity every one, that I
^e walking in their own Iniquity:
^et me, in using of my best endeavor
^o save my soul from perishing for ever:
^hink with thy self, my soul, 'twill not suffice
that thou art saved alone; thou must likewise
By Life and Doctrine, or whatever may,
Seek to put others also in the way
To save themselves: My Soul, thou can not b^
Rightly endeavoring thy self to free
From Death's eternal Soul-amazing snare,
But others of thy labors will have share.
When wicked men behold thy good behavior
It makes impression, leaves a pleasant savor;
Makes them in love with goodness, lets them se^
The foolish madness of Impiety.
Men truly brought unto a sight of sins,
Soon sees the danger of it, and begins
To take up resolutions, to forsake it;
Hear now this Counsel, O my Soul! and take it
Be like the Seaman, who, while he make sure
To save himself, does all the rest secure.
Yet by the way, this one thing must be known
While thou seeks others good, slight not thin^ own^
8. From these unconstant various mutations
Which Seamen daily see these Meditations,
Which under this eighth circumstance does she^
It self, is here presented to our view.
How do calm Evenings many times deceive
The too secure Seamen, who believe,
Perhaps, because they see no present Storm
Before the Sun goes down, there will no harm
Suprise their quiet rest, but that they may
Lie down in safety, sleep till brake of day.
But now behold, before the Night is spent,
A sudden Tempest is from Heaven sent,
That does awake them; they are dispossessed
All of a sunden of their quiet rest:
Their Evening's Calm's turned to a Night of sorrow,
In great distress they cry out for the Morrow;
Hoping the Day, when come, will bring Relief;
But Day, Alas! does still increase their Grief.
O sad disastrous Accident! most strange!
O great Mutation! unexpected Change!
Who would have thought, but some few Hours past,
Those Calms would usher in so great a Blast?
The Day is come, but yet no Hope remains;
They call and cry, but yet their fruitless pains
Goes unrewarded, till the dismal Night
Comes on, and puts their slender Hopes to flight;
Their Hope is at an end, their Day is done,
Their sable Night has now obscured the Sun;
And now they are expecting every Minit,
Their Ship should sink, with every thing that is in it:
But of a sudden, as the Night came on,
The Tempest ceases, all their Fears are gone:
They that were now with fear of Death possessed,
Can now dispose themselves to quiet Rest;
They, whose perplexed Thoughts the Storms did fright,
(Who were in dread of a Tempestuous Night),
Can now lie down in safety, sleep secure:
These strange Mutations Seamen do endure.
Thus stands the Case, my Soul! The same Mutation
Daily attends upon Soul-Navigation.
How calm sometimes, an Evening does appear?
The Soul goes on in sin, and does not fear:
He sins, and sins again, without relenting;
And not so much as dreams of his Repenting.
While others fear the losing of their Souls,
He sins, and meets with nothing that controuls;
Can laugh at Vices, and can play with Sins;
So great's the Calm: But suddenly begins
An unexpected Alteration; and,
He now begins to see, and understand,
That God's an Enemy to Sin, and will
Not clear the Guilty, but in wrath will kill
All the Ungodly; such as do rebel,;
He will cast down into the Pit of Hell
Where Sinners shall be Subjects of his Ire,
And live Eternally in Flames of Fire.
O what a Tempest is there now begun!
His Joy is over, and his Peace is done:
Now every Sin seems like a mighty Wave:
He now cries out* with Peter; O Lord, save
A miserable Wretch, that am undone!
O may I see the Morning! may the Sun
Arise, and fill my darkened Soul with Light,
And free me from the Terror of the Night!
Thus with Soul-melting lamentable cries,
My soul did long to see the Sun arise;
But when the Morning came, alas, my grief
Seemed rather more than less, and my relief
Seems farther off, the Sun did shine so clear,
That now my sins like Armies do appear.
I saw Gods Love in Christ, indeed, most plain,
And understood, that he for Sin was slain:
Yea, furthermore, I also understood,
It Was for great Sinners, that he shed his Blood:
But yet withal, I also did perceive,
That such as did the Benefit receive,
Were real Converts, such as did repent:
But I beheld my self Impenitent;
^ disobedient Rebel: With Delight,
Have I committed sin both day and night;
^or could I see a Reason to expect
that, which was only due to God's Elect.
Thus in the Day, the Tempest did increase;
^he more I saw, the further off from Peace.
^he Tempest thus continued, till the Light
^as quite obscured, and a dreadful Night
^ame fast approaching on, my Watchful Eye,
^ees nothing now but Death Eternally.
Behold, My Sorrow's now at height, extreme!
^ow all the World, for one refreshing Beam!
^ut when I thought this dark and dismal Night
^ould sink my Soul, I saw by Candlelight,
spotless Dove, bringing a Branch of Peace;
^id to the Seas, Be still: Their Rage did cease.
was the sacred Candle of Gods Word,
^at did this precious Beam of Light afford:
^lainly saw from thence, that Christ was sent,
^ save the sinful, disobedient:
I saw from thence, God never past Deaths Sentenc^
On any Man, till he refused Repentance:
I saw from thence, God never did respect
Any Man's Person, nor did he reject
The worst of Sinners, that were but content
To leave his sins, and truly to repent:
I saw from thence, God's Universal Love
To every Man: This sacred Light did prove,
That God loves all Men from his first Creation
And from this Light, I saw his great Compassion
Unto his Creature, Man, whom he did make
In his own Image; for which Creature's sake,
He made a gracious Promise of Redemption
Unto his Creature, Man, without Exemption.
I saw my self from thence, as one of those
That God out of the whole Creation chose
To bear his Image hence: I knew likewise,
If any one that bears his Image dies;
It Is not because the Lord before has said,
This Man whom I have in my Image made,
Shall dye Eternally; he shall not have
Sufficient Means allowed him to save
His Soul from Death: But, it is because he chu^
To walk in Paths of Darkness, and refuses
That sacred Path of Light and Life, that is giv^
Wherein all Men may stear their Course for H^v^
All these bright Beams of glorious Light Divi^
Forth from the Candle of God's Word did shine:
Even in the Night, the stormy Wind did cease,
Which filled my Heart with Comfort, Joy, and Peace.
9. How beautifull's the Ship when under sail,
Having the advantage of a pleasant Gale?
With how much Pleasure, Ease, and Cheerfulness,
Do Seamen then attend their Business?
How pleasant is their passage, when no Storm
Puts them in fear of an approaching Harm?
When neither Wind, nor Weather interpose,
How well all matters in their Voyage goes?
How beautiful's the Soul, when its Affections
Is wholly guided by Divine Directions?
When holy Breathings makes the Affections swell
With Love and Zeal for God, and to excel:
When sacred Breathings thus possess the Mind;
He Is like a Ship that runs before the Wind
Upon the smooth-faced Seas, when never a blast
Is sent to interpose. O then, what have
The Soul does make for Heaven, when it is Corruptions
Is all subdued, and makes no Interruptions?
How pleasant, O my Soul, and with what ease
Thou do thy Work on these tempestuous Seas?
Christ's Yoke's then easy, and his burden light;
Then will thou serve the Lord with all thy might,
And all thy Labor easy will become,
Thy Works of Charity, not burdensome?
How lovely Christians are in such a Case?
Those holy Breathings beautifies the Face.
When Passengers behold the Waves arise,
As if they meant to grapple with the Skies,
Behold the Waters in great fury strive
To bury Ship and Seamen all alive;
The Passenger concludes Seamen unwise,
That for the advantage of a slender Prize,
Will run such Hazards: But when they behold
Their Vessel laded with Rich Indian-Gold;
And also fees the Seas affords Delights,
As well as Terror: These things now invites
The Passenger to think a Seaman's Life
Is worth the seeking after: To be brief,
When such a one as only is a Stranger
Unto a Christian's Life, beholds the Danger
That Christians are exposed to; and also,
The Danger that they daily undergo,
Some times from their Corruptions, and sometime^
From Men that look at Righteousness a Crime;
Whereby they daily are exposed to scorn,
And looked upon as wretched and forlorn;
Hated, forsaken, persecuted, and
Beset with Sorrows upon every Hand:
Upon the sight whereof, he will suppose
It Is worse than Folly, for a Man to chose
To live so vile a Life, in expectation
Only of future Glory, and Salvation.
But if he sees a Christian in his Beauty,
Freed from Temptations, to perform his Duty
To God and Man: If ere this Stranger's Eyes
Be so far opened, as to see the Prize,
With which a Christian is at last rewarded,
He Will think these Sorrow's not to be regarded:
The VVorth and Value of that sacred Prize,
Makes him conclude a Christian only Wise.
Improve thy Intrest, use thy utmost Skill;
^ntreat the Lord, my Soul, that he may fill
Thy Spiritual Sails with Breathings from Above;
That being filled with fervent Zeal and Love
To God and Man, thy Beauty may invite
Strangers to stear for Heaven with Delight;
And so thou will adorn the Gospel, and
Make many seek after the Holy Land.
10. How useful's every Rope? there is none so small,
But is of use; each Seaman knows them all;
Can call them by their Names; do understand
Both when, and why each Rope he is to hand:
And, with what Strength, with what Dexterity,
They hand and hale each Rope? My Soul, apply
This to thy self: In sacred Navigation,
There Is not a Rope, but thou will find occasion
To make use of it; There is not a Word,
But something of benefit it will afford:
The Promises is all of use, we know;
And every threatening VVord's of use also;
Every Experience of God's Faithfulness,
Thou may lay hold on, with as great a stress,
As Seamen do upon the Ropes they hale,
When they would either keep, or force the Sai^
To bear up Wind; that so they may,
Taking advantage of the VVind, make way.
Every Experience is like a Cord,
That draws the Soul's Affections to the Lord;
From whence these sacred Breathings do procee^
That fills thy Sails, and makes thee run with spee^
Every Work, or Act of Providence;
Mercies, Afflictions, sudden Accidents,
Steppings-aside, Miscarriages, Temptations;
All these are useful in Soul-Navigation;
Want of Industry, or spiritual Sloth:
There Is not a Word can slip out of thy Mouth;
There Is not an Act of Folly can be wrought;
Nor yet a vain unprofitable Thought;
All sins of Negligence, sins of Omission:
All these may serve to stir up Heart-Contrition
See thou thy self in every thing too blame;
Be drawn thereby, into a humble Frame:
The humble Man the Lord will teach his ways
The Lowly he will exalt to sing his Praise.
By all that is said, it does appear most plain,
A spiritual Seaman, if well skilled, may gain
By every Work and Action in his Life,
Whether't be good or evil: To be brief,
As every Rope is useful in its place;
So nothing's useless in a Christian's Race.
God's goodness, when compared with ours, man serv^
To let us see how little we deserve.
^o see his Wonders both by Sea and Land,
May let us see the Power of his hand,
That of a suddain's able to consume
Such as do live in wickedness, presume.
11. As Ships within the Holds do bear the Prize;
So on the Deck, they carry strength likewise;
So that they may be able to oppose
The strong Assaults of their enraged Foes*
Know also, O my Soul! thou must provide
Weapons of War, of which thou wilt be supplied
Out of that sacred Magazen, the Lord
Has richly furnished from his holy Word.
Seamen expect to meet with opposition;
And Spiritual Seamen's in the same Condition;
Beset with Pirates round on every side;
World, Flesh, and Devil: O my Soul, provide
Thy self with Armor, that thou may withstand
The Force and Fury of this tripple band.
Thy Adversaries have both strength and skill;
Resolved they are, and overcome they will,
Unless thou make a very strong resistance;
Which if thou will, thou shall not want assistance.
God's holy Word's the Magazen; wherefore,
Go arm thy self out of that sacred Store:
There Is Weapons suitable for every Foe;
The Sword, the Shield, the Helmet; and also,
A sacred Breast Plate, Paul esteems no less,
Than pure Innocence and R^ghteousness;
This piece of Armor will secure the Heart
From being pierced with Satan's fiery Dart:
A Breast that that is armed with Righteousness can never
Be pierced with all the Darts in Satan's Quiver.
It Is neither Satan, nor his Instruments,
Can with their Malice harm the Innocent.
Satan improved all his Hellish Power
Against poor Job, intending to devour
That Righteous Person; and to that intent,
That nothing should his Hellish Rage prevent,
He makes Job's Wife an Instrument to cause
Him to offend, and break God's sacred Laws;
Persuading him to curse his God, and dye;
Stirs up his Friends t'accuse him wrongfully:
But Job being armed well, resists them all;
Their Darts rebound (as from a flinty Wall)
Against themselves, as they could do no less,
He being strongly armed with Righteousness:
He could appeal unto the Lord most High,
Who knew the Truth of this Integrity;
That willingly he never did transgress;
Muchless had he contrived Wickedness*
Thus Job was armed against the force and might
Of Satan, armed with Hell-inraged spite.
These three pernicious Foes were all consented
To ruin Job, but they were all prevented.
Poor Job upon the Dunghill sits him down,
Beholds the former-smiling World to frown;
and of a sudden, sees himself bereft
^f all his Temporals, and has nothing left.
^ut what does Righteous Job in this distress?
^ow he has nothing left him to possess,
^e takes him to his Weapon; draws his Sword.
It Is God does give (says he,) it is the Lord,
That when he pleases, takes away the same:
^od gives, and takes; and, Blessed be his Name.
Thus with his sacred Sword he puts to flight
^he World with all its Pomp: But now in sight,
another dreadful Foe, with Visage pale,
^ncounters Job, and threatens to prevail:
^^ was his Flesh, that in* bred Enemy,
that now against poor Job does make reply.
^Vhence does it come (says Flesh to Job) that thou
^rt of a s^ddain tumbled down so low?
and what is the cause that thou art thus tormented?
and why art thou so patient and contented?
^Vhat? is thy Righteousness no more regarded?
and must thy Innocence be thus rewarded?
^Vas it but now that thou was so precise,
^o offer for thy Sons a Sacrifice,
that for thy Sons thou might make Intercession,
^^ case they had bin found in some Transgression?
and is this all the acceptance thou must find,
^o have thy Sons slain with a mighty VVind?
^Vas't not enough to cast thee from thy Throne,
^here like a Prince, thou wast accepted on;
^ut that thy Flesh must tortured be at last,
and thou thy self upon the Dunghill cast?
If Pious Persons be rewarded thus,
In vain, poor Job, have thou been Righteous:
Cease to be Righteous Job; thou can but dye crying
What Is the Reward of thine Integrity?
It Is worse than Death: Thou sees thy consta^ says
Bespeaks no less than a continual Dying.
But now observe what this brave Champio^
See how he wealds the sacred Shield of Faith!
What now my Flesh (says he) art thou afraid
To serve the Lord ^mnipotent, that made
The Heavens, and the Earth, Sun, Moon, and Stars
And all, because there does remain some Scars
Upon thy Body? What, tho Torments fill me?
I Will fear the Lord my Maker, tho he kill me.
I know (says Job) that my Redeemer lives;
Who, tho he do afflict my Body, gives
Me full Assurance, that these Eyes of mine,
Shall yet behold him Gloriously Divine:
And tho my Flesh be tortured with Pain,
I know my Flesh shall be restored again:
I will not part with my Integrity,
Nor lose my Righteousness until I dye:
The Grave within a little space receives me,
And then my Tortures must be forced to leave me:
Then cease my Flesh to tempt me any more;
For while I live, my Maker I Will adore.
Thus Job being armed with Helmet, Sword, Shiel^
Did force his Enemies to quit the Field.
Job like a skillful Seaman was so wise,
He carries Weapons to secure his Prize:
then, my Soul, be thou so wise to arm thee,
and Satan, that grand Pyrat shall not harm thee.
12. But in the last place: Let thy Meditation
^metimes be fixed on this Consideration:
^ust by the Helm, thou sees the Compass stand;
^o sooner does the Seaman lay his Hand
upon the Helm, but that immediately
unto his Compass, he directs his Eye
^ee with what Strength he holds the Helm, when he
Would stear upon some Point. This ought to be
The care of every Spiritual Seaman here,
As up and down these trouble Seas they stere:
As thou art stearing up and down this World,
Where many times you are in a Fury hurled
Into strange Countries, and sometimes is driven
On churlish Rocks and Sands: What strength is given,
Improve it to the utmost of thy Skill.
Hold fast the Helm, but eye thy Compass still.
This World's the Sea; thy Body is likewise,
The floating Ship; thy Soul's the Merchandise;
The Affections is the Sails; and also mind,
The Spirit's Breathings is that sacred Wind
That fills thy Soul, and gives it lively Motion
Unto thy Vessel on this restless Ocean:
Well-grounded Hope's the Anchor, makes thee able
To Endure the worst of Storms: True Faith's the Cable,
That holds the Anchor fast, it cannot slip:
Thy Tongue's the Helm (says James) that gu^ the S^
When David would prevent his doing wrong
With force and might (says he) I Will keep my Tongue
With that we bless and curse; and ^o be plai^
The Tongue unguided, makes Religion vain:
Be careful what thou utterest therefore; and
Before thou speaks, observe how it will stand
Agreeing to the Compass, Rule, and Guide:
Men by their Words (says James) are justified
And by their Words M^n are condemned says he
To Rule thy Tongue well, is a good Degree:
He that has gained the Conquest of his Tongu^
He is both skillful, valiant, wise, and strong.
Three things observe in guiding of thy Tongue
And first, observe that it does speak no wrong
Of God the Father; charge Him not foolishly,
If He afflicts thy Soul: But rather cry
With David; Search my Heart, purge out from then^
What Sin so ere may stain my Innocence.
But in the second place; I say again
In guiding of thy Tongue, thou must re^rain
From idle Words: Vain Jesting says St. Paul
Is not convenient; does no suit at all
With Heaven-expecting Souls: Vain Words defil^
The best of Men. Let not thy Tongue revile,
Although thou be reviled: Do not render
Railing for Railing; evil Words engender.
^ multitude of Sin does purchase blame,
And terminates in Everlasting Shame.
Thirdly: In guiding of thy Tongue, thou must
Be sure to speak the thing that is Right and Just.
Speak no unsavory Word in any Case:
Let all thy Words be seasoned with Grace;
That from thy Lips such gracious words may fall,
That may be of sweet benefit to All;
That Sinners may be drawn from Wickedness,
And Saints may persevere in Holiness.
These three things, if thou do observe them well,
^n guiding of thy Tongue, thou will excel.
And to conclude our sacred Navigation:
There is sufficient for thy Meditation
^n every thing, that to the Ship pertains,
Or to the Sea: It only now remains,
That Ship, and Sea, and Sand, and Rocks, and Wind,
With Heavenly Contemplations fill thy Mind.
Thus having briefly run through every Part
Of this Soul-saving Navigable-Art;
I Will leave it with thee now, and say no more:
But shall desire (as I have done before)
That all these Rules, as I have here laid down,
May be as fully practiced, as known;
That in this sacred Art, thou may excel;
Which He desires, that bids thee now Farewell.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the
Stationers-^rms in Sweetings-Rents, in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange.
A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many
Congregations of Christians Baptized, upon Profession of their Faith in London,
and the Country; newly Published: Price bound, One shilling.

War with the Devil: Or, The Young Man's Conflict with the Powers of Darkness:
In a Dialogue: Discovering the Corruption and Vanity of Youth, the Horrible
Nature of Sin, and deplorable Condition of Fallen-Man: Also, a Definition,
Power, and Rule of Conscience and the Nature of true Conversion: To which is
added, An Appendix, containing a Dialogue between an Old Apostate, and a Young
Profess^r Worthy the perusal of All; but chiefly intended for the Instruction
of the Younger sort: The Fifth Im^^ession: By Benj. Keach. To which is now
added, a Second Part: Price bound, On^ shilling Eight pence.

The Causes and Cure of sad Disconsolate Thoughts in Christians: By William
Traughton: Price bound Eight pence.

The Seamans Spiritual Companion: Or, Navigation Spirituallized: Price bound,
One shiling.


