THE Apostate Prince: OR, A SATYR Against the King of Poland.

By Richard Burridge.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. 1700.

THE Apostate Prince: OR, A Satyr Against the KING of POLAND.
NOW, like a Porcupine, I dart my Pen
Against the least of Kings, and worst of Men,
What Sat'rist can forbear the lashing you,
Who neither will to Man nor Heaven be true?
Who ran from Saxony to cruel Rome
Only the Throne of Poland to assume,
That ticklish Seat of Empire; which allows
None there to Rule, but what will pay their Vows
To such like Saints, which commonly depart
The World upon a Ladder, or a Cart.
Fie, fie, a Christian Prince his God betray!
Change his Religion, the Apostate play,
For such a Diadem which must not be
Entailed upon your Line successively?
The Jews, the Turks, who falsely do believe,
Do Laugh to see your Faith pinned on your Sle^ve;
And I do fear, you will, as Pride does Swell,
Turn Atheist next, to be a King in Hell.
Scandal to Princes, scorn of Kings, and shame
To Christendom, infernal is thy Fame!
A Prince affront his God with Deeds so foul
That they stain Heaven, and deform the Soul!
O horror, and amaze! what have thou done?
My Blood congeals, and scarce has power to run,
To think thou art to Pride, that base born Slave
Of Hell, so much a Friend, that you can leave
A Church so well Reformed so True, Sincere,
Pure, Orthodox, and Holy, to adhere
To that Communion which does Canonize
Men for nefurious Impieties;
To make their Peace with God, invoke the Dead
Stanislaus of Polish Saints the head:
But good St. There are many Saints whose Aid and Assistance they Implore in
particular Diseases, and Distemper of Body; as St. Venisa for the
Green Sickness, St. Liberius for the Fistula, St. Flacrius for the French Pox,
etc. See Stopford's Pagano-Papismus, Chap. 4.
Flacrius, I do suppose,
You call on most, that he may guard your Nose
From those Disasters which attend the sport
Of Venus, in a lustful Prince's Court.
Into what Errors are the Papists led!
To think their Jugglers do release the Dead
From Purgatory; it is a feigned Flame,
Which does such simple Fools as you are Tame.
As under every Poplar, Elm, and Oak,
The Ethnicks did their senseless Stocks Invoke;
So they to Images, and At Fouchial in Madera, I have seen the Picture of our
Savior carrying his Cross, painted on the outside of one of their Churches;
to which the Portuguieze paid so much Veneration, that they kneeled in the open
Street, and sang before it for near a quarter of an Hour: O superstition
exceeding the Heathen!
Pictures bow,
As if they Sense had got their Zeal to know.
Your Priests drink Wine, give Laymen only Meat;
O Romish Faith! it is but a holy Cheat.
Pray, what avails Stopford again tells us in these words, cap. 17. In some
Churches the Candles are put out with a Wax hand, which signifies the hand of
Judas, which was as it were of Wax; that is, flexible to evil, by which Christ
our King, and true Light, was Betrayed, and, as much as in him lay,
Extinguished.
Wax-hands; Indulgences,
Censers, Odd-numbers (damned Fopperies!)
To'ards Heaven? Or, what Grace does Flagelling,
Crossing with Holy Water, to you bring?
None: Nor does Agnus Dei's Sir, preserve
You from Enchantments; from the Truth you swerve.
Your Beads will serve you, as a Scale, to tell
How many Miles it is from Warsaw, to Hell.
Apostles Christened Men, as Scripture tells,
But Rome, as well as Men, do Christen Bells.
If Pilgrimaging merits Heaven, take
A Trip to England, for the Blessing sake.
Here may you see fair Winifria's strange Well;
And old St. German's, where he once did dwell;
At Canterbury base St. Becket's Shrine,
For the deserved end of which Divine,
A King was Flaug'd; here may you likewise see
Tyburn, that triple, consecrated Tree;
From whence, St. Coleman, Whitebread, Pickering,
And Langhorn, went to Heaven in a String.
Since for a better we our King did change,
A Chapel has been (you will think it strange.
'Cause not Loretto's) brought from Heunsloe-heath,
Eleven Miles, it is true, upon my Faith.
But if strange Relics you have a mind to see,
You must tramp France, proud Spain, and Italy,
And other foreign Parts; though once we'd here
A Nail, which fixed Christ to the Cross; a Spear,
With which Longinus pierced our Savior's Side,
When he between Two Malefactors Died.
The Lustful Flames of Whoring Carmelites,
Proud Cardinals, Rich Abbots, Lazarites,
May make you dread those endless pains of Fire,
They represent by leacherous Desire;
To prompt their Fury of debauched Heat,
They need not He tells us from another Author, cap. 18. Many leacherous Men
and Women resort to Compostella, to eat Scallops for the kindling of Lust, and
increase of Nature, under the name of a Pilgrimage to St. James his Shrine.
Compostella Scallops eat;
Their Heat without 'em Swells their burning Veins,
And, where their Host is consecrated, Reigns.
The Nunneries, where Parents Daughters thrust,
And Maiden-heads are sacrificed to Lust,
They Are to your Clergy, dedicated Stews,
There handsome Paramours they pick, and choose;
What need Maids to be Whores range Christendom,
When they may be as well Debauched at home
For nothing; without acting that damned Crime
Of sending H. T. in his Abridgement of Christian Doctrines, being one of your
own Writers, that unbaptized Children dying, go to the nethermost part of Hell,
where they endure the sense of Loss, though not of Pain, and are ever excluded
from the Face of God.
Babes to Hell, Rome's natural Clime?
Was Blood upon each murdering Nun to fly,
As Judgments to detect Barbarity,
They could not then about their Gardens tread,
But Vengeance would spurt from the private Dead
In reaking Wrath of stifled Infants, Blood,
To drown their Parents in a crimson Flood.
Perhaps the Pope's Infallibility
Makes you to be in love with Papistry;
But, knew you all that Hist'ries of 'em tell,
You would not run so fast with them to Hell:
The Lives of John the Thirteenth, Hildebrand,
And others, put the Devils to a stand,
For fear their Pride, and grand Impiety,
Should claim over Spirits, a Supremacy:
Such as will take from Emperors their Right,
For that Prerogative in Hell will Fight.
But, hark you me: Another Trick they do,
They Make their God, and then they Eat him too.
If Rats, or Mice, should chew this holy Meat,
The Creature then does the Creator Eat;
This Metamorphosis is very odd,
Lo, Bread's made Flesh; a Priest can make his God;
That Wine they can so soon to Blood convert,
Surely it must be done by Magic Art!
What Prodigies of Sin! -- These Poys'ners shun,
And, to the healing Balm of Luther run;
Leave Poland, and then let the Diet choose
One purposely bred up his Soul to lose.
Although by Bell, by Book, and Candle, they
Will curse you, if you will not their Church obey;
Laugh at their slight Anathema's, and hate
The Pope, whom God does Excommunicate.
Like our first Martyrs (with immortal Praise
May it be spoken) in Marian days,
None of our Pastors of the Church of Rome,
Walking with Crooks, and Mitres, durst presume
To hazard the Salvation of their Souls
On spurious Faith; the fear of Death controuls
Their foolish Doctrine; tells 'em, if they die,
They die great Villains to assert a Lie.
Base Profligate, your Honor Heraldry
May justly paint with black Iniquity;
Yet other Colors may, as Emblems, show
That many Qualities belong to you.
Gules in the first place may adorn your Arms,
To show, a bloody Faith your Conscience charms.
Next Or, to show you're Impudent and Bold;
Your Heaven to hazard for a Crown of Gold;
Then Vert, to signify, at any time,
Your mind is Fresh, and Brisk, to act a Crime
For Interest; the Blazon, let it be,
Set out with all the marks of Infamy;
Two Jesuits, the Supporters; on each Hand,
The Motto, God and Justice I withstand.
Arouze, ye drouzy Imps, and do not Sleep;
For, if a Register of time you keep
In Hell, now change the Epoch, and Year,
A New-Style make, as well as Papists here;
And when Old-Nick does find such silly Fools,
Who will for Wealth, or Honor sell their Souls,
Much after this same form, And manner, let
The Bond be Signed; and hereunto I set
My Hand and Seal, the first of June, N. S. --
In the third Year, since Fredrick's Wickedness
Revolted from a true Belief, which made
Infernal Markets have but little Trade.
Though Hell's Applause you have, yet, when you Die;
Satan will have a very careful Eye
Over your most perfidious Soul, for fear
Your growing Pride should snatch at Empire there;
He knows, with Oaths, you would make the Damned believe
Strange Matters, and the Wits of Hell deceive,
With sugared Words, till your usurping Pride
Had got the Brimstone Forces on your Side;
Then every Day you would lessen more and more
His Strength, as you had Conti's heretofore.
I am afraid in your dull frigid Clime,
There is approaching a distracted Time,
Wherein the Wrath of Heaven will soon Rejoice,
To plague you for the Crown, the People's Choice.
But what care you, brave Champion for the Pope,
Who dreads no Vengeance, nor for Bliss does hope?
For one short Moment of Regalian Sway,
High Heaven you would, though damned for it, Disobey.
Were you by the Turks Besieged, too hardly pressed,
For Liberty, or for a Crown at least,
You Would Swear, till Oaths from Hell, did Devils draw,
The Alcoran were truer than the Law:
To Moses you would prefer his Mahomet;
(Who, in his pendant Tomb, at Moecha, yet
Deceives the blinded Turks) Swear him alone,
Greater than the World's Savior on his Throne:
Swear that the Musselman's true Sanctity,
The unbelieving Christian does Outvy:
A Thousand other Falsehoods Swear too, which
Shall raise your Fame in Hell t'a higher Pitch
Than tottering Poland's Throne; whose Steps ascend
To Ruin faithless Princes in the End.
Perhaps, now Crowned, you think, your Greatness can
Protect you from the common Lot of Man;
Though Kings are styled Gods, yet must they Die,
Their Scepters, Riches, Crowns, nor Dignity,
Cannot save them from the Power of that Fate,
Which will not grant to Life a longer Date:
Nay, had you all Endowments, which adorn
The Mind, or Body, Death such Gifts will Scorn:
The Beauty of Young Absalom; or Age
Of Lamech's Son; the Policy of Sage
Achitophel, nor Height of Saul; the Son
Of Kish, the Wisdom of King Solomon;
Or matchless Strength of Sampson, could not be
Defense enough against Mortality.
I Am apt to think you are wicked Julian's Ghost,
Who, in the middle of a numerous Host,
Smitten by God, flung up, toward the Sky,
Handfuls of Blood, to show he did Defy
The force of Heaven to the last: But now,
Some hurly burly-being raised below,
Among the Damned, you have stolen away
From those dark Shades, into the Beams of Day:
If Man, you must descend of that Fell Wretch,
A Monster whilst on Earth, who was no Sketch,
But perfect Picture of as horrid Crimes,
You count the Glory of the Present Times;
Who would, when dreadful Thunderclaps broke through
The Mounts of Heaven, and swift Lightning flew
About the limpid Air, in proud Disdain,
Throw counterfeited Thunder back again,
To make Resemblance that his Majesty,
Was equal to the Powers of the Sky.
That you might see your Errors all, and fear
The Scourge of God, I wish, there might appear
Comets, extending frightful, blazing Tails,
A Navy which through Clouds of Fire Sails;
Warr'ours in a confused Enmity,
With stranger Apparitions in the Sky,
Which might portend some heavy Punishment
Was due to you, unless you do Repent:
But, ah! I dread, you are too much hardened in
The Love of Monarchy, thy darling Sin;
Good Counsel you will spurn against, and count
Them all as Foes, who'd have you to dismount
Your Ivory Throne; a Bliss, you think, so good,
That God in Competition with you stood
About it, if he should Displeasure show,
By dire Signs, which from his Anger flew.
Who would, besides your self, have all this Shame,
Only to be a gaudy Thing in Name?
Power you have none; for the Republic Rules
As it thinks fit; Crowns are but lent by Poles:
Your Queen durst not be there, unless, like you,
She Will headlong damn her Soul, and Body too:
Because a Gentleman, they let you wear
A Sword, but of your drawing it take care;
For, if you offer there to be Uncivil,
They Will drive you, and your Saxons to the Devil.
Such is your high Ambition, (which would feign,
By grand Rebellion, over Angels Reign)
That Laws of Nations, Bonds, and solemn Leagues,
No Infl'ence have on you, your dark Intrigues
With Hell, in whose behalf you draw your Sword,
Make you, with Kings and Princes, break your Word
Your Pride, with which you meet your Glory, can
Deceitful be to God, as well as Man.
Does Hell, and Rome, already stir you up
To fill the ever-thirsting Harlot's Cup?
With Blood of Innocence, without a Cause,
Damned, and be double damned your bloody Laws.
Must Lifeland now be Plundered, Ravaged,
Made a Sepulcher for the Massacred?
The Streams of sweet Duina be Intwin'd
With Romish Rage, and under Blood Confined?
It Is hard, but Riga will, (I do not doubt)
For Sweden's Honor, hold your Fury out.
If you Dominion over them should have,
Rogues sent to Galleys, or an Algier Slave,
Would have less Bondage; so they will Freedom choose;
Rather than, like the French, wear Wooden Shoes.
As a Bassaw, when some Deaf Mute does blow
The Fatal Trumpet at his Door, and show
The Sultan's Ribbon'd Orders, for his Head,
Trembles, wax Pale, and, with the Fright, half Dead,
Resigns his Life, Resistance being vain,
Against the force of a Despotick Reign;
So to great Taxes, must the Swedes then bow,
And not presume to ask, why it is so;
Sic volo, and sic jubeo compels,
When Vassals, to obey against their Wills:
Nay, more than this, your Rage will Violate
Those Holy Altars, which they Consecrate
Unto a Sacred Deity, that is true,
And not to Saints, their Fathers never knew.
Have we, like They, a ten Years War maintained
With France, till we that Throne had almost drained
Of all it is Wealth, for weeping Europe's Good,
Made Flanders Drunk, and Reel with Humane Blood:
At Ryswick made an Honorable Peace;
And, shall not Wars yet in her Bowels cease?
To please the Humor of your hellish Reign,
Janus must open all his Gates again.
Is this the Thanks which Caesar has, to bring
To all the Universe Peace Offering?
Has he, for this, so often crossed the Main,
(Where Neptune Homage paid, and all his Train)
To Face the French, and make the Eagle fly,
With Olive, from the Crescent Enemy;
Ventured his Life for all, without Excuse;
Fierce Ireland in Person did Reduce;
Where that Attempt, performed at the Boyn,
To everlasting Story Fame will join:
There in the great Exploit, a Random Shot,
(Which had it is dying Orders near forgot,)
Did Wound the King, but God the Fate withstood,
It being not designed for Royal Blood:
Virtue and Fortune seemed to contend,
Which of the two should be his greatest Friend;
Angels, amazed to see him Baffle Fate,
With Crowns of Laurel did upon him wait,
To all his Foes, his Presence (like the Soil,
Which Poisonous Insects Kills) was Killing; while
The Hero rushed through Blood, and Smoke, to Fight,
The Unsuccessful James did take a Flight,
To tell the News to Him, which does supply
His wants, more for the Queen's Dexterity
In Bed, than out of Pity to the Fate,
Which has reduced him to so mean a State.
Now think but what our KING has undergone,
That Europe might not be by France undone;
How He has broke her Chains of Misery,
To set her free, for all Eternity;
Then Thoughts would quickly to your Conscience tell,
To break her Peace deserves the Pains of Hell.
Without a Cause to Gore thy Neighbor's Prince!
All Kings should join to punish the Offense.
Deserter of the Faith, what have thou done?
False Judas, cruel Herod, Cain, or none,
Who are tormented in the Flames of Hell,
Did, when they lived on Earth, so much Rebel
Against their God as you; Cain strove to Please
Him, but in vain; a horrid Dread did sieze
The Soul of Judas, he was sore Dismayed,
That he (like you) his Master had Betrayed;
And, as for cursed Herod's Cruelty,
Fear prompt him to secure his Regency:
Thus Murd'rers of a Brother, and the Lord
Of Life, young Infants, wicked Crimes abhorred
(Yea, one especially) by all the World,
I can excuse, but on you must be hurled
My Wrath. O wicked Runagate, reflect
Upon a future State, do not neglect
That great Concern, return to Saxony,
And, laying Crowns aside, to Heaven cry,
To make you but the least amongst the Blessed*
Which lean their Heads on faithful Abra'm's Breast;
But, hold! bid I a Pilate to Repent,
It is as strange as Flesh to Rome in Lent;
For; now you have an earthly Crown, you slight
Your way to God, in hopes a hallowed Light
Will guide your Steps to Heaven, when you Die,
So, this I Note on your Impiety,
Non-Recantation to the World does tell,
Your Coronation will be next in Hell.
The Plagues which God and Man can heap on you,
Are but, base Ruler, thy deserved due:
Were there but such an one as Ravillac
(That would but Laugh at Tortures on the Rack,
So he could wash his Hands in Royal Gore)
To Stab you, Europe would the Fact adore:
That every Deed of Murder would prefer
His Noble Soul, to be a Shining Star
Of Heaven; Heaven would the Murderer Greet,
Nay, come Halfway, the Regicide to meet.
FINIS.
These Three following Books, Written by the Author hereof, are Sold by B.
Harris, at the Golden-boar's-head in Grace Church Street.
ST. Ignatius's Ghost, appearing to the Jesuits; upon the KING's Signing the
Act against the Growth of Popery. A Satyr. Price 6d.

THE Shoemaker beyond his Last: Or, a Satyr upon Scurrilous Poets, especially
Ned W -- d, Author of a Poem entitled, a Journey to Hell; or a Visit paid to
the Devil. Price 6d.

HELL in an Uproar, occasioned by a scuffle that happened between the Lawyers
and the Physicians, for Superiority. A Satyr. Price 6d.


