THE Shoe - Maker Beyond his LAST: OR, A SATYR UPON Scurrilous Poets,
Especially NED W -- D, Author of a Poem entitled, A Journey to Hell: Or, a
Visit paid to the Devil.

LONDON, Printed for S. Cook, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. 1700.

THE Shoemaker Beyond His LAST, etc.
WHAT private Sin has fertile England Nursed,
That She is thus severely Plagued, and Cursed?
Infected with Ingend'ring Spawn of Knaves
Who Poison Wit, and make the Muses Slaves;
In such an Age as this is, swelled with Pride,
That Wit and Learning both in Triumph Ride,
Exasperated Pens should all Conspire
To Blast this Seed before it grows higher;
Among the rest my Vengeance shall be hurled,
I Will chase these simple Block-heads through the World,
Till Conscience terrifies them for the Crime,
Which makes an angry Muse against them Rhyme.
Ye drousie Sinners look about, and mend
Your Lives, be mindful of the Latter-end;
This wicked World much longer cannot stand,
I Am sure the Day of Judgment is at Hand;
For as the Mass in order was begun,
So to'ards its End prepost'rously 'twill run;
And never more contrary did it go
The course ordained than now, for Tailors do
Turn Doctors; Cordwainers Astrologers,
Who play the Devilish and Two Sticks with the Stars;
Bankrupts turn Lawyers; Mechanics without Sense
Ravish the Muses, brazen'd Insolence
Protects 'em. Now a silly Prentice-Boy,
With Billet deux endeavors to decoy
Some sorry Servant-Wench to be his Spouse;
Who, if she cannot Read the Verses, goes
To some by-Scriv'ner, who does them explain,
And Twopence has to answer them again.
Each Beau in Playhouse, Pit, or Gallery,
Cloys Orange Wenches with dull Poetry,
By Momus, and Old Acco there Inspired,
Each Swears the Creature has his Senses Fired
With Love: Alas! more Knowledge is among
Illit'rate Link-boys which do nightly throng,
About an Alehouse, or a Tavern-door,
To light Home Cully, Bawd, and drunken Whore,
Than is amongst such Self-conceited Fools,
Who cannot distinguish Pigs from Joynted-Stools;
More Eloquence flows from the Tongues which Beg,
With counterfeited Sores, or tied up Leg,
For Farthings in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, to be
Fuddling at Night with their Fraternity.
Here some fanatic Tinker in a Rage,
Pretends to Satyrize the wicked Age,
So out of an Enthusiastic Fit
(Which clogs his Brains, and does his Thoughts be-s -- t)
He Writes to get the popular Applause
Of Independants, thinking that the Cause
Will make them (like the Jewish Rabble) cry
He is some GOD, his Name we'll Deify.
A Lawyer's Clerk sits at his rotten Desk,
Does on the Works of Learned Bards Burlesque;
One from his Infancy a Hare-brain Fool,
But got a little Book learnt at some School,
Where Learning was for Parish-Children free,
By a dead Lord's, or Lady's Charity.
His Works, as soon as Born, do curse their Fate,
And like old Almanacks grow out of Date;
Unknown in Duck-Lane, or St. Paul's-Church-Yard,
They molding lie, no one the Works Regard;
Then for a Halfpenny per Pound they Sell
Them for Wast-paper, or they will serve as well
As can be for Bum-fodder when you S -- t,
Truly for nothing else the Stuff is fit.
A Mercer that in Rhiming does Delight,
In that sweet Dialect pretends to Write;
Not Learnt at all, he would (but never can)
By Learning claim to be a Gentleman;
His Wit's so short, to call that Name his own,
That Amo he would Swear must be a Noun;
Show him but such a Word as (...) he
Would Swear it was no Word, there could not be
Such Characters in use with any Land,
They were no Letters; but a Mad-Man's Hand*
Put but the dunny Lubber to spell The,
He Would stand and Pause, and then cry S -- O -- T;
A Sot indeed! but instinct we may 'spy,
There is in Dullness, and Simplicity,
Which made the Hog's-head of Recorded Shame,
Sound the right Echo of his Sottish Name:
Poor foolish Pamus, he may, to obtain
The little Wit he Lost, sue (though in vain)
All whom he meets: his dram of Sense thinks fit
To let his clacking Tongue outrun his Wit,
Which is but shallow; at the highest Tide
Over its puddled Stream an Ant may stride.
A Tallow-Chandler thinking that he may,
Like Marsyas, with great Appollo play,
Makes silly Ballads to old Women's Tunes,
On Country Bumpkins, Jilts, and Scottish Loons:
With Ladder he his half-til'd Garret Scales,
The Cieling hung with Cobwebs; dingy Walls,
Daubed like a Taylor's Shop, with Snot and Spittle;
A rotten Floor, and Furniture but little.
There does he sit, and scribble all the Year,
For Bread and Butter, and Six Shilling Beer.
An ign'rant Joyner driven to his Shifts,
Upon the double-headed Hill he lifts
His Thought, which puts his Head to harder Pains
Than Jove's, when Pallas tumbled in his Brains;
Like Dogs which bark against the Moon, but can
Not reach it, so this Self-conceited Man,
To spend his ever Idle time, does vent
His Thoughts on Themes beyond his Element
To comprehend: his Skull, that is void of Wit.
Reason, or Understanding's only fit
To be chained to the Corner of a Street,
For Passengers to Piss in, if they see it.
A starving Barber that for Twopence Shaves,
But take the Year round nothing by it Saves;
Till Shirt is washed and dried, a Bed does lie,
There makes a Song or Two, then, like the Fly
That sat upon the Chari't Wheel, and praised
Her self by saying, What a Dust I Have raised;
He thinks Wit makes him Great, when, all this while,
It is his Nonsense makes the People Smile:
In Foolishness he Swaggers, Bounces, Huff,
And surfeits all the Town with bombast Stuff,
Scum'd off the settlings of a frothy Wit,
To have a Name; but if a Name he will get,
It must be like Herostratus his Fame,
Got by Reproaches, Scandals, Scoffs, and Shame.
Lewd Rhimes a foolish Glover writes for want,
But yet his Scribbling's insignificant;
Instead of Guineas from a Lord for the
Epistle, all bedaub'd with Flattery,
The common Hangman does his Pains Reward,
By burning what he writes in Palace-Yard:
Against the Precepts of Anatomy,
His stinking Arss-gut in his Pate does lie,
So what he eats upwards strait ascends,
And there to Ordure turning much offends,
With stifling Fumes the little Wit which grows
Wild in his Noddle; like a Man that goes
A Journey, when the clearness of the Skies
Is wrapped in Fogs, (which from the Earth arise
In noisome Steams, and in them lose his way,
So in-turd-Mists his Fancy runs astray:
The flashing Vapors of his Nail-thick Scull,
In which the Organs of his Sense play dull,
Lead his confounding Wit a rambling Dance,
Through Whimsies, Self-conceit, and Ignorance;
Till in Maeander's roving round about,
He Whips, and Spurs up Nonsense to get out.
To name the Calls of each poor Bankrupt Wretch*
That Writes for Bread, my Catalogue would stretch.
Through all the Companies which show their Trade,
By Streamers at a Lord May'r's Cavalcade.
Who are resolved now to plague the State
With Rhiming, 'cause they would not tolerate
Their cheating in White-Fryars, and the Mint;
It Is time to give their Villainy a Stint.
Into Twelve Parts this Kingdom now divide,
Eleven aim on Pegasus to Ride;
But sift good Poets from Pretenders, and
I Am sure we have not Six-score in the Land:
Bad Poets nowadays do stroul about,
As thick as Pettifoggers in a Court:
They are as common as deceitful Cracks,
Or Lying, Impudent, Base, Knavish Quacks,
Who ride about from Street to Street to tell
What famous Pacquets they for Twopence sell,
To any Man who has a mind to lose
His Life before his Time; thus they abuse
The Ignorant, great Doctors say they be,
Although they cannot construe Recipe.
As some believing Oafs at every turn
To know their Fortune will devoutly run
To Sharpers, studying Astrology,
An Art composed of Cheats and Fallacy:
But hearing talk of Schemes, Conjunctions, Signs,
Azimuths, Oppositions, Sextiles, Trines,
They think they are Names of Spirits; and suppose
These Shirks have got 'em faster by the Nose
Than Dunstan had the Devil; so will some
To Nasty, Pedling, Senseless Poets come
To have a Ballad on coy Sweet-hearts made,
Or lewd Lampoons upon some tired Jade,
Which they (as well as their insipid Wit,
Or little skill of Rhiming will permit)
Do blunder over for a little Drink,
And Sixpence to recruit their wasted Ink.
Good Poets must be Poets born, inspired
With natural Parts, as well as Parts acquired,
Masters of Horace's Language, and the Tongue
Of Homer, other Arts to them belong:
Therefore for you whose Breeding is no more
Than Reading, Writing, casting up a Score
Of Ten or Fifteen Pounds, for shame leave off
The Art which makes the Country at you scoff.
Illit'rate Men, who cannot keep their Wives,
Themselves, and Children, but lead sorry Lives,
For Soldiers go, else by the London-Cries,
As Prunes, or Mother Shipton's Prophecies,
Old Chairs to Mend, Pearmains, or Windsor-bowls,
Thread-laces, Chimney-sweep, Geese, Ducks, or Fowls;
A Livelihood endeavor all to get;
And never triumph over little Wit.
Do this, and then perhaps ye'll never starve,
By Rhimes you will; and if you will not observe
Ne suitor ultra crepidam, the Ashes
Of Oldham will arise to give you lashes.
Ah! treacherous Slaves, how come you to escape
The Sessions House so often, for the Rape
Committed on the Muses, up and down,
Publicly, in all places of the Town?
Which spurious issue of each forced Verse
Your impious Hands, Sirs, ought to be the Hearse,
To carry them to a consuming Flame,
For all things should return from whence they came;
Have you no good Receipt, to cure that Itch
Of Rhiming, which I fear will make you scratch
Your Brains to pieces? get in time a Cure,
Or else none can your Company endure;
But do not Brimstone use, for that will smell,
And make 'em think the Sacred Nine are fell
From steep Parnassus, to the Pit of Hell.
Upon the Lawreat of this gang I Will fall,
For their Presumption he shall pay for all;
I charge you fairly to stand on your Guard,
No favor will I show you foolish W -- d,
Unless its Credit to you, that I do
Take Notice of one Fool, and Coxcomb too:
Lackey to Fools, blind Buzzard, Son of Sloth,
If your nonsensical, and canting Wrath,
Cannot from lampooning these my Lines refrain,
Able I am, and will lash you again,
Or any of your Crew. --
How long have you a Poet been I pray?
Or who was it that put you in that way?
Great Stallion of the Town, thy giddy Brains,
(Grown Rude and Headstrong for the want of Reins,
To keep 'em staid) writes Verses? I must tell
The World, Fate having a design to sell
Your Credit, and resolved to redicule
You to the Country for an arrant Fool,
Does eg you on to Write in Dogg'rel Rhimes,
The only Sickness of the present times:
It makes my queezy Stomach Sick and Weak,
To see you let your Nonsense spring a-leak,
And Founder. I petswaded am to think
Poor Battus that you wast your Pens and Ink,
For Flouts, and soul Disgrace; the Town's disdain
Does style you one of that insipid Train,
Which put their Friends for Wit but to the Charge
Of Primmer, Psalter, Copy-book, and large
Octavo Bible, and a Sice a Week
For Schooling at the Devil's Arss-a-Peak.
You know no Pardon is allowed a Spy,
Therefore by Law of Arms expect to Die,
As all your Similes are at an end,
I think that Man that Kills you is your Friend;
For once they fail you must expect to be
Reduced to your former Poverty;
The Press you stuff and gorges every Season,
Much more with Nonsense, than with solid Reason;
Your dull, debauched, putrified Brains,
Fly-blown with Nonsense, and fantastic Strains
Of idle Thoughts to Maggots turn, which make
You talk of things at Random; for the sake
Of Coin you scribble. To all goodness spite
(Reason it is not) that urges you to Write.
Thou sole Promoter of deformed Vice,
Pray what is the Moral of Sot's Paradise?
The Walk to Islington, the Trips you make
Abroad? and Journey to the sulfurous Lake?
None as I know of; but the Visit paid
The Devil was by Don Quevedo made,
Translated by the celebrated Hand
Of brave L'Estrange, or else you understand
Him not; thus Plagiary you do Live
By What the Wits indeed to Fools do give.
If some of our Clergy are so bad
As you do make them, you no reason had
To speak against them e're thou art Reformed
From all those Sins which has thy Body Stormed;
Besides Respect to our Religion ought
To'ye kept Reflections from your wicked Thought.
Art thou a Man, and 'buse the Clergy so,
If Man, art thou begat as other? no;
As Serpents which in Lybian Deserts be,
Engendring in the Sands promiscuously,
And breed such Monsters of so strange a kind,
That they were not for Nature's Work designed:
So you fell Creature was as strangely bred,
Of Man's Seed spilt on Mummy of the Dead,
Mixed with Witches Excrements, to be
A Plague (till choked) to Christianity;
For which, one day or other, you will feel
The stripes of Nemesis, whose Rods are Steel;
But antic Tricks proclaim you for an Ape,
Or Monkey molded in a neater Shape
Than us'al; which grieves me your pains will end
(Like other Beasts) when Death shall for you send.
I don't believe you are made of Flesh and Blood
At all, thou only art a Log of Wood;
Which he that made the Iron Dove to fly
(To show his cunning Ingenuity)
Has carved like a humane Figure, and
By Clock-work makes it move Eyes, Legs, or Hand,
But speak it does not, it is a Wizard (Drunk
With Spite) that bellows through the liseless Trunk:
Or else the Liver-knawn Prometheus,
Is broken loose from frozen'd Caucasus,
So ventures privately with stolen Fire,
Life into one Clay Statue to inspire;
To be Revenged on the Deity,
The Author of his pain; and thou art he.
If you for nothing carp on such as these,
You Will rail against your God for Bread and Cheese.
The World is come to that pass now adays,
That Slaund'rers will or Nothing Slanders raise,
If Kings cannot from Slaund'rous Tongues be free,
Much less a Subject: It Is not Quality,
Renown, great Learning, Virtue, or Estate,
Or Charity can in the least abate
The rigid Censures of cursed, partial Tribes,
Sprung I believe from Pharisees and Scribes,
Who other People would for Vices blame,
Though they themselves were guilty of the same.
With Vice they were enamored, yet those Sects
Forbad it; still the Devil Sin Corrects:
Was each one's Fault upon their Forehead writ,
I Am sure you could no man of Sinning twit.
Thou little, nasty, filthy, partial Knave,
How most imperiously you Scold and Rave
Against the little Practicers of Law,
And Physic; great ones keep your Pen in awe,
Who ought the most of all to have the Lash,
But lo! you run the Gauntlet through such Trash,
Clerks of the Court, rude Bailiffs, Hangmen, and
Base Goalers' who no Mercy Understand;
Sow-Guelders, Barber-surgeons, and a Crew
Of Tooth drawers, as Ignorant as you,
Therefore on such you vented all your Spleen,
Because you would not have the Lash again.
Indeed Ned W -- d, thy Lines does run as Harsh
As thou in Satyrising art too rash,
But yet I own in one thing you excel
(For all my jesting) sacred Couleigh's Skill,
So much as he exceeded you in Wit,
So much thou will outrun the Bard in Feet,
Twelve are the most, I think, which he does use,
But one more you are resolved to give thy Muse.
Truly Jack Adams born at Clerkenwell,
The greatest Changeling of his time, could tell
More matters of Prosodia than you,
Who knows not when a Stanza's Wrong, or True.
I wonder the Churchwardens do not where
You dwell, of such an Idiot take care,
To put you out to some old Parish-Nurse,
And some small matter once a Year disburse
For Slabb'ring-Bib, green Tunick, Petticoat,
The common Livery to show you Dote:
But if he be not of the Parish which
He lurks in now, good Beadle with a Switch
Drive him before you to a Whipping-post,
Where flaug him till he in his Dung is lost,
Let not your Hand yield pity to his pain,
Then pass the idle Vagrant home again;
But where that is, the Lord of Oxford knows,
For I don't; nor himself (Sirs) I suppose.
Do say, thy Soul is innocent and bright,
The greatest Stain that blots the darkest Night,
Ecclipseth it, to Hell so well you are known,
Had you been there, they would kept you for their own;
Thy Sins had pressed you to the deepest place,
Where Souls are tortured for the want of Grace.
The cries of starved Bastards, or the Tears
Of Maids you have Broached for these many Years,
Are evidence enough to keep you there,
Whenever you on Earth shall disappear:
They say in every Parish that is in Town,
A little Son or Daughter thou may own.
As for your Second Part, or any other
Journey to Hell, or News of Smoke or Smother,
It Is not worth while to talk of, so keep on
The Brimstone Road, till I have bid you done.
Thou interloper of a noble Trade,
To which thou art beholding for thy Bread,
Sell not your Stuff at Home, go you and cry
With other Hawkers what is your Infamy.
It Is too much Justice to make you my Scorn,
(Cursed Rake) I wish thou never had been born,
For fear it should be made a damning Crime,
In Writing against such Fools as you are in Rhyme.
What Epithet shall I on you bestow?
Rise Hell to tell me, for I do not know!
W -- d still I Will call you, no Name else is worse,
Wherefore I shall entail the sequent Curse
On you, and all such who themselves forge^,
And on the sacred Sisters Rapes commit.
O Envy! let my Thoughts upon 'em fly,
To Kill such Varlets all by Sympathy.
Pray pay 'em off with Nits, Lice, Itch, and Scabs.
Let 'em be taunted at by dirty Drabs,
Who keeps 'em for their Pimps, and Right or Wrong
Let Cullies Kick 'em as they go along,
Bark little Dogs; upon 'em Smell and Piss:
Then Boys that see the Passage at 'em Hiss.
To Bedlam send these Foes of Sense, to be
For Mice, and other Vermin, Company,
Whilst they do squeak, let them Curse, Swear, and Rail
For Bread and Butter given out by Tale.
The Straits of all the Poor in Town befall
Such Miscreants, this lump of Leaven. All
The Curses of Ash Wednesday be their Doom.
Let desperate Debts confine them to their Room;
Grant every rap at Door may make 'em fear
A sponging Bailiff, or a Serge'nt's there:
But then Enact, that no Red-Letter Day
Be their safe Sanctuary, that they may
As much Confinement suffer in their Holes,
As if they Prisoners were in County Goals.
I wish 'em all the Punishment which be
Passed on convicted Rogues, for Larcenie;
Manslaughter; O! to Curse in full, let all
The Crimes be theirs that comes to Hicks his Hall,
So monthly let 'em take Old Bailey Air;
Or at Assizes out of Town appear
So often, that a Neck-Verse shall not save
Them from the Gallows, and a High-way-grave.
Light on 'em Curses vented by the Poor,
When Parsons for their Tyths stand at the Door.
O! grant for every Letter in this Satyr,
Or Letter Written since the use of Paper,
That new Distempers be found out in Heaven,
And all at once to such dull Poets given.
FINIS.

