AN EXPLANATION OF THE Drayning Works Which have been lately made for the
KINGS MAJESTY IN Cambridge Shire, By the direction of Sir Cornelius Virmuden.

Written by Andrews Burrell, Gent.

Wherein is discovered how the said Sir Cornelius has abused the KINGS
MAJESTY, and many of his loving Subjects.

Printed in the year 1641.

An Explanation of the Drayning Works which have been lately made for the
Kings Majesty in Cambridge Shire, by the direction of Sir Cornelius Virmuden.
Written by Andrews Burrell, Gent.
Wherein is discovered how the said Sir Cornelius has abused the Kings
Majesty, and many of his loving Subjects.

FIrst, He has disgraced the KINGS Works, by making weak Banks, when he
might have made them strong.

SEcondly, by making hollow and counterfeit Banks of light Moore Hassocks, and
Sedge, skimming and destroying three times so much ground as would have
performed the service, if he had taken the best of the soil.

THirdly, he has disgraced the Kings works in causing diverse Sluices and Sasses
to be made of rotten timber, which ought to have been made of the best
Brickes or Stone, in regard they are to be placed for perpetuity.

FOurthly, he has abused the King in misspending his treasure.

FIfthly, he has abused the late Earl of Bedford, and diverse Noblemen and
Gentlemen that adventured with him in his undertaking, by undervaluing the
Works which they made, and by hindering their proceedings, to their extreme
loss and disadvantage, and to the great hindrance of all those Gentlemen that
are interessed in that great Level, consisting of three hundred and seven
thousand Acres.

SIxthly, he has abused diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, in taking their
Lands from them illegally, without any composition or satisfaction.

SEventhly, he has exposed to wilful and unnecessary hazard the Lands,
Cattle, Corn, and other goods of many of his Majesty's Subjects, so that they
are in great danger of being drowned this present winter, as does appear by
this ensuing discourse.

THe first work he caused to be made, was a Sea Bank in Wysbeach Saltmarsh,
which is so slender, that three Roods of the new Sea Bank has not so much
earth in it as one Rood of the old Sea Bank. He ought also to have armed the
new Sea Bank with Sods on that side which is next the Sea: for being thus
slightly made, and not armed, the Sea has lately broke the new Sea Bank in
diverse places, and weakened it for a great space; but in regard it was an easy
flood, the damage is little in comparison of what it might have been, that
Land being always well stored with Sheep, that may soon be lost.

The second work which he caused to be made, was a Sluice at the outfall of a
draine, called the Sheir Draine, which work he commanded to be made in
unseasonable weather, not knowing (I am sure not attending or not heeding) the
danger, when it was plainly to be perceived at the laying down of the
foundation: for at that time the loss might have been prevented: it is said
that that Sluice, with the spadework and mischances which happened whilst the
Pit was making, by the Seas breaking in twice upon them, did cost the King at
the least three thousand pounds, which money is every penny lost.

The third work was the enlarging of a part of Wysbeach River for the space of
a mile, wherein he was as much wanting of the depth of the Earl of Bedfords
work, as he exceeded in unnecessary breadth, (leaving the River as narrow as
the Earl left it, two miles above the new Work, and two miles below it,) a
work that is broad and shallow may be made without skill or care. And if the
truth may be spoken without offense, such is that work. The depth of that new
Work cannot be perceived above one month in the year, and that is when the
winter floods have recovered the outfall to the Sea; for so soon as the waters
do rise in the River, it seems to them that know not the difference, to be a
very great enlargement, being very fair to the eye, but wanting depth can
perform no better then eye-service.

Whereas the River of Wysbeach runs from the Town Bridge to Guyherne fix
measured miles of the way toward Peterborough in a near and safe tract, in
regard the soil where the River now runs, is clay, earth, or Silt; that
substance would have enlarged the Banks on either side of the River, to so
great a proportion, that the Countries lying on either side would have been
much better secured then ever they were in the times which are past: yet Sir
Cornelius Virmuden either through wilfulness or weakness, left the safe and
nearest way where he might have enlarged the River to what proportion he
pleased, and secured the Lands on either side from danger, as is said before,
and made a new Bank of Hassockes, light spungy Moore, and Sedge, in a Fenne
called Walterley, where there is neither Clay, Earth, nor Silt, unless it be
at the first entrance, for the space of a furlong. The new Bank so made, is
more then two miles and three quarters in length; in which Work he misspent at
the least two thousand and three hundred pounds (or thereabouts.) Besides which
great loss to the King, and damage to the owners of the Lands, his intent is
to lay four hundred seventy four Acres of the said Land, waste to the said
River, upon which Land there is three Tenements newly erected, and two other
that are ancient: and this he will do, as he falsely pretends, to make that
Land a receptacle for the common Waters: whereas in truth he does it of purpose
to do me a mischief, in regard I did contravert some of his opinions before
the late Lord Treasurer, when my self was a Commissioner for his Majesty in
October 1638. when God knows that which I spoke was in the sincerity of my
heart, for the advancement of his Majesty's service, without any by respects.
One of the Works which I then propounded, was the making of a Brick Sluice
below Spaulding, to keep out the Sea Floods: and Sir Cornelius disliked it,
affirming that there was no way to draine the Fennes, but by making of large
Banks: yet now that he does what he pleases, he himself has very lately not
only approved in speech, (for therein he is very giddy) but he has covenanted
with a workman to make a Timber sluice with a Sasse beside it, to be placed in
the same place, for which the King is to pay three thousand and five hundred
pounds, wherein appears his deceitful dealing with the Lord Treasurer, Lord
Cottington, and my Lord Banckes, at that time the Kings Attorney. And if the
old firm Bank were cut, so that the Common waters might come to the new
hollow Bank which he has caused to be made, it is undoubtedly certain, that
they will drown all the rest of the said Lands, being at the least four
thousand Acres; and if that were effected, it would be no way beneficial to
the general Drayning, as does appear by a Certificate made by the principal
Gentlemen, and Land holders in that Country. These Lands were banked and
drained by an Act of Parliament made the fourth of King James, and have ever
since that time been maintained and upheld, and were not questioned in the
Earl of Bedfords undertaking. Besides there is no mention of making this
Receptacle for the Common waters in those Propositions which Sir Cornelius did
deliver to the Kings Majesty in January 1638. Yet contrary to all justice, he
has taken these Lands from the owners, without any composition or
satisfaction, and intends to drown all the rest.

Fifthly, he has caused a Bank of H^ssockes and light spungy Moore (which in
three or four years will shrink to less then half the proportion which it
now has, and after that to be so much less, as it will be little better then
nothing, for it will be hollow and spungy still.) Such a Bank he has caused
to be made from Guy herne to the East end of Wittelsey. He has also continued
the same Bank (but in a better Soil) from the West end of Wittelsey to
Stanground, intending thereby to keep the River Neene from drowning those
Fennes which lie betwixt these new Banks and the North Bank of Bedford River:
and certainly they will secure them this present Winter from Neene. But if the
North Bank of Bedford River be settled so low that the River of Owse overtop
it, and make breaches in it (as I believe it will) those false fires will soon
be discerned. I have often heard Sir Cornelius fleight all the works which
were made by the late Earl, as if they were rather hurtful then beneficial
to the Country. But he did the Earl great wrong, for if those Works fail,
all his Hassock Banks will not be worth three pence. Nor could he have made
them, if the Earl had not opened Wysbeach River to the Sea, and kept the Sea
from choking it again; which was a work far exceeding all that Sir
Cornelius has done. His plot is by subtilty to rob the late Earl and those
Adventurers of the credit of their works, and after that to make all such as
know not the truth, believe that himself with ten thousand pounds, will
presently make one hundred thousand Acres fit for the Plow, which is a mere
delusion. And as it is wicked in it self, so is it attended with a danger much
worse then all that has been yet discovered. And it is a question whether it
be not past recovery. This mischief he has cast upon many of his Majesty's
Subjects, inhabiting the low Lands, called Holland in Lincoln shire, and the
North side of Wysbeach, both which Countries are full of people, and well
stored with Cattle: they lie between the Fennes and the Sea, and are much
lower then the Common Fennes: they are preserved from Inundation by Banks
consisting of a sandy substance, and are so low, that they cannot defend the
said Countries from Inundation. Now Sir Cornelius has turned the Southern
waters upon them; for there will come three times so much water upon them now
as did before. The new Banks were made in regard Neene cannot pass in its
own Channel to the Sea, nor dilate it self over the face of those Fennes
which lie on the South side of Wittelsey, as formerly they did.

Sixthly, he has caused a Timber Sasse to be placed near Stanground, which
has cost the King eight hundred pounds at the least. The use of the Sasse I
believe will be good (in convenient time) but I like not his direction, who
dares to spend the Kings money in Timber works, when indeed they ought to be
made of the best Brickes or Stone, I think rather Stone then Brickes, in
regard that Country affords great plenty of good Stone at very cheap rates.
This Sasse is not only made of Timber, but of Fur Timber, and that so rotten
that it was not fit to be used in the making of a good Stable; and in stead of
Oken Plankes three inches thick, it is planked with Deal boards but one inch
thick, which will be rotten before the other works are finished.

Seventhly, he has caused diverse petty Sluices to be made of the like Timber
and Deal boards, which ought to have been made of Brickes or stone, in regard
they are intended for perpetuity.

Eighthly, he has misspent the Kings Treasure, in giving over large wages unto
many workmen; for since Michaelmasse last, money being wanting to forward this
goodly design, Sir Cornelius procured some assistance from those Gentlemen
whose Lands lie on the South side of Wittelsey, (in regard these new Banks
will be some advantage unto them) paying the workmen part of their wages, in
Bullockes, Sheep, Beer, Cloth, and other commodities; amongst them there were
some paid part of their wages in Wheat at fifteen Shillings the Comb, which
did the next day sell the same Wheat for nine Shillings the Comb. And if their
wages were not extraordinary large, the condition of those workmen is such,
that they will not work two weeks to an end, unless they do receive the due
of what they earne, much less continue working two months without pay, and
then accept of nine shillings for fifteen. And here I beseech you give me
leave to give my deceased Master, and those Noblemen and Gentlemen that
adventured with him, their due praise; from the first to the last of their
undertaking, their workmen never wanted their wages, but were duly paid every
week, until the untimely difference in the year 1637. The reason why I
mention this, is, that you may the better discern how grossly the Kings Majesty
has been abused, not only in the loss of his treasure, but in paying the
workmen with commodities, and in commodities much inferior to them which I
have named, and indeed not fit to name, which for their baseness I omit. And
all this to support an unadvised action, which I am confident will occasion a
thousand times more loss, then all the good which can be expected, if duly
considered.

Lastly, if it be objected, That I have informed against Sir Cornelius in
discontent, or because he by his subtilty did defeat me of my employment in
those Works, after I had undergone the greatest difficulties, and meanest
servitude, from the first day to the last of the late Earls undertaking, or
that I have wronged him in this my Information, and cannot justify every
particular which is here expressed; instead of relieving me, let me undergo
the displeasure of all them whose help I do implore. But if that which I have
discovered be true, I do most humbly pray that the remainder of my mean
estate may by your Justice be kept from utter ruin; and that a Commission of
Inquiry may be directed to examine and certify my present loss, and future
danger; and that they may also consider whether the drowning of the four
hundred seventy four Acres before mentioned, will be beneficial to the
general drayning or not. And that in the mean time it may be ordered, that
the old Bank may not be cut.

FINIS.

