CHRIST Inviting SINNERS To come to Him for REST.

Wherein is showed, FIRST. 1 The Burden of Sin. 2 The Burden of the Law. 3 The
Burden of Legal performances with the Misery of those that are under them. 4
The Burden of Corruption. 5 The Burden of Outward Affliction.


SECONDLY, Christ Greciously offers to them that come to him, REST from al
those Burdens. Wherein is showed 1 What it is to come to Christ. 2 That Christ
requires nothing but to come to him. 3 Several Rules to be observed in in right
coming to Christ. 4 Means to draw Souls to Christ. 5 That in coming to Christ
God would have us have respect to our selves. 6 That there is No REST for souls
out of Christ; And the Reasons therefore; with some conclusions from it.


THIRDLY, There is showed. 1 The Rest Believers have from sin 2 The deliverance
from the Law by Christ is, 1 Privatively, 2 Positively. 3 The Rest Believers
have from the Burden of the Law by coming to Christ. 4 How Christ gives Rest
from the Burden of Legal performances. 5 How Christ gives Rest from the Burden
of Corruption; wherein is showed how Sanctification and Holiness comes from
Christ only. And encouragments to come to Christ for Holiness. 6 How Christ
gives Rest from outward Afflictions. 7 Some Directions how to get Rest from
Christ in Spiritual desertions.


By JEREMIAH BUROUGHS, Preacher of the Gospel at Stepny and Cripple-Gate,
London.

London, Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, and are to be Sold at
the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1659.

A Testimony to the Reader
WHAT we have by way of Preface set before the several Books already published
of this Reverend Author, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, may sufficiently serve for all
that are come forth: So that we only need now give Letters Testimonial to the
World, that these ( viz. The Sermons on Matthew, the 11. Chapter. 28, 29, and
30. verses) We avouch likewise to be the painful and profitable Labors of the
same Author, and published by the best and most Authentic Copies.

Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, William Bridge Sydrach Sympson, Philip Nigh,
John Yates, William Adderley.


Books Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Book- seller of London, at the
Exchange,
Four New Books of Mr. Jer. Buroughs, VIZ.
THE FIRST BOOK
Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest.

Wherein is showed First.

1 The Burden of Sin. 2 The Burden of the Law. 3 Ths Burden of Legal
performances with the Misery of those that are under them. 4 The Burden of
Corruption. 5 The Burden of Outward Affliction.

Secondly, Christ Graciously offers to them that come to him REST from all
those Burdens.

Wherein is showed.

1 What it is to come to Christ. 2. That Christ requires nothing but to come to
him. 3 Several Rules to be Observed in right coming to Christ. 4 Means to Draw
Souls to Christ. 5 That in coming to Christ God would have us have respect to
our selves. 6. That there is No REST for souls out of Christ; And the Reasons
therefore; with some conclusions from it.

Thirdly, There is showed.

1 The Rest Believers have from sin. 2 The deliverance from the Law by Christ
is. 1 Privatively, 2 Positively. 3 The Rest believers have from the Burden of
the Law by coming to Christ. 4 How Christ gives Rest from the Burden of Legal
performances. 6 How Christ gives Rest from the Burden of Corruption, wherein is
showed how Sanctification and Holiness comes from Christ only. And
encouragments to come to Christ for holiness. 6 How Christ gives Rest from
outward Affliction. 7 Some Directions how to get Rest from Christ in Spiritual
desertions.

THE SECOND BOOK
Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him.

Wherein is showed

1 What Christ's Yoke is. 2 That believers must take Christ's Yoke on them. 3 The
more we are under the Yoke of Christ the more REST we have. 4 Christ is the
great Teacher of his Church and People. 5 In what manner Christ Teaches, 1 He
is a Meek Teacher. 2 An Humble Teacher. 6 The Learners of Christ must be MEEK.
7 The Learners of Christ must be humble. 8 Christ teaches by his EXAMPLE. 9
Wherein Christ's EXAMPLE is to be followed. 10 What kind of Pattern Christ is.
11 We must not follow the Example of the World.

We must imitate Christ in MEEKNES.

1 What Meekness is. 2 Learn of Christ to be Meek toward God; And the Reasons
thereof. 3 The Dreadful Evil of Anger and frowardness toward God. 4 Meekness
toward God Exemplified from scripture Examples. 5 Meekness toward Men which
consists in ordering Anger. 1 To the right Object. 2 To the right Time. 3 To
the reight measure. 4 To the right end etc. 6 The sad Effects of Anger. 7 The
Excellency of Meekness. 8 Promises made to Meekness. 9 Many Vain Reasons and
Pleas for Anger Answered. 10 Exhortations to Meekness. 11 Means to get and keep
Meekness.

New Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs,
THE THIRD BOOK
Christ the Humble Teacher of those that come to him.

Wherein is showed.

1 What Humility o^ Lowliness is Not. 2 What that Lowliness of Heart is that
Christ would have us to Learn of him. 3 Arguments from the Lowliness of Christ
to work Lowliness of spirit in Us. 4 The properties of an humble heart toward
God 5 The Properties of an Humble and Lowly heart in respect of Our selves 6
The properties of humility in respect of others. 1 It is fearful of giving or
taking offense. 2 It gives due honor to all. 3 It is tender to others. 4 It Is
not needlessly* singular from them. 7 The Excellencies of Humility. 8 Humility
brings REST unto the Soul. 9 Means to get Humility

THE FOURTH BOOK
The only Easy way to Heaven. Where^n is showed.

1 The way to Heaven that Jesus Christ Teaches, is an Easy way: six Evidences
thereof. 2 The Difference between the EASE a Carnal heart has, and the EASE a
gracious Soul has in Religion. 3 The Reason why some gracious Souls complain
of difficulty in Gods ways. 4 What it is that Makes the ways of God so Easy.
5 Consequences from the easiness of Gods ways. 6 Directions how we may make
the ways of God Easy.

New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpsons. viz.
I Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ. And receiving Christ is
Believing.

II Of Covetousness.

In the First Book is showed (besides many other things)

1 That Persons that are believers are Receivers.

2 That to Receive is the Principal use of Faith.

3 That nothing should hinder our Receiving. 1 Not our Sins. 2 Nor Gods
delays. 3 Nor the smalness of our receipts. 4 Nor the greatness of our Wants.

4 How Faith Receives.

5 That Faith Receives Christ. 1 In the understanding. 2 In the Will.

6 The temper of a man that has faith.

7 The necessity of Faith.

8 Though Faith be small yet it makes us the Sons of God.

9 The Nature of True Faith.

10 There are but few that Receive Christ.

11 Three sorts that come not to Christ. 1 Such as Receive him not as he is. 2
Such as delay their coming to him. 3 Such as give not that place to Christ in
their hearts that is fitting for him.

In the Treatise of Covetousness is showed,

1 It is the Duty of all as they would obtain eternal Life to beware of
covetousness.

2 The Reasons of the Doctrine, 1 Its a spiritual Sin. 2 It over spreads the
whole man. 3 Its opposite to the Nature of Godliness and Religion. 4 Its the
Womb and seed of all Sin. 5 Its a base Sin.

3 The Dangerousness of covetousness^ 1 It is hardly avoided. 2 Its difficultly
cured.

4 You shall have all things needful for this life if you will look after Grace.

5 Your Life lies in Grace, not in Riches.

6 There is more to be feared than to be desired in Riches.

7 We should Mortify our desires after Riches.

In Book 1 Of Unbelief: or the want of Readiness etc. is showed

1 What Unbelief it is that is here spoken of.

2 The best way to deal with Unbelief.

3 That Unbelief is a sin against all the Attributes of God.

4 That Christ will not bear with this Sin of Unbelief.

5 That we should be quick and re^yd to believe.

6 Motives to endeavor for readiness to believe.

7 Helps to attain readiness in Believing.

In Book 2 Of Not going to Christ etc. is showed,

1 That unbelief is a great Sin, and exceeding provoking unto God.

2 Several arguments provoking us to believe the greatness of the Sin of
unbelief.

3 Many Objections answered.

4 Several sorts of this Sin of unbelief.

5 Means to convince us that unbelief is so great a Sin.

6 Though the Sin of unbelief be very great, yet it is pardonable.

7 God has pardoned unbelief, and will pardon it.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are answered, 1 Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors have an
Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be subject to the
Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4. How far the People are to obey
their Governors.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament time.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech

Woodwards Sacred Balance.

Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.

Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the Seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there you have showed.

1 That the end why the Saints receive al glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one.

2 That God the Father loves the Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ.

3 That our Savior desires to have the Faithful in Heaven with himself.

4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven, is to see Christ's Glory.

5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods Love, in the most able
Saints.

6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction, according to the daily need of
his Servants.

7 That it is the desire, and endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods
Love, which was bestowed on himself, should be given to his faithful Servants.

8 That our Union, and Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our
happiness in Heaven.

The first eight Books: of the Application of Redemption, By the effectual Work
of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to
God. In which (besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths) there
is also largely showed.

1 Christ has purchased al spiritual good for HIS.

2 Christ puts al HIS into possession of all that good that he has purchased.

3 The Soul must be fitted for Christ before it can receive him: And a powerful
Ministry is the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ.

4 The work of God is free: And the day of Salvation, is while this Life lasts,
and the Gospel continues.

5 God calls his Elect at any Age, but the most before old Age.

6 The Soul is naturally settled in a sinful security.

7 The heart of a Natural man is wholly unwilling to submit to the word that
would sever him from his sins.

8 God the Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their
corruptions, and draws them to believe in Christ.

The Ninth and Tenth Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual
Work of the Word, and spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners
to God. Besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths, there is also
largely showed.

1 The heart must be humble and contrite before the Lord will dwell in it.

2 Stubborn, and bloody sinners may be made brokenhearted.

3 There must be true sight of sin, before the heart can be broken for it.

4 Application of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to
^ight of, and sorrow for them.

5 Meditation of sin, a special means to break the heart.

6 The same word is profitable to some, not to another.

7 The Lord sometimes makes the word prevail most, when its most opposed.

8 Sins unrepented of, makes way for piercing Terrors.

9 The Truth terrible to a guilty conscience.

10 Gross and scandalous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings
of heart, before they be brought to Christ.

11 Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces the hear^ of the sinner thoroughly.

12 They whose hearts are pierced by the Word, are carried with love and
respect to the Ministers of it: And are busy to enquire, and ready to submit
to the mind of God.

13 Sinners in distress of conscience, are ignorant what they should do.

14 A contrite sinner sees a necessity of coming out of his sinful condition.

15 There is a secret hope wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite
sinners.

16 They who are truly pierced for their sins, do prize and covet deliverance
from their sins.

17 True contrition is accompanied with confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto.

18 The Soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless dislike
against it

Six Books more of Mr. Hookers in two Volums in Quarto, are printing.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2. Natural and Supernatual Dreams 3 Impressions with, and without
Word* 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience.
7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons, on 2. Pet. 1.19.

2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1. The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after
effects of his Death, 3* His Assurance of Issue. 4. And his satisfaction
therein. Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa. 53.11.

3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in case of, 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of
Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties 4. Want of Assurance, 5. Affliction, 6
Temptation. 7. Desertion. 8. Unserviceableness. 9, Discouragements from the
Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons, on Psalm, 42.11.

His Four Sermons concerning,

4 Sin against the Holy Ghost.

5 Sins of Infirmity.

6 The false Apostle tried and discovered

7 The good and means of Establishment

8 The great things Faith can do.

9 The great things Faith can suffer.

10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his People under
Temptation

12 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

13 Grace for Grace.

14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.

15 Evangelical Repentance

16 The Spiritual Life, etc.

17 The Woman of Canaan.

18 The Saints Hiding Place, etc.

19 Christ's Coming etc.

20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances

22 Grace and Love beyond Gifts

Mr. Brightman on the Revelation.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism

Mr. Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending his
Ambassadors to that End From 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21.

2 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1
What Contentment is. 2 It is an Holy art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it.
4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it.

3 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords supper, and prayer.

4 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1 17 Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature 2
Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to what Truths the Gospel
holds forth To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their Portion
in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14.

5 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness: Wherein is showed, 1 What
Earthly-mindedness is, 2. The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of he 19.
verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and
walking with God, on Genesis 5.24. and on Phil. 3* 20.

6 An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea.

7 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of Hosea.

8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea,
being now complete.

9 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of sin, on Job 16.21.

10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1.

11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.3.

12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.

Mr. Buroughs his fifty nine Sermons on Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Are Printed.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.
Mr Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Ou^e: Discovering the Leprosy
of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith.

Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage.

The Wonders of the Loadstone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.
The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there.

The Wise Virgins Lamp Burning; Or, Gods sweet incomes of Love to a gracious
Soul waiting for him. Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, late of New England.

Twelve new Books in one Volum of Nich. Culpeper, All called the Idea of
Practical Physic.
1 The art to preserve Health.

2 The preternatural disorder of man's body, and their Signs.

3 Of Medicaments.

4 Of the art of Healing.

5 Of the general Cure of Diseases.

6 Of External Diseases.

7 Of Fevers.

8 Of Head Diseases.

9 Of middle Belly Diseases.

10 Of Lower belly Diseases.

11 Of Venomous Diseases.

12 Of Childrens Diseases.

Thirty four Books of Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology,
formerly published.
The first Twenty four Books. Are all called the Practice of Physic, Wherein
is plainly set forth* The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of
Signs; Together with the Cure of al Diseases in the Body of Man. Being a
Translation of the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius,
now living; Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above
fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few Years,
having been eight times printed though all the former Impressions wanted the
Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the
Medicines for the cure for them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle.

25. A Sure Guide to Physic and Chyrurgery: That is to say, The Arts of
Healing by Medicine, and Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical Description of
the whole body of Man, and its parts, with their Respective diseases,
demonstrated from the Fabric and use of the said Parts. In Six Books of
Riolanus, translated, and adorned with an hundred eighty four Figures cut in
Brass.

26 Ves^ingus Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the
several Parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass
Plates than ever was in English before.

27 A Translation of the New dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added The Key to Galens Method of Physic,

28 The English Physician enlarged* being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of
the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of
most Diseases incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and
for three pence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The time of
gathering al Herbs, both* Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of drying, and
keeping them and their Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping al manner of
useful Compounds, made of those Herbs. The way of mixing the Medicines
according to the Cause, and Mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body
afflicted.

29 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the
Author in every sheet, and illustrated with diverse new Plates.

30 Galens Art of Physic, with a large Comment.

31 New Method both of studying and practicing Physic.

32 A Treatise of the Rickets, being A Disease common to Children wherein is
showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs* 4 The Remedies of the
Disease: Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates and Dr. Regemorter,
translated into English, And corrected by N. Culpeper.

33 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People.

34 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.

The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin.

Six Sermons preached by Dr. Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding.

2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of Christ.

3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Age^ Christ Jesus.

4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength.

5 The Best and Worst of Paul.

6 Gods Eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.

A Commemoration of King Charles his Inauguration. In a Sermon, By William Laud,
then Bishop of Canterbury.

Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a Sermon by Mr. He^le, before the Lord
Major of London.

Mr. Spurstows Sermon, being a Pattern of Repentance.

Englands Deliverance from the Northern Presbitery, compared with its
Deliverance from the Roman Papacy. In a Sermon on the 5 of Nov. 1651. before
the Parliament. By Peter Sterry.

The Way of God with his People in these Nations. Opened in a Thanksgiving
Sermon, preached on the 5* of November. 1656 before the Right Honorable, the High
Court of Parliament. By Peter Sterry.

Mr. Sympsons Sermon at Westminster

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A Sermon.

A Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen Marshal. A Sermon.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen. A
Sermon

The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cardel* A Sermon.

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises. A Sermon.

Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's Genealogy.

The Cause of our Divisions discovered, and the Cure propounded.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to al Rational men concerning his trial.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England: by
Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Treatise on Math. 11.28.
CHAP. 1 Wherein, There Is, 1. The Dependence of this verse upon the former,
with the Scope of the Holy Ghost herein. 2. The Meaning of the words. 3. The
Division thereof into three parts. Page 1 Chap. 2. Containing a Description of
them whom Christ invites to come unto him, which is laid down in this doctrine.
That they whom Christ calls to come unto him, are such as Labor and are heavy
Laden, whether* 1. Under the burden of the righteousness of the Law. or 2.
Under the weight of their sins. Or, 3. Under the power of any corruption. Or,
4. Under any outward trouble, or Affliction. Page 6 Chap. 3. The Burden under
sin, laid open in nine Particulars. 1. When the Soul not only apprehends, but
is sensible of the Evil of Sin in the reality of it. 2. Finds all the comfort
that did attend Sin before to vanish and come to nothing. 3. Looks upon it self
as loathsome, and is in* Some measure bowed to God. 4. Trembles at the least
thoughts and Temptations to Sin. 5. Feel Sin heaviest, where it is indeed
heaviest. 6. Feels the weight of Sin to be such, as that no Creature is able to
remove it. 7 Had rather be under any burden, then the burden of Sin. 8 Does
notwithstanding the weight thereof, justify God. 9. Does not lie sullenly, and
despair under it, but attend for direction from God, how it may befreed there
from Page 15 Chap. 4. Two Cautions touching the Burden of Sin, 1. That it is no
condition of the Covenant of Gace 2. That it does not interest the Soul in
Christ, nor g^ve it rest in him. Whereunto certain Consequences are annexed.
Page 21 Chap. 5. The Reasons of the former Doctrine. 1. Christ has all mercy
in him. 2. The end why he came into the world, was to give rest to burdened
Souls. 3. Christ himself was once under some kind of this burden. 4* He is to
have the glory of all the ease which is given to sinners. Page 24 Chap. 6. The
Application, Exhorting Sinners to come unto Christ, with Answers unto certain
Objections. Page 26 Chap. 7. The Burden under the Law laid open in Eleven
particulars, 1. The Law Requires of us such things which we are unable to
perform. 2. It Requires absolute perfection. 3. It Accepts not of any of our
Endeavors. 4. Upon any one breach of the Law the sinner loses al ability for
ever keeping any part of it afterward. 5. Upon any breach thereof, it presently
binds over the sinner to eternal death. 6. It requires constant obedience.
7. Being once broken, it cannot be satisfied with any after obedience. 8. It
accepts of no repentance. 9. It only lays open a man's misery, and there leaves
him, without showing him any remedy. 10. There is no appeal from it, nor
repealing of it. 11. The more it comes to be revealed, the more are our
corruptions Stirred up. Where some Objections are answered, or Doubts resolved.
Page 31 Chap. 8. Three Conclusions arising from the former Doctrine concerning
the Burden under the Law; Namely, 1. That man by Nature is in an evil case. 2.
That it is a mighty work to save a Soul. 3. That those vain thoughts wereby men
think to pacify their Consciences, will stand them in no stead. Page 47 Chap.
9. Of the Burden of Legal Performances, What it is; With the burdensomness
thereof laid open in twelve Particulars. 1. There is no inward principle of
doing. 2. In men that are only under the Law, there is a principle contrary to
the performance thereof. 3. Such are wearied with doing, getting no supply of
strength to perform duty. 4. By their performances, they still contract more
Guilt upon their Souls. 5. What they do in Obedience unto the Law is only out
of fear. 6. And with much straitness of Spirit. 7. Nothing comes of such
Performances. 8. They that perform Duty in a mere Legal way, never attain their
end, which is, peace with God. 9. They know not whether God accepts of them, or
rejects them. 10. They are forced unto Duties instantly, presently, and upon
the sudden, though to the hinderance of other Duties of greater concernment,
Which God requires of them, at the same time. 11. Though they go on toyling,
yet know they not whether they shall hold out unto the end. 12. Their
Humiliation and trouble for not doing what they ought to do, hinders them from
doing what God requires. Page 50 Chap. 10. The Sad condition of such as are
under the Burden of Legal Performances set forth in Six Particulars, 1. That
which should be accounted their happiness is their Misery. 2. It is a means to
cause hard thoughts of God. 3. It causes great discouragement. 4. They bring
an evil report upon the ways of God. 5. They keep no proportion therein. 6.
They are kept off from Christ. Page 65 Chap. 11. Of the Burden of Corruption,
And that there is Corruption in the Saints. Being a Burden. 1. Of Grief. 2. Of
Shame. 3. Of Fear. 4. Of Care. 5. Of Labor and Toil. Page 72 Chap. 12. The
Burden of Coruption set forth in eight particular^. 1. It is a Sole burden. 2.
It has al other burdens in it. 3. It is a Continual burden. 4. It makes al
other things to be a burden. 5. It is a burden to God himself. 6. It makes the
sins burdensome to all others. 7. It makes him burdensome to himself. 8. How
grievous soever, we cannot be rid of it in this life. Page 81 ^hap. 13. In what
respects Corruption is a Burden. 1. In that our nature is opposite unto the
very nature of God. 2. It presses down every holy duty. 3. It affords matter
for any Temptation. 4. I^ has a Root from whence all kind of sin may spring.
5. It dampeth all the activity of our Graces. Page 87 Chap. 15. In what
respects the stirrings and motions of coruption are very burdensome. 1. They
contitinually fight against the Spirit of Grace in the heart. 2. They are
sudden. 3. They are full of confusion and disorder. 4. They work very
Maliciously. 5. They watch opportunity to do mischief. 6. They are very
unseasonable. 7. They are very prevalent. Page 92 Chap. 15. The Reasons of the
former point. 1. Because corruption (when it prevails) weakens the heart. 2. By
it God is dishonored. 3. By it our holy profession is scandalized. 4. By it
they over whom it prevails, are made useless in their places. 5. Thereby the
means of grace are made unprofitable. 6. Thereby our peace with God is
disturbed. 7. Thereby the assurance of our Salvation is shaken. Page 98 Chap.
16. Why the Saints feel these things so burdensome, Namely. 1. Because the life
of grace is a tender and delicate thing. 2. Because grace keeps the Soul in
continual acting. And why God suffers corruption notwithstanding the
burdensomness thereof to remain in the Saints, Namely. 1. That hereby be may
show forth his own power. 2. Hereby their Faith be exercised. 3. Hereby they
are driven unto Prayer. 4. Hereby stirred up unto Repentance. 5. Hereby make
known his Wisdom. 6. Hereby manifest his justice in laying a stumbling block
before the wicked. 7. Hereby the Saints may be induced to long more after
Heaven. With two Consequences issuing from hence. 1. The differences between
the sins of the godly, and the wicked. 2. Why the Saints go on so sadly in
their ways. Page 103 Chap. 18. Of the Burden of outward affictions, and the
grievousness thereof laid open in three Particulars. 1. In themselves they are
a part of the curse of the Law. 2. They hinder much in doing Service to God. 3.
They often help forward many strong Temptaions. Why God will have his Saints to
be under this Burden, Namely 1. Because he will have his Servants to honor and
obey him, merely out of Love. 2. Because he knows that thus their corruptions
may be best mortified. 3. To be a stumbling block to the wicked. Page 111 Chap.
18. Christ's Invitation of Sinners, laid down in these words, Come unto me.
Opened in five Particulars. 1. It is to look to Christ as an All-sufficient
Savior. 2. It implies an unsettledness upon the Creature. 3. A stirring of the
heart after Christ. 4. A laying of all our burdens upon Christ. 5. A leaving of
the Soul with Christ for life Page 116 Chap. 19. How Christ calls Sinners unto
him, set forth in two Particulars, Namely. 1. By an outward and general call. 2.
By a Particular call to Particular Sinners. And how to know the voice of
Christ. Page 124 Chap. 20 That there is nothing required of Sinners but to come
to Christ, with mne Consequences arising from hence, and what has been laid
down in the two former Chapters. 1. There it not any worthiness required in
such as come to Christ. 2. The Soul needs not to be troubled about the time and
and measure of its Humiliation before its coming to Christ. 3. Nor about what
interest it has in Christ, before its coming to him. 4. That the least degree
of Faith will give the Soul interest in Christ. 5. That the work of Faith is
supernatural. 6. That Faith is an humbling Grace. 7. That Believers after their
coming to Christ should be willing to do and suffer much for Christ. 8. That
they wr^ are once in Christ, shall never be east off. 9. That they know not what
to do when they loose their interest in Christ. Page 130 Chap. 21. Nine Rules
to be observed in right coming to Christ. 1. Rest not in outward means that
lead to Christ, before Christ himself be enjoyed. 2. Pitch rather upon Christ
himself than upon the good things of Christ. 3. Come with the whole soul. 4.
Keep Christ continually in thine Eye. 5. Be convinced that whatsoever keeps
thee from Christ, comes not from God. 6. Take heed and beware of all
discouragements, and hindrances. 7. Keep the Heart still tending to Christ. 8.
Give up thy self to Gods Spirit. 9. Often renew the act of coming, come often
to Christ. Page 143 Chap. 23. Nine means to draw Sinners to Christ, namely,
That 1. He that ca^s us is the Son of God. 2. He is our near Kinsman, (wherein
three strong arguments are included. First, the terror of Gods glory is taken
away. Secondly, He is infinitely inclined to do good unto the Sons of men.
Thirdly, In uniting the divine nature with the humane, he has done a greater
work than to save a soul.) 3. He is the mediator. 4. He deserves that we should
come to him. 5. The soul gets infinite good by coming to Christ, instanced in
four particulars. 6. We are miserable in our selves. 7. Christ will certainly
receive them that come to him, which is opened in three particulars. 8. We
stand in great need of Christ. 9. The not coming to Christ will aggravate all
other sins. With an answer unto some Objections. Page 156 Chap. 23. The
Doctrine arising from the dependence of the promise upon the Invitation, That
God will have us when we are coming to Christ, to have respect to our selves.
Page 179 Chap. 24. Of the rest promised by Christ in general: And that there is
no Rest for a Soul out of Jesus Christ. Page 186 Chap. 25. Six Reasons of the
former Doctrine. 1. The soul out of Christ is departed from God. 2. Every man
by nature is an enemy to God. 3. Every man by nature is bound over to the
justice of God to answer to what be can charge him with. 4. In a m^n out of
Christ there is every thing to disquiet him. 5. Every one out of Christ is
condemned. 6. Such every moment may be plunged into a gulf of Wrath. Page 196
Chap. 26. Contains, I. A further consideration of the restless condition of
men out of Christ, from Prove. 23.34. II. Five Reasons thereof. 1. They are
under the curse of God. 2. All creatures are their enemies. 3. All the ways of
Gods providence are against them. 4. All their best services are rejected. 5.
They have no refuge for comfort. III. Two conclusions from the premises. 1 Most
men live and perish in blindness. 2 There is an insufficiency in all things out
of Christ, to give rest; with the Reasons thereof. Page 205 Chap. 27 The
insufficiency of every thing besides Christ to give rest to the Soul is further
enlarged, with several choice Considerations Page 210 Chap. 28. Of the Rest
that a Believer has by Christ from the guilt of sin, laid out in ten
Particulars. 1 Christ takes upon himself all the sin of them that come to him,
and stands charged with them before his father. 2 He satisfies for sin. 3 The
wrath of God is appeased. 4 He is continually at the right hand of his Father
to intercede for Sinners that come to him. 5 Their Souls are sprinkled with the
blood of Christ. 6 The Soul at the first coming to Christ, is made perfectly
righteous before God. 7 Christ not only undertakes for all the sins past, but
for all the sins to come. 8 Guilt shall never return, when it is once taken off.
9 The soul at its first coming to Christ is clothed with the righteousness of
Christ. 10 Such are sure that the day of judgment shall be the Solemnity of
their absolution^ Page 218 Chap. 39 The deliverance from the Law by Christ set
out. 1 Privatively in five Particulars. 2 Positively in five Points more Page
228 Chap. 30 The Rest that believers have from the burden of the Law by coming
to Christ, laid out in ten Particulars. 1 They do not stand or fall for life by
the Law. 2 The Lawgiver is the Redeemer. 3 The least spark of Grace is
accepted. 4 Their will shall be accepted as the deed. 5 Obedience is required in
a sweet and gentle way. 6 The grace of God in Christ does melt the heart. 7
Their sins make them an object of Gods pity. 8 They have Christ to undertake
for them as a surety. 9 They are delivered, and yet satisfaction is made to the
Law. 10 They have assurance that they shall never forfeit the covenant of grace
they are under by Christ Page 234 Chap. 31 Contains diverse Consequences from
the rest Believers have from the burden of the Law. And Lessons they are taught
from thence Page 249 Chap. 33 Of the rest from Legal performances, and the
several ways how this rest comes from Christ, viz. duties are delightful to
the soul, because Christ renders God unto the soul in a gracious way. 2. They
are not performed as satisfactory, but as testimonies of love and thankfulness.
3 Christ himself offers up the duties to God. 4 They are performed from the Law
in the heart. 5 They have the Promises joined with them Page 262 Chap. 35. Two
other ways whereby the former point is cleared, with some consequences from
the same, and the use of the whole. The First way is, that whilst the soul is
performing duty, the strength of it is continually renewed. Secondly, The soul
has the love of God shed abroad into the heart. The first Consequence is
happiness of a Christian here. Secondly, Hence comes the perseverance of
believers. The use of all is to exercise much faith in Christ Page 285 Chap. 36
Shows the Rest, from the remainder of Corruption to be Sanctification, and
that to be a great Rest, Laid open in six particulars. 1 It is the right temper
of the heart. 2 In it the soul does in great part attain its end. 3 In it the
soul lives the life of God. 4 It raises the soul above the region of al
troubles. 5 It turns every thing to good. 6 It is the beginning of Glory Page
291 Chap. 37. Shows that Sanctification is only IN Christ Page 297 Chap. 38.
Shows how our sanctification comes from Christ in six particulars. 1 It was
the end of his coming to destroy the works of the Devil. 2 He is the great
Ordinance appointed by God to sanctify his people. 3 His death is appointed to
mortify sin. 4 By him the curse upon the heart is taken away. 5 By his union
with Believers, being the head of the second Covenant. 6 In Christ are the
strongest arguments for holiness that can be Page 300 Chap. 39 Containing two
strong Arguments in Christ for holiness. First, In him the soul sees the
greatest breach between it and God by reason of Sin. Secondly, In him it sees
the greatest Hatred of Sin in God. Page 313 Chap. 40 Showing how Sanctification
comes from Christ, in six Particulars more. 1. It is he that reveals the Father
to the Soul. 2. Through Christ the Love of God is shed abroad into the heart.
3. All the Promises are made to us through him. 4. In him all the Ordinances
are effectual. 5. He sends the Spirit into the heart. 6. Christ Rules in the
heart Page 317 Chap. 41. Six Consequences from the former Doctrine I. The
difference between believers and the state in Adam. II. We see the difference
between Civility and true holiness. III. We see the reason why so many Vows
and Covenants to live holily come to nothing. IIII. It is impossible for any to
be a member of Christ, and not be holy. V. Be not hindered from coming to
Christ, albeit you have not so much holiness as you desire. VI. Hence we learn
how to Understand Christ aright. Page 327 Chap. 42. Contains an exhortation
to come to Christ wherein Three hindrances are removed, And six encouragements
laid down. First, The Union between Christ and a believer. Secondly, From the
great Love of Christ, Thirdly corruption is the burden of Christ as well as of a
sinner. Fourthly, He healed the bodies of many, he will much more the soul,
Fifthly he knows what it is to be Tempted. Sixthly, It is for the Honor of the
Death, Resurrection and life of Christ to give Holiness. Page 337 Chap. 43.
Contains the conclusion of the former doctrine of Sanctification, with diverse
directions how to come to Christ for holiness. I. Be sensible of the want of
it. II. Be not satisfied with the ordinances further then you meet with Christ.
III. Come not so much for comfort and peace as for holiness. IV. Be sensible of
new supplies. V. Converse with Christ in the Gospel Page 341 Chap. 44* Shows
that a believer has Rest in Christ in all troubles he can meet with in the
world, which is laid out in four Particulars, 1 All afflictions are at his
disposal. 2 In him the curse is taken away. 3 They stand with Gods love. 4 They
are measured by God. Page 348 Chap. 45. The Rest believers have from Christ in
outward afflictions discovered in four Particulars more 1. They shall be to
good ends, 2 They shall be sanctified to the good of believers. 3. God is
present with his people in Christ, 4 There is abundance of present good in
affliction. Page 360 Chap. 46. Contains the conclusion of the last doctrine
in the two former Chapters, showing how unbeseeming a thing it is, for a
believer to be troubled in affliction. Page 366 Chap. 47. Shows that
believers are often under inward affliction, and spiritual desertions. Page 368
Chap. 48. Contains Seven Directions how a believer may get Rest from Christ
in spiritual Desertions. First, Look upon Christ as once in the same condition.
Secondly. Look to Christ as full of Grace and Goodness, Thirdly, Look to Christ
as an advocate at the right hand of God. Fourthly, Look to Christ for
fulfilling the promise of sending the comforter. Fifthly, Go to Christ as at
first in thy Conversion. Sixthly, Keep good thoughts of God. Seventhly, Resolve
never to take Rest in any thing else beside Christ. Page 371 Chap. 49. Shows
that believers have not only Rest in but Rest also from afflictions. Page 379
Chap. 50. Five marks of true rest in Christ. I It is not but upon discovery of
glorious things the soul knew not before, II. It comes upon the soul, ceasing
from its own work. III. It makes the believer active for God. IIII. Rest in
those things wherein Christ. rested V. True Rest will abide the trial of the
word. Page 382 Chap. 51. Eight means to get and keep Rest in Christ. 1 Beware
of secret Sins 2 Be thankful for what good God has given thee 3 Judge not thy
self in time of temptation 4 In trouble wait upon God in the use of means. 5
Meditate much upon the promises 6 Proportion humiliation to thy comfort. 7 Be
thoroughly grounded that thou art in Christ. 8 Improve the Rest thou have to
God, by doing much work to him Page 388
CHRIST INVITING SINNERS TO COME TO HIM.
MATTHEW. 11.28. Come unto me al ye that Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest.


CHAP. 1.
Wherein, There Is 1. The Dependence of this verse upon the former, with the
Scope of the Holy Ghost herein. 2. The Meaning of the words. 3. The Division
thereof into three parts.

HAving opened unto you that great Doctrine of See my Treatise, on 2 Cor. 5.19,
20.
Reconciliation with God in Christ, and of the willingness of God and Christ to
be Reconciled to Sinners; sending his Messengers to invite, entreat, and
beseech in his Name; though there was something else followed in the Chapter
that I could willingly have handled: yet because I would press on what has
been delivered about our Reconciliation with God in Christ, and urge it further
with a suitable argument; I have pitched upon this text, wherein we have set
forth the willingness of Christ to be Reconciled to Sinners: and a most
gracious invitation of Jesus Christ to poor Sinners to come in unto him, that
they might have Rest for their Souls. A Text that breaths forth nothing but
mercy and goodness to Sinners, a Heart melting invitation. In Jer. 31.12. we
have a prophecy, that Sinners shall come and flow together to the goodness; Or
to the bountifullness, of the Lord, (as some of your books have it) surely if
there be any Scripture, that holds forth the goodness, and bountifulness of the
Lord to Sinners, so as to melt their hearts that they may flow unto it, it is
this in the Text. This invitation of Christ, Come unto me, ye that are Weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, is that which has been the Comfort
of many a wounded Conscience, of many a troubled Sinner* having fastened upon
it, their Souls have been stayed, and they have been kept from sinking into the
bottomless Gulf of despair thereby. A Text that has been of as great use unto
afflicted Consciences, as any in all the Book of God; If ever there were a Heart
breaking Scripture, certainly here it is; Come unto me, ye that are weary and
heavy Laden, etc. It is in it self an entire sentence if we take the 28. verse,
and no more; it is full of abundance of sweetness, and filled up to the top with
the Grace and goodness of the Lord. But ^ow, if you observe the dependence of
these words on the former, (the words that go before) then you will see, that
there is indeed, a soul satisfying fullness of Mercy, and goodness in the Lord,
held forth from this text: and though many of you (I question not) have heard
this Text often quoted; Come unto me, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest; yet (perhaps) few of you have observed how these words come
in, and have a sweet dependence upon the former. If you compare these words,
with those that go before, you shall see, that they are very heart breaking
expressions. What did Christ say in the very verse before? (I Will go no
further.) Al things (says he) are delivered unto me of my Father; and no man
knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the Father save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him; (and then follows) Come to
me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. The Text
seems to be so full of sweetness alone, that it is seldom observed how this
comes in after it. But now, we should look upon them thus, and consider, that
they are the words of Christ, Who after he had said, Al things are delivered to
me of my Fathet, and no man knows the Son but the Father, etc. Immediately
says, Oh! Come to me, all ye that are weary and heavy Laden, and I will give
you Rest.

We may observe in this dependence of the words on the former, these two things.

1. Christ says, That al things are delivered to him of the Father, and
therefore come to me; this depends upon the beginning of the 27. verse. All
things are delivered to me of my Father; as if Christ should say; Be it known
unto you, poor troubled afflicted Sinners, that mourn under the weight and
burden of your Sins, I have all things delivered by the Father to me, that is,
all the mercy, all the Riches of Grace, all the treasures; all the goodness and
Grace that is in the Father is given to me to dispense to you, and al power is
given to me of the Father to do good to poor troubled Sinners. And therefore
come to me, Oh! come to me ye poor troubled and afflicted Sinners.

2. No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father,
save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him; that is the second thing
observable in the dependence, of these words on the former: says Christ, there
is a most infinite communion between me and my Father, and I know fully
whatsoever is in the mind of God the Father, what his Heart is toward sinners;
I know what his thoughts have been from al eternity about doing good unto poor
Sinners: there is a most near conjunction between me and my Father, and I alone
can reveal the Father to poor sinners that are in darkness, they can have God
the Father made known to them by no means, but by me, there is no way for them
to know, what is in the Heart of God the Father toward them but by me, and
therefore, Oh! Sinners come to me. Here is the dependence of the words upon the
former. Likewise consider what follow^. If the poor should say, Oh! blessed
Savior, we are vild unworthy creatures, we lie under the weight and burden of
the guilt of our Sins: and shall such as we come to thee? Yea, says Christ,
notwithstanding that, yet come to me. The word in the Greek here has an
emphasis beyond that which you have in your Books; it is not Venice, that is
usually translated come, but adeste; it is a word exhortation, not a mere word
commanding, but a word of Exhortation, as one friend calls to another in a
familiar sweet way, and says, come hither: I come to thee, Oh! blessed
Savior, (says the poor Sinner) thou art the Holy one of the Father; thou art
God blessed for ever, and how should I be able to come to thee? now says
Christ, I am meek, and I am lowly, come to me, and I will lay no further burden
upon you, no other yoke upon you, I am meek and lowly, and I will show my self
to be meek and gentle, and loving to you; I will not upbraid you; if you come, I
will not say to you, as Jeptha said to the Elders of Gilead, you did hate me and
cast me out, and why are you come to me in your distress? but if you come to
me, you shall find rest to your Souls, and be sure that whatsoever yoke shall be
laid upon you, it shall be but an easy yoke, and whatsoever burden shall be
laid upon you, it shall be but a light burden. And thus you have the dependence
of the words, and the scope of them.

Now further for the meaning of them; come to me, ye that Labor. The word
translated here [ Labor] is (I think) in some of your books [ Weary] al ye that
are weary. And it signifies a cutting Labor, it comes from a word that
signifies to cut; any kind of trouble or vexation that is upon ones spirit that
is cutting; a cutting trouble; sometimes it is used for any kind of trouble in
the world; as in Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for
they rest from their Labors; from al their trouble and affliction; Al you that
Labor and are heavy Laden; the word comes from a word that signifies the Lading
of a Ship, such a load that would load a Ship: heavy laden, this is the
meaning of the words. You that are under such afflictions of spirit, as you are
even cut again; you that Labor under the trouble, anguish, and sorrow of your
hearts. And then you that are under such a burden, that even would lade a Ship;
that is ready to sink your souls down into the bottom of despair; you that are
in such a condition, come to me; you that can find no rest any where else, come
to me, and I will give you rest. So that here in verse. 28. You have these three
things for the division of it.

1. The description of those whom Christ would invite to himself; what kind of
people they are; or the condition of such as are invited and required to come
to Christ; the subject, Such as Labor, and are heavy Laden.

2. The sweet and gracious invitation of Christ to such [Come to me] come to me
you that do thus Labor, and are thus heavy Laden. And,

3. A Gracious promise unto such as come unto Christ; that Christ will give rest
unto their Souls. These are the three things in verse. 20.

For the first; I shall only speak of that at this time; though the other two
are the Chief that I do intend. And I speak of the first only, as making way
unto the other two that follow. For the reason why I chose this scripture was
to draw the Soul unto Christ, and to open the riches of this promise of rest;
to show what rest the Soul shall have in Christ that does come unto him.

CHAP. II.
Containing a Description of them whom Christ invites to come unto him, which
is laid down in this doctrine. That they whom Christ calls to come unto him, are
such as Labor, and are heavy Laden. Whether, 1. Under the burden of the
righteousness of the Law. Or, 2. Under the weight of their sins. Or, 3. Under
the power of any corruption. Or, 4. Under any outward trouble, or Affliction.

YOu that Labor and are Heavy Laden. So that then the point is, DOCT. That
those that Labor, and are Heavy Laden, are called to Christ. Such as Christ
calls are Such as Labor and are Heavy Laden.

1. Such as Labor and are Heavy Laden, under the burden of the righteousness of
the Law. So Chrisostom carries the text. Those that heretofore have sought
righteousness by the Law, and find it very burdensome to them; they that are
toyling, and laboring, to get peace and rest unto their souls by the works of
the Law, but find themselves tired, find that peace and rest does not come that
way, are even toyled and tired and do (as it were) stick in the mire but yet
find no peace nor rest that way. Now says Christ unto them, come unto me; as
if he should say; This is not the right way to get true peace and rest to your
souls, to think to bring it about by the works of the Law; you may toil, labor,
perform duties, and not dare to do any thing against your consciences; be very
strict in your lives, be striving to do more and more; And yet this will not
bring true rest and peace unto your souls; you will never have peace and rest
through the righteousness of the Law; you must have it by me. There are many
whose consciences God has begun to enlighten, to see that there is an evil in
Sin, that sin will bring death, that it does endanger their souls of damnation
eternally, they are convinced of this; and that they might have peace with God,
is the thing their souls does much desire. O! that they might have the pardon
of sin, and peace with God. O! that they might have their consciences quieted;
God does awaken the consciences of many men and women, who yet have no saving
grace; and they spend a great deal of time in laboring, and taking much pains
to get their Consciences quiet; there is many that have been diverse years
laboring, and taking pains to get their consciences to be quiet, and cannot,
but their consciences ever and anon will be flying in their faces, and troubling
of them, and yet they are such people, as dare not commit any known sin; dare
not neglect any known duty, are constant in prayer in secret, attend upon the
word. And whenever they hear of a duty that they should perform, they labor
to set upon it withal their might: but alas! they feel little sweetness and
comfort in their duty; only conscience hales them to it, and tells them, that
they must do it, and if they do neglect it conscience flies in their Faces, and
tells them they must perish eternally, and they seek therefore to pacify their
Consciences only by the performance of Duties, and by their obedience to the
Law, and so seek it by the righteousness of the Law; that is the only way that
they do take to pacify their Consciences, and get rest and peace unto their
souls. Alas, all this while they are laboring and toyling, but cannot do it; for
while men seek Righteousness by the Law, it must needs be a toyling labor that
will not give rest.

The First Burden of the Law.
First: The Law gives no strength at all to enable me to perform duties: and
therefore the Children of it must needs be under bondage; as Pharaoh's
Taskmasters commanded so much Brick to be made, but would afford them no
straw, no means to do it. So some set forth the bondage and servitude of the
Law, commanding such things as it gives no strength at al to perform.

Quest. But you will say, Is this the Law of God? is God so hard to his
Creature as to command that which he gives no ability to perform?

Answ. We must know, that God did once give strength to perform Duties: but
certainly now the Law of God commands Duties, but gives no strength to perform
them: there is no strength enabling us to perform duties, until the Spirit of
Jesus Christ does come into the Soul; we may perform the outward part of them,
but not perform duties in such a spiritual manner, that they should be suitable
to our hearts, so as to bring ease and quiet unto our souls; and though the
soul do seek to get rest, and ease to it self, yet it will not come that way.

The Second Burden of the Law.
Secondly: The Law requires perfect obedience in every thing, and denounces a
Curse against him that does not continue in every thing that is written in the
Law to do it. Now when men and women are seeking to get rest to their souls by
the works of the Law, they cannot perform duties as they ought; and therefore
they have no rest, but they see the Law to condemn them because they do not
perform duties in a perfect manner; and yet they think they must go on, and do
as well as they can: I, but still Conscience has matter to accuse them of; you
have not done enough, you still come short, and though you do some duties, you
neglect other duties: so that Conscience has them at advantage every day, and
they are continually under the bondage of an accusing and condemning
Conscience, that they can have no rest to their souls; they perform duties, but
question with themselves, how can I know that the infinite, holy God will accept
of what I do? and although they may get quiet for a little while, yet
Conscience comes upon them again, and disquiets them, and casts fears and
doubts ^to their souls; insomuch that many poor Creatures have gone seven, or
perhaps twice seven years under trouble of Conscience, and never had any rest
or peace; and yet still have gone on making Conscience of their ways, but
withal full of fears and doubts, lest al should not be well with them at last.

The Third Burden of the Law.
And besides, Whiles the soul goes on to seek quiet and rest by the works of
the Law, there is an unsuitableness between the duties that are performed, and
the heart of such a man or woman; so that the very works that they do, and
duties they perform, are grievous and tedious unto them. I, but now says
Christ, O! Come to me, such as these are; Is there any of you that have had
your consciences troubled, and have desired, O! that there might be peace
between God and my soul, that I might have assurance of Gods Love? what course
have you taken to get it? have you not sought to bring it about by the works of
the Law, and have thought to get rest and peace to your souls that way? Indeed,
it is better to go on that way, than in the ways of sin; but to think to have
rest and peace that way, has a great deal more evil in it than you are aware
of; if men shall think to quiet themselves that way, and thereby put off the
Righteousness that comes by Faith, they may come to be hardened before they be
aware. But is there any of you that are seeking rest and peace unto your souls
in such a way by the righteousness of the Law? says Christ, know, That this is
not the way for you to have rest to your souls; it is true, you must abstain
from sin, and perform duties; O! but if you would have rest to your souls, you
must come to me, it is by the souls rolling of it self upon the perfect
righteousness that there is in Jesus Christ, that only can bring true rest unto
the soul. Many a poor sinner that has been seeking rest many years, has not
got it; but when the Lord has been pleased to come in with one promise of the
Gospel, setting it home upon their souls, they have got more rest and quiet to
their souls in one day, yea, in one hour, than they did before in many years;
there is a great deal of art and skill to get rest and quiet to the soul that is
troubled. The Gospel is a mystery in this thing; and when God acquaints the
soul with the mystery of the Gospel in this thing, then rest comes on in a
sweet and gracious manner. It Is true, it is the hardest thing in the world for
to close with Christ, and to get true ease and rest to the soul, it is hard in
it self til God make known the mystery of Faith to the soul, but when that is
done, then the soul finds abundance of ease and rest, and that in a little
while. As it is with a man that thinks by main strength to do some work that
indeed can only be done by Skill and Art; he may be toyling, laboring, and
tiring himself; but yet cannot do it; whereas another man that understands the
mystery of it, he comes in, and in a little time by his skill and art can do
that with ease, that the other man was toyling and laboring about, a long while
and yet could not do it. As you know in all Trades that have a mystery in them.
You that are Navigators that understand the mystery of that Art; if any
unskilful man should come, and think to do some of your work by his main
strength; he may labor and toil even his Heart out, and not do that work that
you can do easily in a little time. So many poor Souls are laboring, and
toyling that these troubled Souls of theirs might be but quiet; they are
laboring, and they will perform duties, and fast, and pray so many times in a
day, and so go on in a tiresome way, whereas after the Soul comes to be
acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel, that it hears the voice behind him
as it were saying come to me. And the Soul being enabled to answer to the call,
and to come to Christ; it does now perform duties as much as it did before, and
makes conscience of them as much as it did before, but now they come to do them
in another manner than they did before, and they come to be easy to them over
that they were before, and they come to have rest to their Souls
notwithstanding their imperfections in duties. When you went to prayer; indeed
sometimes when your Hearts were much enlarged in Prayer, and your thoughts were
taken up wholly with the duties that you were performing; then you thought you
had some comfort, but when you had any wandering thoughts and distractions in
Prayer, then you rose up with a mighty troubled Spirit, and could have no rest
all the day long. Now when you come to be acquainted with the mystery of God in
Christ, though there be many imperfections in your duties, yet then you shall
find rest unto your Souls, notwithstanding all your imperfections. But that will
come to be more clearly opened when we come to that [and I will give you rest]
Those that have labored under the righteousness of the Law, and find it
toylsome and exceeding burdensome to them; Christ calls them to come to him that
they may have rest.

The Burden under Sin.
Secondly, Those that labor and are heavy laden under the weight and burden of
their Sins; The trouble of Conscience that is upon them for their Sins, this is
another thing, besides the righteousness of the Law. The other labor was from
under duties, but this labor is from the sense of the weight, and burden of
Sin; and we are to know that this is a great labor, and burden. Oh! when the
Soul comes to be under the burden of sin, it works to purpose; it labors then
indeed. The thoughts they gather together, and conscience being awakened makes
a great disturbance, and causes fears and tremblings in the Soul, the heart of
a man or woman that was before slugish, dull, heavy, and dead; when God comes
to make it to be sensible of the evil of Sin, then it is quickened, enlivened,
and working. You that Labor and are heavy laden; you that feel the weight of
Sin upon your Souls, and know not what in the world to do; Come you to me
(says Christ) and I will give you Rest.

The Burden of Corruption.
Thirdly, You that labor under the power of any Corruption; Not only under the
Guilt of your Sins, but under the power of Corruption, that feel your Sins
strong in you; and you would fain get the mastery of them. You that carry about
with you such a weight as makes you to cry out with St. Paul, Oh! Wretched man,
or Woman that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? You that would
fain overcome those strong Corruptions that are in you, and it is the great
burden of your Souls that you cannot overcome them. Come to me (says Christ)
and I will give you rest, from them also. First, you that labor under the burden
of duties and find them toylesome. Secondly, you that labor under the guilt of
Sin, and find your Souls perplexed by it. Thirdly, You that labor under the
power of any corruption and cannot overcome it. Come to me and I will give you
Rest. And then.

The Burden of Affliction.
Fourthly, You that labor under any outward trouble or Affliction in this
world. All you that are in any sad condition, that have any burdens upon you
outwardly; if you come to Christ he will ease you of them; though perhaps he
will not take them from you, though you may be under the affliction as before,
yet you shall have rest and ease in them. Have you any burden of poverty? Have
you any Burden in your Children? Have you any burden in your Yoke fellows? Or
burden by reason of weakness in Body? if you will have rest, you must go for it
to Chirst. Many when they are under any outward affliction, they go no futher
then the creature for rest. Oh! if I had but good friends, I should be happy;
or if I had but an Estate I should be well. But if thy poverty did work upon thy
heart kindly, it would drive thee to Chist, and make thee to say, true I am
poor in this world; but there is enough in Christ to make me Rich; there is
mercy enough in Christ to make my life comfortable, to make me who am for the
present in a miserable Condition, happy for ever. Those that are poor
outwardly, they should go to Christ, if their poverty did drive them to Christ
it were a good sign that the Lord did Sanctify their poverty unto them.

Now because al these Burdens, if they were handled distinctly. The Burden of
the righteousness of the Law; The burden of the sense of the guilt of sin; the
burden of the power of sin; And the Burden of outward afflictions in this
world. To open these fully, and to show how Christ calls those that are under
these to himself, would take up much time; therefore I will pitch upon the
Second at present and handle that more thoroughly; and that is the laboring
under the burden of the guilt of Sin.

You that Labor under the burden of the Guilt of Sin, Come to me and I will give
you Rest* I will not here stand to open unto you, what the burden of the Guilt
of Sin is; then I should soon slip into an argument, that I have at large
heretofore opened to you, See my Treatise of the Evil of Sin.
out of the Evil of sin; only thus much let us know, that of al burdens in the
world, the burden of Sin, it is the greatest; it is that that is a burden to
the very spirit of God. God complains that he is pressed under it as a Cart is
pressed that is full of sheaves; it was that which pressed down the Angels to
Hell to be reserved in Chains of darkness; it was that which pressed down
Christ, and made him sweat drops of Blood. And it is that that has been a
great weight and burden upon many thousands of Gods Saints; it is that that the
damned in Hell lies under now, and must do so eternally, Cursing, Blaspheming of
God. It is that that makes the whole creation to groan and travel in pain.
However many people think ^lightly and meanly of it, yet when the Lord does lay
it upon any Soul, such a Soul does find it to be a burden indeed.

CHAP. III.
The Burden under Sin, laid open in nine Particulars. 1. When the Soul not only
apprehends, but is sensible of the Evil of Sin in the reality of it. 2. Finds
all the comfort that did attend Sin before to vanish and come to nothing. 3.
Looks upon it self as loathsome, and is in Some measure bowed to God. 4.
Trembles at the least thoughts and Temptations to Sin. 5. Feel Sin heaviest,
where it is indeed heaviest. 6. Feels the weight of Sin to be such, as that no
Creature is able to remove it. 7. Had rather be under any burden, then the
burden of Sin. 8. Does notwithstanding the weight thereof, justify God. 9.
Does not lie sullenly, and despair under it, but attend for direction from God,
how it may be freed there from.

NOw you that are Burdened with Sin, and labor under this; you are those that
Christ calls to himself to come to him that you may have rest unto your Souls.

For the opening of this, I shall show you.

First, How the Soul is burdened with Sin in a right way, so as Jesus Christ
looks upon it, and does invite it to come to him. How the Soul is wrought upon,
and what it feels in the burden of Sin, that is here spoken of, that Christ
does call unto himself for to receive rest.

Secondly, Why it is that the Lord will have the Soul burdened for sin.

Thirdly, Upon what ground it is, that Jesus Christ has such a desire to have
the Soul come in to him, and does invite the Soul. And so apply it.

For the Frst. You that are weary, and heavy laden. Christ invites the heavy
laden; [ heavy laden] what is that?

The first Burden of Sin.
First, Those notions, or truths that before lay floating as it were in the
understanding; Those truths of God, and apprehensions of the evil of Sin that
lay before as it were aloft in the understanding of a man; now the Lord causes
them to sink down within the heart, And does press the evil of Sin upon the
Soul, making the soul now, not only to apprehend, but to be sensible of Sin, of
the evil of it, in the reallity of it; it feels I say, those truths that were
but hovering in the understanding before, now to settle upon the heart, and to
press the heart with the real apprehension of sin; says the Soul, I heard
talking of it before, and I could speak of it before; but now I feel it; now
says the soul, those things that were as notions before are the greatest
realities that are in the world; the Lord presses them down upon the heart so
as they are heavy upon the Soul, so heavy as to be crushed as it were under
them; now al those vain reasonings, al those vain hopes, those shiftings that
before the Soul had for to quiet it self, they are now quite crushed under the
real apprehensions of sin. If there should be a Millstone upon the ground, and
a few light things put on the top of it, and an other Millstone should be let
fall upon them, it would even grind them to powder; so before there were vain
Hopes, and vain reasonings in the heart. But when God causes those truths and
the realities of them to press upon the heart, it crusheth al those vain Hopes,
and vain reasonings to nothing.

The Second Burden of Sin.
Secondly, The soul that finds al those Comforts that did attend sin before, to
vanish and come to nothing; there is scarce any man or woman in the world, or
very few so vild as to delight in sin, merely because it is sin without any
other consideration; but sin as it has some comforts attending upon it, is
pleasing unto the hearts of men; as now there comes in perhaps some gain or
pleasure to men, and that gives content to them; but when the heart is burdened
with sin, the Soul feels sin so weighty, as it is sensible of it, as a dreadful
evil notwithstanding all the comforts that do attend it. All the comforts that
attend upon sin do vanish and come to nothing; now the Soul can take no further
contentment in any thing that comes in by sin; and that is the second thing; it
is so burdened with sin as it can take no contentment with any thing that comes
in by sin; whatsoever gain comes in that way it casts it off: or whatsoever
pleasure or other seeming accommodation sin is attended with, the soul looks
upon them al with disdain.

The third Burden of Sin.
Thirdly, The Soul that is burdned with sin does so feel the weight of it, as
that the back is bowed down and tired, at least makes it look upon it self as a
vild and loathsome Creature, and fit to be dealt withal as a vild and loathsome
creature; it is burdened so, as the heart is in some measure tired with it.

The fourth Burden of Sin.
Fourthly, Yea so burdened with sin, as that it now trembles at the least
thought of sin, or temptation to sin fearing that if it should willingly commit
any further known sin, that it would so ad unto the burden, as that it would
press the soul down to eternal misery: it is so burdened, that it dares not ad
any one sin more, as far as it can at least, it is afraid of adding any more
sins least one more should sink it to Hell.

The Fifth Burden of Sin.
Fifthly, The soul Feels Sin heaviest where indeed it is heaviest, when it is
rightly burdened, it Feels it heavy, because of the wrath of God that is due to
it; But it is most heavy because it is against the Infinite Holy God; and rule
of righteousness; there lies the weight of al, See the treatise of the evil of
sin.
that by it I have Struck at the infinite holy God, and bin an enemy to him, as
you have had opened to you at large. Now when the heart is truly burdened with
sin, it feels Sin heaviest there, as it is against Such an infinite blessed holy
God, that is so infinitely worthy of al honor from me.

The sixth Burden of Sin.
Sixthly, When the heart is truly burdened, with sin; it is so burdened, and
feels such a weight, as it clearly apprehends that no creature in heaven or
earth is able to remove and take it away, it is made so sensible of the weight
of sin, that it feels and apprehends it self to lie under such a weight, as no
Creature in Heaven or Earth is able to take away, and if there comes not some
power beyond the power of any Creature, here must I lie down and be pressed
eternally under this weight. As suppose a poor man Should lie under a grievous
burden, in some ditch or the like, and there comes it may be a child to him, or
there flies a Bird over him, or there runs a dog by him; But alas, he thinks
with himself, I may lie long enough notwithstanding al these, there must come
some other Strength to help me, or else I must surely perish; So the soul lies
under the burden of Sin, and thinks, Lord what a burden have I brought my self
under, so great that if all the men in the world, or all the Angels in heaven
should come to me they cannot help me; they may speak good words to me but
they cannot help me, it is only the almighty power of god that is able to help
me: now the soul feels sin to some purpose, when once it feels that there is no
created power, no finite power but only the infinite power of the great god that
can help it, and give it ease.

The seventh Burden of sin.
Seventhly, And then in the next place, the soul that is truly burdened with
sin had rather ten thousand times have any burden upon it, then the burden of
sin; there was a time that sin was delightful to me, but now I would rather
have any burden upon me then this, I did before think, that those that wanted
the comfort of the creature, and were outwardly poor, and mean, were
miserable, but now had I all the outward miseries in the world upon my back, I
had rather bear them al then this burden; I have felt much affliction in my
days, but this burden and this weight, is most grievous and heaviest of al,
Oh! if the lord would but take off this weight, and this burden from me, let
him lay what weight and burden upon me he will. Thus the soul that is rightly
burdened with sin is affected.

The Eighth Burden of sin.
Eighthly, Again, Though it feels much weight of sin upon it, Yet in all this it
Justifies God, and does not think hard thoughts of God notwithstanding the
heavy hand of God is upon him. Its true I feel Gods heavy hand is upon me; and
presses me sore but yet Gods hand is just, he is righteous in all this, let him
have glory whatsoever becoms of me, for the truth is, I have brought this
burden upon my self; there was a time that I heaped up one sin after another,
as if I could never have had weight enough upon me, but now I find it heavy,
Oh! the Sins of my youth they lie heavy now upon my soul, my lying and
Swearing, And the Loss of my time, and my Saboth-breaking; Oh! the Lord is
righteous in all his ways. And in this manner does the heart work that is
burdened in Such a way as the Lord does intend good unto.

The Ninth burden of Sin.
Ninthly, And lastly; though it be under such a burden as is almost
intolerable Yet it is not Sunk down in Despare, under its burden, as a beast
while it is under a burden, for a little while it will strugle and strive under
it, but afterward it will lie down and be sullen and die under it. But now
those that are burdened with sin in such a manner as the Lord does use to
prepare the heart for his Son by; they feel the weight indeed of it, but so
feel the weight as they labor, that is, their hearts are yet active and
stirring and working, attending still upon any directions that God has to give
them out of his word, their hearts do keep active and crying to God and
waighting to know what the mind of God is toward them, and are willing to do
any thing that God shall require of them, they do not lie Sullen and dead as it
were under the burden of their Sins. Now if there be any Soul in this
condition expressed in the nine particulars before mentioned, if there be any
such as these, Know, that these are they that Christ does in a more especial
manner call unto, and Says; Come to me ye that are thus weary and heavy Laden
and I will give you rest.

CHAP. IV.
Two Cautions touching the Burden of sin, 1. That it is no condition of the
Covenant of Grace. 2 That it does not interest the soul in Christ, nor give it
rest in him. Whereunto certain Consequences are annexed.

NOW I must lay down two Cautions before I come to give the Reasons of the
Point.

Object. You will say, What do you speak of these burdens, of the necessity of
the souls being burdened with the weight of sin, that it may come to Christ for
ease and rest? surely there is no such thing required.

Answ. To that I answer, That all this burden of the soul for sin, is not any
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, that must be granted; there is no other
Condition but believing in Christ; it is not looked upon as a Condition.

In the second place, you must know, That all this burden of the soul for sin,
it does not interest the soul in Christ, nor give it rest in Christ. I may be
thus burdened for sin, yet except I do believe indeed, that there be an act of
faith beyond this, I shall not obtain rest. Then hence, we must not ground our
faith upon being burdened for sin, to think, because we are burdened, therefore
we shall be pardoned and saved; we must not lay the stress and weight of our
faith, upon the feeling the weight of our sin, that which we must pitch our
faith upon, is not our trouble, the trouble of our souls for our sins; but
those troubles that the soul of Jesus Christ suffered for sin. It is a note of
great use, and I beseech you observe it; you must know this, That when your
hearts are troubled for sin, you must not think that this is the Condition of
the Covenant of Grace; nor you must not make this the object of your faith, as
to think thus, because I am thus troubled, therefore I may believe that my sin
is pardoned, no, I must not pitch my faith upon my own trouble, but upon the
trouble of Jesus Christ; those troubles that the soul of Jesus Christ did
endure by way of satisfaction.

First: Then hence will follow, That it is not any degree of trouble for sin,
how much soever one has been troubled for sin, or how little soever that gives
them interest, or not interest in Christ. I say, it is not the measure of it;
for certainly if we could come to Christ without any burden or sense of our
sin; if it were possible that we could come to Christ (I say) without any such
being burdened for sin, we might; but because that Jesus Christ does work upon
the heart in a rational way, as a rational Creature, although he does work
above Reason, and conveys supernatural Grace that is beyond Reason; yet still
he does work upon the heart as a Rational Creature. Now therefore the work of
Reason must be made subservient to the work of Gods Grace, usually, when the
Lord works upon a soul, he makes use of the work of Reason, to make that
subservient to the Work of his Grace. Now because no man can come to a Savior,
but he must know what need he has of a Savior; therefore if I come to Christ
as a Savior to save my soul from sin, I must apprehend what sin is, that I may
be sensible of it.

Secondly: If God does work upon the soul as a Rational Creature, then he makes
use of this to be a means to stop the soul in the course of sin; for before the
sinner is made sensible of the evil of his sin, he goes on in a full carear as
it were, and nothing will stop him in his course. But now when the soul comes to
be thus burdened, the soul it stopped, and does not run in that full stream of
wickedness as it did before, and that is one good means to help the soul
toward Christ, the very stopping of it in the course of sin.

Thirdly: This is the means in a Rational way to make the soul attend to any
call of Christ, for before Christ may call to sinners out of his Word, Come to
me, and believe in me, but they do not feel the burden of their sin, and
therefore they do not come; if a man be under a heavy burden in a dark night,
if he hears the least noise of the feet of any man, then he cries out for help.
So the soul under the heavy burden of sin, does rejoice to hear of any
direction out of the Word to come to Christ.

Fourthly: The soul comes to prize mercy, and mercy will take a deep impression
upon the heart that is burdened; when the heart is burdened with sin; Oh, how
dear, and sweet, and precious, are mercies then.

Fifthly: And further, When the soul is burdened with sin, it is in a Rational
way prepared to take the yoke of Christ. Before it did cast it off, but now
feeling sin to be a heavier burden than any other whatsoever, it is more
prepared to take upon it the yoke of Jesus Christ; now when the soul is under
this burden, then Christ calls in love to ease and give rest to those souls
that are under such a burden.

CHAP. V.
The Reasons of the former Doctrine. 1. Christ has all mercy in him. 2. The
end why he came into the world, was to give rest to burdened souls. 3. Christ
himself was once under some kind of this burden. 4. He is to have the glory of
all the ease which is given to sinners.

THe Third thing is, Reasons why Jesus Christ does desire and invite souls to
come to him.

REASON I.
First: Because that all is given to Christ; Christ has all the mercy of the
Father in him; for the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, and therefore he
must needs pity such a soul. There is a Law in Deuteronomy, That if a Beast be
under a burden, and ready to perish, God requires that you should not withdraw
your self from the Beast, though it be the Beast of your Enemy, but to help it.
Now if God would have us to be so merciful (who have but drops of mercy in us)
when we see a beast, and that of our Enemies, under a Burden, Then surely the
Lord Christ that has the fullness of the mercy of the infinite God in him; when
he shall see an immortal soul under such a burden, and ready to perish, and it
cries to him for Help, certainly Christ will ease and help that soul.

REASON II.
Secondly, We know that Christ came into the world on purpose, Christ was
anointed and sent for that end to bind up the broken hearted and give them
ease; Christ is designed by God the Father for this very work, and therefore he
will do it; he is appointed by God the Father for to ease burdened Souls, it is
his work; therefore when Christ sees any poor soul burdened under sin, says
Christ, here is work for me; He came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to
Repentance, Here is that that I came from Heaven for, it is the very business
that I was sent from my Father to do; it is the work my Father sent me into the
world for.

REASON III.
Thirdly, Christ himself once felt some burden of this kind, and he knows what
it is to be burdened with Sin, He was made sin for us, So the Scripture says
in the 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made Sin; Christ had the weight of all the Sins of
the Elect upon him, and did feel what the weight of sin was. Christ has
experience what it is to be burdened with sin, and with the wrath of God the
Father for sin. Certainly when Christ lay grovelling with his Face upon the
ground and sweated drops of blood then he was under a great burden. Christ had
the great burden of man's sin upon him, and of the wrath of God that was due to
man's sin, and he had it upon him til he sweat under it; Now Christ himself
having been under it; certainly he cannot but pity poor burdened Sinners.

REASON IV.
Fourthly, It is Christ that is to have the Glory of the ease of sin, and those
souls that are burdened for sin, if ever they have ease; they will give the Lord
Jesus all the Glory. Now first Christ having all the Mercy of God the Father, and
being sent into the world to bind up al broken hearts, and having experience of
the burden of sin. And fourthly knowing that he shall have all the Glory, in
delivering and easing of Souls; certainly Christ does account it worth al his
sufferings, that he might have the Glory in easing of troubled Souls, as many
Chyrurgions account it to be their Glory, to have the Honor of curing desperate
cures; the Lord Jesus will Glory in this to al eternity. When all the poor
burdened Souls that ever he did ease shall be brought before him, and shall be
acknowledged before God and his Angels. Oh! here are those, many thousand Souls
that were under their burdens, and were ready to perish and I have eased them,
and here they shall rest from al their labors for ever; Christ calls Sinners upon
these gro^ds.

CHAP. VI. The Application, Exhorting Sinners to come unto Christ, with Answers
unto certain Objections.
APPLICATION.
NOw for a word of Application: does Christ call for burdened Souls; to come to
him that they may have rest? Then those that are burdened should harken to what
Christ says in this Congregation this morning; Is there any poor soul that is
ready to perish under the weight of sin, that goes under the Load of it; Christ
calls to that Soul to come to him. It were a grievous thing for Christ to come
and call into such a Congregation, and there should be none there. Nay, I cannot
but think, there may be many in this Congregation that shall hear the call of
Christ. Christ many times calls where there are none to answer: we may say in
this case as our Savior Christ said in another, the harvest is great, but the
Laborers are but few; So we may say, the harvest of sin is great, but the
Laborers under the burden of Sin, are but very few: many there are that would
cast the burden of sin upon Christ, but they do as the Pharisees did, cast
heavy burdens upon others, but they themselves will not touch them with one of
their fingers. So many would cast the burden of sin upon Christ, but they will
not feel it themselves. O! let me speak to you, What Chamber, or Closet can
witness that you have been sending strong cries unto God, as being under that
grievous burden. A beast if it lies under a burden, it will roar and cry out for
help. So certainly if your souls were pressed with the burden of sin, there would
be mighty cries to God to ease you of that burden: But to most people in the
world, sin is very light: Well, know, That as Christ himself felt sin to be a
heavy burden, so one way or other they must feel it, either here, or hereafter;
but blessed is that man or woman, that feels the weight of sin while he may be
delivered from it, that he be not hereafter pressed under the weight of it. We
read of Pharaoh, when the people of Israel came for ease, he bids them go to
their burdens; that, that he did unjustly, Christ might do to many righteously
hereafter, when you upon your sick beds, or death beds hereafter, shall cry for
mercy, Christ may say to you, go to your burdens; when any thing of the Word
came to press sin upon your souls, you cast it off. O! it is a dangerous
Condition, when men and women cannot only sin enough: but now when any truth of
God should lay sin upon their hearts, they cast it out, and they think hardly
of those Truths of God that would come and ^ind their sins to their
Consciences, and so burden them with their sins; but it should be otherwise
with us. If those that be thus laden with their sins, be those that Christ does
call to him, we should not think so hardly of those Truths of God that does
reveal the evil of sin unto us, but rather let us join with those Truths of
God, and labor to burden our own hearts; for you see that those that are
burdened, Christ calls them to him that they might have rest; there is no other
burdens that we are to bring upon our selves, but rather seek to avoid them;
but as for the burden of sin, we are to burden our hearts with that, and to
labor to lay our sins to our hearts, and to press them there, and to charge
them upon our own Spirits with all the aggravations we can, and to join with
the work of Gods Spirit, when the Spirit of God comes to lay sin upon the soul,
to join with it, and to say, Lord, I begin to be more sensible of my sins, than
I was before, Lord, humble me through it, let me be under thy hand as long as
thou please, only work thy good work upon me.

Object. But you will say; We may sink under the burden of Sin.

Answ. O no; those that cast off the burden of sin they are most like to sink
under it; now can you think that the Lord will Suffer such a soul to sink under
the burden, that does burden it self, that God might have glory: But those that
are unwilling, and are forced to be burdened, that never are sensible of the
burden of sin, til all the props and Comforts of the creature are taken away.
Upon their sick beds, and death beds, then men are burdened with Sin, and why?
because the props are taken away; before they had comforts, and estates, and
such things which are as so many props; but now God comes and takes the props,
and down they f^l upon us. That is the reason that many upon their death beds
lie Ro^ring and Crying out so bitterly for their sins; and why? because the
Lord has cut asunder the props, and now it lies heavy upon their hearts. Now
Christ calls; come to me you that are weary and heavy laden; come to me says
Christ, Know that you are in a fa^ better condition, than you were, when you
went on with delight in sin; you are now in the way that God does use to bring
them in, that he has a purpose to do good unto: I remember in the Gospel where
the poor blind man cried to Christ, O Son of David have mercy upon me, and still
cried; at length Christ heard the cry of the blind man and asked what it was?
Now those that were by him, they go to the poor blind man and say to him, be of
good comfort, he calls; he might say; I, but my eyes be not opened; I, but be
of good comfort he calls. So I say to al burdened Sinners; be of good comfort
troubled soul, Christ calls thee; he says come to me al ye that are weary, and
heavy laden; he does not say, thou that art so much laden; Christ calls thee to
him.

Object. I but (thou will say) I have no ease, if I were sure that my sins were
pardoned, and I should be saved, then I should have ease and comfort.

Answ. I but poor soul be of good comfort, thou art called; he does not say,
thou art a wretched wicked creature, and depart from me thou cursed, as he will
say to sinners hereafter; that might have been thy condition; but thou did
not hear the voice from Christ this day, depart from me: but thou do hear
this voice this day from Christ, Come to me al you that are weary and heavy
laden: Christ is near to you; the Lord is near to the broken heart; he is near
to the contrite spirit. And know this, the longer thou art under the burden of
thy sin, there will come the more comfort hereafter. Now there is a burden of
sin upon thee, and there will be a weight of glory, hereafter; So the Scripture
speaks of a weight of glory, as well as of a weight of Sin, be willing to bear
the weight of sin quietly; say with the Prophet, I will be willing to bear the
indignation of the lord because I have sinned against him. So say thou: it is
fit my soul should bear a burden, be content to wait now, do you the same
thing that Christ did when he was under his burden: mark what he did in Heb.
5.7. See how the heart of Christ was affected when he felt the weight of our
sins upon him* In the days of his flesh he offered up prayers, and
supplications with strong Cries and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he Feared. Go thy way O Soul, and get into
the presence of God, and tell God of thy burdens that thou feel, make thy
moan unto him, and let it be with prayers and supplications, and strong Cries;
and tell him Lord I fear least my soul should be pressed down to eternal death
under this burden: tell him of thy fears this way, and it is very probable,
that thy soul shall be heard, and according to this invitation here, surely,
there is rest for thee as well as for any, while thou art crying out under thy
burden, for ought thou know, or any Angel in heaven the pardon of thy sins
may be sealling in heaven, and therefore do not make any desperate Conclusion
against thy own Soul, for thy pardon may be a sealing, and then the Lord will
send a messenger to tell thee of this. Nay, do I tell thee that the^e will a
messenger come. Behold here in this text, the Lord Jesus Christ comes, the
Angel of the Covenant cries to thee, Come O Come, come freely, though thou have
no good at al in thee, there is enough in me to give rest unto that soul that
does most labor under the greatest burden of sin that ever was. I Will now
conclude with that that I began with all at the first. O remember again the
dependence of these words with the former; that he that calls to thee to come to
him for rest, it is he that has received al things of the father; and what
has he received them of the Father for, but for such poor Souls as these are?

CHAP. 7.
The Burden under the law laid open in Eleven particulars, 1. The Law Requires
of us such things which we are unable to perform. 2. It Requires absolute
perfection. 3. It Accepts not of any of our Endeavors. 4. Upon any one
breach of the law the Sinner loses al ability for ever keeping any part of it
afterward. 5. Upon any breach thereof, it presently binds over the sinner to
eternal death. 6. It requires constant obedience. 7. Being once broken, it
cannot be satisfied with any after obedience. 8. It accepts of no repentance.
9. It only lays open a man's misery, and there leaves him, without showing him
any remedy. 10. There is no appeal from it, nor repealing of it. 11. The more
it comes to be revealed, the more are our corruptions Stirred up. Where some
Objections are answered, or Doubts resolved.

HAving finished the burden of the guilt of Sin. The next is, the burden of the
Law.

Come to me (says Christ) you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, viz. You that labor under the burden of the Law, and Legal
performances; I will put those two together having a necessary dependence one
upon the other: though I intend to handle them distinctly.

First, You who come to see the great bondage that you are in under the Law,
and feel the great burden that is upon you in seeking after justification by
the law and have done so for a long time; says Christ, know that you have been
deceived in looking after your justification on that way; you have labored, and
toyled in vain, for it will not be gotten that way* Come to me, and you shall
have such rest to your souls, as you never yet have felt, nor never shall feel
by that way. This I take fully to be the Scope of Christ, as well a^ the other.

Now for the burden of the Law; That the Law compared to a burden will appear
by that expression which you have in Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion
over you, for you are not under, the law, but under grace; He Speaks to those
that were delivered, and faith, they were not now under the Law, there was a
time indeed that they were under the law; the Law lay upon them as a heavy
burden; but they came afterward under grace, and they had a yoke there also
(even grace it self brings some kind of yoke) but not such a yoke as the Law
does. Christ himself says, take my yoke presently; but the yoke is very easy
in comparison of the yoke of the Law.

Now that I might open what the burden under the Law is; which if a sinner
comes to understand, any soul once comes to understand; it is impossible but it
must be laden and burdened; it will be a load upon them, a heavy load to those
that understand it; even the burden of the law. Therefore for the understanding
of it which I look upon as exceeding necessary, or else you cannot understand
Christ aright; for it is not enough for us barely to understand Christ; but we
must understand Christ as one that is the great Savior, to deliver us from the
Law; one that comes to give rest and ease to us from the Law; Now except we
understand the yoke, and burden of the Law, we cannot understand the worth of
Christ in coming to give us ease and rest from it.

1. Then I shall endeavor to show what the yoke and burden of the Law is. And
then what is the burdensome Condition of the Soul that seeks after Righteousness
by Legal performances.

In the first place, the Law requires of us such things that we are not able
possibly to perform; it requires things of us that we cannot do; you will say
that is a grievous burden indeed, to be put upon that that we cannot do: now
the Law does so only at the first, that you may not think it hard it does not
put you upon any thing that God did never enable you to do, for that you would
say were hard, and how could God justly do it; but it puts you upon that which
now you cannot do; but you have brought this [ cannot] upon your selves; it
would not have been any burden, to Adam, as God made man first in innocence,
there the Law could have bin no burden: but now as we are fallen Consider what
our Condition is now, and it is a grievous burden, for it puts us upon that
which we cannot do, all the strength that we have should it be put forth to the
performance of the Law, yet we could not do it; but we must not think that
because we have lost our power, therefore Gods Law should not go on; the law
has its course whether we have power, or no power, because God gave it us, and
we have lost it, this I take to be the meaning of that Scripture in Acts 15.10.
Now therefore why tempt you God to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples
which neither our fathers, nor we were able to bear; The law is such a yoke
which neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear.

Object. I: But it may be said, this is meant of the ceremonial Law.

Answ. To that I answer, Certainly, if the ceremonial Law were a yoke, then
take al together Ceremonial and moral and it was greater; take merely the
performing of outward Ceremonies, and it was not such an intolerable yoke; but
we must take the whole Law in the latitude of it, and that will appear to be the
meaning; for the question was here, not only about the ceremonial law; but
about Moses Law in general, and about justification by it: this was the
Question that the Church of Antioch sent to the Church of Jerusalem to be
informed about, for this was all the Sinod that was here in Acts, 15. there were
Certain men came from Jerusalem to the City of Antioch and there taught, that
they must still of necessity keep Moses Law for justification. Now the Church of
Antioch being troubled that some should come from Jerusalem and teach this
doctrine amongst them; they Sent certain Brethren to the Church of Jerusalem to
be informed further about this question, and you may see at the ^. verse, There
arose certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying that it was
needful to Circumcise them and to command them to keep the law of Moses as to
the matter of justification. Now in the assembly of Jerusalem Peter rises up
and tells the rest, that they should take heed what they do, and not put such a
yoke upon the disciples, especially that of the law, which neither we nor our
fathers were able to bear; and that it is not only meant Ceremonial but moral;
it appears at the 11. verse We believe that through the grace of our lord
Jesus Christ we shall be saved even as they. Now the grace of our lord Jesus
christ is not only opposite to the ceremonal law, but to the moral Law, when it
is taught in way of Justification to life. So that this law that is such a yoke
is that that is opposite to the grace of Christ that brings salvation; it is
that law that reveals Sin; it is that law which is the minister of death, by
which the mouths of al come to be stopped, so that it is a heavy yoke, those
that are under this Law: that is, such as are under the first covenant, the
Covenant of works, that seek for Justification by that, they are under a
grievous burden, they are the children of the bond woman, for the law requires
that that is impossible for them to do. Now when a soul comes to see and
understand it self to be under the law such a Law as requires things
impossible to be done; this burdens the soul, and so by this means it comes to
see the need it has of Christ, and Christ calls to such to come to him: as if
he should Say: So long as you continue unbeleivers in your natural condition,
you are under Such a covenant for life, as requires that of you which you
cannot possibly do and therefore there is no resting in that condition: Come
therefore to me, take my yoke, my easy yoke, the other is a heavy yoke: But I
will show you a way for ease and rest to your souls. That is the first.

But though the law may require hard things, and impossible things yet it may
remit in some other things. Wherefore.

2. In the second place: this is the yoke and bondage of the Law: that in every
thing that it does command, it does require absolute perfection; accepts of
nothing but absolute perfection in every thing that it does Command; it does not
only command hard things; but whatsoever the law requires, it does require an
absolute perfection in it, or otherwise casts the Soul if there be but a
failing on any particular in any degree of that which the Law requires, the Law
casts the Soul by it. It requires not only that the thing should be done, but
that it should be done, in a right manner; that it should be done out of a
right principle, that it should be done in the perfection of degrees, to the
uttermost that is required: that there should not only be a direction of our
lives according to the rule, but that we come up fully to the Rule, this the
law requires: Now what a miserable yoke and burden is this, for a poor soul to
look upon the Law as requiring, first things that I cannot do. And secondly
absolute perfection admitting of no imperfection at al: this is a heavy yoke:
this neither we nor our fathers could bear: and those that come to be sensible
of this, must needs be under a grievous burden, and so se a need of Jesus
Christ, Christ calls those that do understand this. It is true if it were thus,
and people were left without any help, and remedy, it were a sad condition;
truly if christ had not come into the world to put himself under the law, we
had been left thus; and al those that do not understand the Gospel, that have
not had Christ preached unto them they are al thus, they are al in this
Condition; they are under a law that they cannot perform, that law which does
require absolute and perfect obedience in every thing or else casts them.

Thirdly, The Burden of the Law is this; you may say; though it does require
perfect obedience; but will it accept of no endeavors at al? suppose we do
endeavor to obey to the uttermost that we can? There are many men will require
things that are hard, and beyond strength, I but when there are endeavors to
do that that is required, that will be accepted: wherefore we are to know this;
that the Law accepts of no endeavors; though a man, or woman should strive
their hearts out to obey, to come to the height of the perfection of the Law,
the Law does not accept of those endeavors: It is true, when the Soul comes
unto Christ in the Gospel; when the Soul comes under the covenant of Grace;
endeavors are accepted; therefore do not say that God will not accept of our
endeavors, and why should we endeavor? Yes, if you come unto Christ your
endeavors will be accepted, as we shall show you when we come to discourse the
rest that the Soul has in Christ; But now here is an argument to drive poor
souls to Christ; to consider that while you are out of Christ, your endeavors
are not accepted, you are not in away of life; for life, and Salvation, it is
not to be had in the condition you are now in: for the Law requires obedience,
it must have the work done; you can be but either under the covenant of works,
or the covenant of grace; so long as you are under the covenant of works, there
the work is called for, and not merely endeavors, that will not do; therefore
the Apostle says in the Romans 10.5. For Moses describes the righteousness of
the Law; that he which does those things shall live by them: You must either be
Righteous by the Righteousness of the Law, or by the Righteousness of Christ;
now if you would be Righteous by the Righteousness of the Law; hear what it is;
he that does these things shall live by them; If you do them, Moses does not
say, he that endeavors to do these things; he that strives to do these things;
No, but Moses says he that does them; he that does these things shall live by
them; it must be doing* and not endeavoring, that the Law accepts, and that
is the third thing wherein the bondage of the Law consists. Says Christ come
to me and you shall have rest; it is by believing in Christ that you must have
rest. There can be no rest but a grievous burden upon the soul til it does come
to Christ; if it does understand things; and if it does not understand these
things, it is in so much the worse condition; though perhaps it be not sensible
of such a burden through ignorance, as most people spend off al their days and
through ignorance do not come to be sensible of it; but when the Soul comes to
understand what terms there are between God and it, and how it must stand
before God, that it must either stand by virtue of a Covenant of Works, or a
Covenant of Grace, and that al naturally are under a Covenant of Works; and so
long as I am in my natural Condition, I am under such a Law that accepts of no
endeavors, this must needs be a great burden unto the Soul and make it to see
an absolute necessity of going to Christ for ease and Rest.

Fourthly, the burden of the law is exceeding great in this respect. That upon
any one breach of the law, the soul comes to be broken so as to lose ability to
be able to keep any part of the Law for ever; I said there is this in the Law
more then in the Gospel; that upon any one breach of the Law in the Covenant of
works, the soul comes to be so broken, as to loose all the abilities of ever
keeping any part of the Law again; as thus, I showed you in Adam. Adam was the
Head of the first Covenant of works, of the Law; now Adam he breaks it in one
particular, failed in one Particular of what God required of him, and in
breaking of it in that one thing, he, and al his posterity was so broken that
they lost all their abilities of keeping of the Law for ever, except God come
and create any ability, they have lost what ability was given at first in their
Creation; so then this is a very great mystery, that one by doing a thing that
is evil should weaken the contrary habit; that by doing a thing that is evil we
should quite loose the Habit, that is quite loose the habit by one act; and not
only loose the habit that is contrary to the particular evil that we do, but
loose al habits of al good whatsoever, and that by one act; now this is a thing
above Nature; this is only by virtue of the covenant of works. God makes such a
covenant; it runs upon such terms, as if Adam did but sin in one thing, he
must die; that is, his Soul as well as his body must die a spiritual death, and
so loose al habits of al Grace. And this is the Reason, why we are by Nature
dead in sin.

Further, such is the condition of the Law, that suppose God should restore us
al to be as perfect as ever Adam was in the state of innocence, void of al sin,
and having the Image of God perfect, and then God should come and put us upon
the covenant of works again; I say if we then should but fail in any one thing,
it would break us so, as we should loose al our abilities to perform any duty
ever after: this is the condition of the law; But it is not so with the Gospel;
though we sin against the Gospel; we do not presently loose al our habits of
Grace; But the Reason of the difference; That though Adam when he sinned
against the Law, he lost al his habits to do any good after, and that though we
sin against the Gospel; yet we do not loose those habits. That I shall show
afterward, when I shall come to show, that the yoke of the Gospel is easier
then that of the Law. And that is the fourth thing in the burden of the Law.

Fifthly, The first thing is this. That the Law upon every breach it does take
advantage against the soul presently; I say takes advantage against the soul
presently and binds it over to death, to eternal death, presently binds it
over; Yea, and does actually put it under a curse upon every breach, instantly
it does it; its true, the law it may be is not presently executed, as soon as a
sinner has broken it, but this is certain that though God does not come upon
you as soon as you have broken the Law, yet know that there are these three
things come upon every one that is out of Chirst, as soon as any one sin is
committed, there are these three things come upon him presently.

First, He is bound over by Gods Justice, by such abond as has more strength
in it then all the power of Heaven and Earth is able to break; as a man that
has done that that is evil, it may be the Law has not present execution upon
him, I but he is bound over presently.

And not only so, but in the Second place, the Law passes sentence, the
binding over that is the guilt, but the Law passes sentence upon the sinner,
and condemns it; the Soul is presently under the sentence of condemnation.

Thirdly, The Law puts the sinner under a curse, for so it is in the latter end
of the 27. of Deu. Cursed is every one that abides not in every thing that is
written in the Book of the Law to do it. Mark, [ every one] that abides not [
in every thing] he is pronounced accursed, and that is a fifth particular.

Sixthly, And in the Sixth place. This Law requires constant Obedience also: and
such is the rigor of it; that if you should obey it never so much for a great
part of your lives; If you should conceive you could obey it perfectly for a
great while; yet if at last you should offend in any one particular you are
cast for all; and all that you have done before is utterly rejected; it will take
advantage against you for any one particular. If it were possible that all your
life time you should keep it and at the last hour of your life break it in any
one particular; certainly you would be condemned by it; this is the condition
of the Law; for so it is in those words that are named; though you do it, if
you do not abide to do (every thing) If there be but any one thing whereby it
can take advantage, it will certainly condemn you for it. This is the condition
of all that are under the covenant of works; and is not this a load? Would not
this burden the Soul? If so be the soul comes to understand it; and whether it
understands it or not, yet certainly it is the truth of God.

Seventhly, A seventh Burden of the Law is this, that when once the sinner has
broke it, the Law cannot be satisfied with any obedience which may make amends
afterward, by any thing that the sinner can do; suppose a man should be never
so angry and offended, he that has offended him may make amends, again a
Servant thinks, though I have offended my Master and done so many faults; Yet,
I will make amends for all. So many people think though we have broken the Law of
God; and lived a great while in sin, and done that which is evil; yet we will
make amends again; and we will give alms; and come to Church and the like.
These are the Reasonings of many poor Ignorant hearts, that do not understand
upon what terms they stand with God; all the Children of men stand before God
either under a Covenant of works; or under the Covenant of Grace, one of the
two: now those kind of men that Reason after this manner, surely they are not
acquainted with the Covenant of Grace; they are under the Covenant of Works;
and now let them know that the covenant of Works admits of no such amends as
they speak of; but when once you have broken the Law all that ever you can do;
If you could live a thousand years never so strictly; or be willing to suffer
never so much for God; yet all this will not satisfy for what is past; many
when they have sinned and their Consciences are a little awakned for it, then
they think to live better and to do otherwise afterward; as if they would make
amends for what is done before; but you must know that this is a mere deceit
and will not satisfy, you must come to me says Christ; you must come to Christ
and believe in him, or otherwise all that you can do will never make amends; you
will say, If we cannot make amends what shall become of us; it is true, if there
were not a Savior, a Christ: our condition were sad Certainly amends must be
made, but it is impossible that ever you can make amends: and this you must
think of: you must not only think of what you are bound to do, for the time
that is to come: but how the breach of the law shall be made up for that which
is past; and when the sinner comes to think of these two together, I have thus
sinned, Lord what shall I do for time to come; I and what shall I do to make up
the breach of the law for that which is past; this will burden the soul; and the
soul will feel upon this such a burden that nothing in the world can give it
rest tell it come to Christ; If we did apprehend this we would see that our
Condition out of Christ were a restless condition; and this invitation of
Christ would be very acceptable. Now because I was loath to tell you of rest
before I had opened a little this burden, for otherwise you might say as those
Jews did to Christ in an other case when Christ told them If the Son made them
free, they should be free indeed; why, Say they, are we bound to any man, it is
in John. 8.32. why do you talk of freedom to us. If I should have gone on in
the invitation [ Come to me and I will give you rest] come to Christ. Why what
restless Condition are we in, you might have said? But now when you see your
restless condition, then I suppose you will be willing to harken to the
invitation [ Come to me and I will give you rest] those things will make you to
know what it is to believe, and to come to Christ, when you come to understand
what you are in being out of Christ.

8. An eighth particular is this; That the Law accepts of no repentance, as it
will not be made amends for; so it will not accept of repentance. Let the Sinner
be never so sorrowful for what he has done, and lament his sin never so much;
if he could bewail his sin with tears of blood, the Law would not accept of
this. You will say this is a strange doctrine, that our repentance should not be
accepted of. I do not say absolutely, that God will accept of no Repentance; but
I say that the Law will accept of no Repentance. Repentance is the doctrine of
the Gospel; the Law preaches no such doctrine as the doctrine of Repentance; it
is an evangelical doctrine: but now repentance, that is merely trouble of
Conscience, that I see my self in such danger of the Law, this may be a natural
repentance, and not evangelical; that is, I see I have undone my self by reason
of my sin, and now am troubled, and so go no further; I say this is a natural
repentance, and not evangelical. When you do think of repenting of your sins,
this is a saving meditation for you to think of your Repentance, thus: I am now
sorry and Repent, and am humbled for my sin; I but this is through a second
Covenant, through a covenant of grace, that this can be accepted, it is infinite
mercy in God and that in Christ, it is purchased by the blood of Christ, that
any Sorrow for any sin shall ever be accepted of God, you must thank Christ for
that; and therefore when you come to the work of mourning for sin, you should
come to it as a work of the Gospel, as an evangelical work, and so come freely
to it; for that which is a work of the Gospel, is a fruit of the blood of
Christ, and it is a great mercy of God unto you that you may be admitted to
come before him to sorrow for your sins in such a way as you may be saved: al
your tears, and trouble for sin except it be through the grace of the gospel,
it is not accepted, and yet how many thousands of poor souls never think of
this in the work of their repentance; perhaps when they lie upon their sick or
death beds, their consciences tells them that there is a hell and misery for
sinners, and there they lie roaring and Crying out, but the truth is they never
understand the way of God in the Covenant of grace: and how the Lord has
looked upon the Children of men under the Covenant of works, and now has
entered into a second Covenant through his Son, and there has provided a way
for their salvation which could not be in the other covenant: we are to know
that the law does accept of no repentance; now O! what a bondage is this that
when I am sorrowful for my sins, and think that God will pardon me, then I am
cursed by such a Law, that will accept of no repentance: but when we come to
Christ, there Godly sorrow is accepted of: and it is said to be Sorrow unto
life, but that is the privilege of those that are under the covenant of grace
in Christ: therefore consider seriously of this point, that you may make a
difference between a covenant of works, and a covenant of grace. I know nothing
in all divinity that is greater for you to understand then these two things: and
those people that are not acquainted with these two covenants, they understand
but little in those mysteries of religion that may bring Salvation; I say
little or nothing of true divinity is understood by people, that do not
understand the difference between the first and the second covenant, between
the covenant of works and the covenant of grace; and the right understanding of
the difference between these two, would let in abundance of knowledge. I dare
undertake that after people come to have the understanding of these two, and to
know the difference of them, in one quarter of a year, they will come to have
let into their hearts more knowledge in the main principles of religion then
they had in many years before, and for want of knowing this one thing, people
do most grossly mistake in abundance of points of Religion, and never come to
understand, and to know christ at al in that way that is propounded in the
Gospel. And that is the eighth thing.

Ninthly, In the Ninth place: the burden of the Law appears in this: that it
only opens to man his misery, and there leaves him; as if a Chyrurgeon should
open a wound, and there leave it, (as it were) in the open air. The Law tells
not man of any way of Redemption, of any way of deliverance, but merely shows
unto us our misery and so leaves us. I do not mean the law that is in the book
of the old testament, for there is Gospel mingled. I do not say that Moses does
not tell us of any way of Redemption; but I mean the Law of the Covenant of
works so far as that is revealed in Moses, and that is revealed in the new
Testament in a great p^rt of it; that only shows us our misery, and there
leaves us; but grace, and truth, and mercy, that comes in by Jesus Christ.

Tenthly, A tenth particular wherein the grievous bondage under the law
appears, is this. That it is such a Law as there can be no appeal from it, no,
nor no repealing of it, though it be thus strict, and thus severe, yet I say
there is no appeal from it, nor no repealing of it: there are many Laws that
we may appeal from one to another, or if that Law be hard it may be called in
again: we cannot appeal from the Authority of this law* nor can it, be
repealed. You will say, this excluds us from al help, though there be many hard
Laws made by men and as long as they stand in force people are in a very sad
Condition; yet there may be means to repeal them: but as for this Law there
can it seems be no appeal from it, nor repealing of it. May we not appeal
from Gods justice to Gods mercy seat? I have indeed spoken of such an
expression, but that expession must be warily understood, for the truth is
there is no proper appealing from the justice of God to his mercy; when the
sinner comes to Christ it has the pardon sealed in the Court of justice, as
well as in the Court of mercy; there is no soul that is saved, but Gods justice
is as well satisfied as his mercy is glorified, nor no repeal of this law. What
must the law stand in force then? yes, the law shall stand in force, and yet
there shall be thousands of souls saved. How is that you will say? This is the
mystery of the Gospel that the law shall stand in force, and yet men shall be
saved, there shall be a way to save men for all this, Certainly if the Law went
on in its course, one would think that it would carry on al mankind to eternal
destruction; yea, and so it would have done but only for this great Savior,
and redeemer Jesus Christ that calls Sinners to him, that they might have rest.
He comes and puts himself under the Law and what the Law requires, he does, and
he Suffers; so that here is all the alteration, the Law goes on, and has its
course, only whereas it might have required to have had the course of it upon
our selves in person; now God is content that it should have its course upon
our security. When a man owes a debt, the Law requires performance, its one
thing to have the law repealed, and an other to have the debtor delivered: if a
sure^^ will come and undertake the debt, he is delivered though he has not paid
it, and yet the law has its course; for the surety discharges what the debtor
should have done: so the way of salvation for any soul, it is not either by
appealing from the law, or by the repealing of the law: but we must look upon
the Law to have its course, only to have its course upon Christ our surety, who
has fully satisfied the law, and Christ looked thus upon, is the true object
of our faith, and except we apprehend Christ thus, as one made under the Law as
the Scripture says, and one that did endure the law to have its course upon
him, and so to satisfy the law: except we look upon Christ thus, we look not
upon him as the right object of our faith; and Christ he thus calls upon you
that are weary and heavy laden to come to him: as if he should say poor Sinners
that are under such a Covenant as this is, you know that though it be not
repealed I have come and put my self under this law, it has had its course
upon me; come to me, and the law shall be sattisfied, it shall have nothing to
say against you, but you shall have through rest in me: come therefore to me.

Eleventhly: The Eleventh thing in the Law is, That it is so far from inabling
us to perform that obedience which it requires, that (in regard of our own
wretched condition that we are now in) the more it comes to be revealed, the
more are our Corruptions stirred up; it does through our fault, not from any
fault in the Law, stir up our Corruptions so much the more. Luther compares it
to Water cast upon Lime, the Law coming into the heart being in its Natural
Condition till God oovercomes it by the Grace of the Gospel, is stirred up so
much the more. You have a notable expression for this in the example of Paul,
who felt it thus in himself, in Romans 7.5. For when we were in the Flesh, the
motions of sin which were by the Law, did work in our members to bring forth
fruit unto death; and again in ver. 8. For sin taking occasion by the
Commandment wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence. It took occasion by the
Commandment; there are many people that are the worse by hearing the Law
revealed unto them, until God pleases to overcome their hearts by the grace of
the Gospel. Now put all these together, and the soul that comes to be
enlightened to understand these, do you not think that such a soul will be
burdened? Is it not a burden to be in this Condition? Is it possible that the
soul can have any rest in this Condition? You will say, these things are hard
in themselves. But first if you did but understand the infinite holiness there
is in God, and the infinite Justice of God with whom you have to deal. And if
you did but understand the perfect Condition that God did make man in at the
first; present before your souls the infinite Holiness and Justice of the great
God with whom you have to do; and then present before your souls that perfect
state that God did make man in Innocence, and then these things will be clear
unto you. And if these things were only preached to you, and nothing else, they
would seem to be hard; but it is all in order to this Invitation of Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Three Conclusions arising from the former doctrine concerning the Burden under
the Law; Namely, 1. That man by Nature is in an evil case. 2. That it is a
mighty work to save a Soul. 3. That those vain thoughts whereby men think to
pacify their Consciences, will stand them in no stead.

NOw upon the hearing of these things, we may truly draw such Conclusions as
these.

First, That certainly man is in an ill case, by Nature. It is observed of the
people of Israel when Pharaoh did increase their bondage, the Scripture tells us
that the people saw that they were in an ill case; so when we understand what a
condition we are in under this bondage, we may conclude that verily man is in
an ill case by nature. Secondly, And a second Conclusion may be drawn hence.
That it is a mighty work to save a Soul; it is not a slight thing for a Soul to
come to be saved; there must be great things done by God to save a soul. Many
people, they confess it is true they are sinners, but they cry to God to have
mercy on them, and so they think it is presently done; but did you consider of
the condition that you are in naturally, and of the Righteousness of God, you
would then conclude it is a mighty work of God to save any soul, and that you
had need fall upon the seeking of your Salvation betimes.

And then Thirdly, Hence will follow this Conclusion also, That those vain
thoughts of men that they have had for pacifying their Consciences, and the
quieting of their hearts, will stand them in no stead. As thus: Many they reason
thus: I am not so bad as others. What if you be not; if you be under the Law,
you are cast a thousand thousand times over, You will say that you do some good
thing, and sometimes come to Church, and pray to God; but what is this to the
keeping of the Law; if thou be in thy natural estate, thy reasoning after
this manner does argue that thou do look after Salvation by what thou have
done, and for men to say; I do what I can, and I am sorry with all my heart
that I can do no better, these are not reasonings that will enable thee to stand
with comfort before the infinite Righteous God; thou must know in what state
thou art in under the Law, and how thou art cast by the Law; these are not
arguings that can bring rest to thy soul; if it could, Christ would never have
called in this manner; But you must know that such is your condition, that all
the Angels in Heaven, and men in the world cannot give rest to your souls; and
if you did understand this; you would thereby go away convinced of this truth;
well I see that there is a burden upon me, howsoever I have not been sensible of
it; and it is such a burden as will press me down to eternal misery, and I see
now by this that I have need of a Christ. Certainly if congregations were
sensible of this burden of the Law; Oh! How would their souls rejoice in this,
and praise the Lord that their ears are blessed to hear such a sound of the
Gospel as this, Come to me and I will give you Rest. I appeal to you whether the
opening of the Law be not of use to make you come to Christ; there are a great
many wanton spirits, that call those Ministers of God that seek out of
Conscience to do good to Souls, and to draw them out of their natural estates;
Legal men, Legal preachers and the like; I appeal to your consciences, upon the
knowledge of these things whether you will not come to know, the way of coming to
Christ better then you did before; if I should have named the name of Christ
five hundred times over and over again, would you have come to understand the
mystery of God in Christ, so much as by hearing what the difference is between
the first covenant of works, and being under the Law; and to tell you that
Christ came into the world to deliver us from this first covenant; he comes,
and takes our Nature upon him, and puts himself under the Law, that he might
free us from such a heavy yoke, and bondage; and in this blessed Scripture, he
calls all souls that do feel this yoke and burden to come to him that so they
might have rest. And thus much for this first Particular, what the bondage is
that the soul is under, that is under the Law; are you sensible of this? Christ
calls you; perhaps some of you may say, we have not been sensible of this; do
you begin to understand it? Does God begin to let in some light to you? Do you
begin to feel it something weighty upon your Hearts? Blessed be God for it, you
are so much the fitter to hear of the covenant of Grace. Now when you come
home, let the Husband say to the wife; we hear of two covenants as you have it
in the 4. of the Galla. 22. Here are two covenants, and these two are set out
in this Allegory of the bondwoman and the Freewoman, now til we come to
understand what the other covenant is, we are under the former covenant, the
covenant of works; this is that you should labor to understand; the Husband and
wife to ask one another of the difference between the two covenants; ask but
what the covenant of works is, and upon what terms that runs, and the covenant
of Grace; and upon what terms that runs; and so you will come especially to
understand that that follows in this text with more profit and advantage to
your Souls.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Burden of Legal Performances, What it is; With the burdensomness
thereof laid open in twelve Particulars. 1. There is no inward principle of
doing. 2. In men that are only under the Law, there is a principle contrary to
the performance thereof. 3. Such are wearied with doing, getting no supply of
strength to perform duty. 4. By their performances, they still contract more
Guilt upon their Souls. 5. What they do in Obedience unto the Law is only out
of fear. 6. And with much straitness of Spirit. 7. Nothing comes of such
Performances. 8. They that perform Duty in a mere Legal way, never attain their
end, which is, peace with God. 9. They know not whether God accepts of them, or
rejects them. 10. They are forced unto Duties instantly, presently, and upon
the sudden, though to the hinderance of other Duties of greater concernment*
which God requires of them, at the same time. 11. Though they go on ioyling,
yet know they not whether they shall bold out unto the end. 12. Their
Humiliation and trouble for not doing what they ought to do, binders them from
doing what God requires.

NOw there is one thing more that is as an Appendix unto the Burden of the Law,
flows indeed from, and is tied unto the burden of the Law, and that is, the
burden of Legal performances, not only the burden of the Law in regard of what
the Law requires, the perfect obedience that the Law requires, that burden
comes from the Law it self, but now there is a burden that many are under, a
very heavy and grievous burden, and that is, the burden of Legal performances,
and this is that that is to be the subject of this Chapter. I intend to go no
further then to speak of that burden to open it a little to you, and that as I
told you at the first opening of the text is the interpretation of Chrisostom
upon this text, You that are weary and heavy Laden, that is you that are laden
with the burden of seeking righteousness under the Law. Come unto me and I will
give you Rest.

First, I will show unto you what I mean by the burden of Legal Performances.

Secondly, What a great burden this is and how much evil there is in it, and so
apply my self to those that are under this burden to show to them how Christ
calls them here in this text to come to him, that they might have Rest.

First, that which I mean by the burden of Legal Performances is this, the
performing of duties that are required by the Law merely out of conscience,
because conscience puts men and Women upon those duties, and doing them in the
strength that they have of their own, and looking upon what they do as the
Righteousness which they must tender up to God, as Righteousness for life, now
this is a Legal performance; to perform duties in a Legal way is this, to do
what the Law requires merely out of conscience, because conscience tells me I
must do it, and to work in mine own strength though it be that that God gives,
yet but a natural strength, and to make account of this to be as my
Righteousness, and to tender it up unto God for Righteousness unto life, here
is a Legal performance, and this is to perform duties in a mere Legal way, and
those that do thus will find that this will be a very great burden to their
spirits, it is a burden unto the Spirits of those that do thus, unto the
spirits of such as are conscientious indeed, for we look not now upon men and
Women as performing Duties out of Hypocrisy to be seen of men to make a show
of what they have not in their Hearts, we do not speak of such, but we speak of
those that have got into a higher form beyond such kind of Hypocrites, such as
perform duties out of conscience, and yet rise no higher then looking at the
Law, that binds them to those duties and so tender them up to God as their
Righteousness, and do them for life, making account that this is the thing that
must bring them to life, such as do this and are not acquainted any further
with the mystery of the Gospel, they do go under a most grievous burden all the
days of their lives, I do not say that it is a burden to perform Duties that
conscience requires, when we do them to the Honor of God, in the strength of
Christ, as a work of the sanctification of this spirit, and as a fruit of our
thankfulness for the Grace and mercy of God in Christ to us, that is not a
burden, that is no burden at al, but to do them merely as being forced to them
by conscience, and as our Righteousness for life this is the burden, and though
there be no other principles that men and Women have but this, yet they may be
very conscientious so as not to dare to commit any known sin in secret, they
may make conscience of secret duties, yea they may be abundant in duties, that
is, do perform many duties. In the 6. of Micah, and the 7. what shall we do say
they, Shall we give Rivers of Oil and thousands of Rams, and the fruit of our
bodies for the sin of our souls, there you have the expressions of those that
are Legal, they would know what they should do, professing that they would be
willing to do any thing for to save their souls, offer thousands of rams and
Rivers of Oil for a sacrifice, so one that is merely Legal may perform many
Duties yea he may be conscientious of every Duty that he knows, there may be
a kind of universal obedience in him, to obey in all, so far as he knows, for
the outward action, he may make conscience of every thing that he knows to be
the mind of God, and yet do all this in a legal way, and his performance may be
rather a burden then that which shall do him good in the conclusion and bring
him to life: and except he does come to know furher then yet he does, to know
the evangelical performance of duties, he cannot have true rest in his soul.

Now this (as the other) is a point of great consequence to many, it may be
diverse that read this book may not so clearly understand what this is, they
may not feel any such thing in their one experience; but I suppose I shall
speak to some even to their hearts, and open their conditions to them, whereby
they shall say that they have not taken a right course to procure rest to their
souls, and to this end I speak that they may hearken to the blessed invitation
of the gospel to come unto Christ that they might have rest; as thus you
perceive a little what I mean by legal performances, now then we are to come
to show the burden of legal performances, that they are very burdensome to
those that are acquainted with nothing but to perform duties merely from the
law.

The first Burden of Legal Performances.
1. Because now they are put upon duties that they have no principle to do, to
be put upon a work where there is no inward principle; to do the work that must
needs be burdensome; conscience puts me upon the duty and that is right, but I
have no principle to do it, yet I must do it, conscience says so, whether I
have a principle or no, and though it is true I have no principle to do it so
as the Law requires, yet I may do some outward performances, now for me to go
about such a work, to endeavor and strive to do all the work that the Law
requires; not only the outward part but the wole work, and to be put upon to
strugle and strive to do that which I have no inward principle to do, that must
needs be burdensome. Al motions of nature that are from an external principle
are violent and so tedious, heavy and troublesome, so this motion to duty that
comes not from an inward principle of heart but is merely legal, conscience
stands to put the soul upon duty; but does not put any principle into the soul
to do it, this is a violent motion, and those that have the experience of this
find it tedious, heavy, and troublesome.

Now here lies the burden, for it is not according to those vain conceits of
men that the duty ought not to be done, because they have no inward principle
to do it, but here is the burden that conscience binds you to do it, you must
do it though you have no principle in you to do it.

The second burden of Legal performances.
2. Legal performances have a great burden in them, because there is in all men
that are but under the law before they come to be true believers sanctified by
the spirit of Christ, a contrary principle, a principle quite against those
duties, opposite unto them, there is a contrary stream in them, they go
against wind and tide, you know what a burdensome thing it is for the boatman
to go against wind and tide, he must put to a great deal of strength, so it is
here til the soul come to believe in Christ and to have the spirit of Christ,
having only conviction of conscience and being put upon duties, there are such
corruptions in the heart, and such evil principles in all men naturally, that
are as wind and tide against those duties; and yet says concience you must do
them though you find your inclinations to be never so strong another way, yet
conscience tells you you must do them, and when God is pleased to put strength
into conscience it will make a man or a woman to go on in duty though it be
never so cross to their own nature; you will say if it be cross to their own
natures why do they not leave it off? No they dare not, notwithstanding; so, it
is true, we shall show you afterward, that even godly men and beleivers are
burdened with corruptions, they have contrary principles to the duty too, I but
they are not so prevailing as with unbeleevers that are only legal, It is a
tedious thing you know to cast a stone upward, not only to cause a stone to
move any way, that is some trouble, because you keep it from its center, but to
put it upon a motion that is quite contrary to the principle, that is
burdensome, because al heavy things have principles in them that work
downwards, therefore to put them upon those things that are quite contrary to
their natural principles, it is a motion that will cause burden, and that
because you keep them from their own center: so conscience may keep a man and
woman from their own center, from those wicked courses that their natures are
inclined unto, and all the while they are kept from the course that their
natures do so strongly incline them unto, it must needs be burdensome to them,
until God come and sanctify their hearts, they may be a great while without
any sanctification, many whose consciences are convinced may go on in duties,
without sanctification in them.

The third Burden of Legal Performances.
3. One that goes on in the performance of duties in a legal way merely, is
weary and tired with what he does, and yet can find no strength coming in unto
him, no further ability to perform what conscience puts him upon, then he had
at first, nay rather less ability. Now this must needs be burdensome. As
suppose a man be put upon a work, and if he have no mind to it, that is
tedious, but if it be against the hair, quite opposite to his disposition,
that is more tedious; yet he must go on, and he toyls and wearies himself, and
yet the more he works the more grievous it is unto him, for he finds no
strength coming, but strength wearying rather, his strength wears a way, and
no strength comes in to assist him, and yet his work is as strong as it was,
that work must needs be burdensome; so those that are merely legal, they go on
still in duty, and the work is still as strong, but they are weaker, many a man
when he first sets upon a work is cold and benumbed, bur when he continues in
the work he gets warmth, and then it is not so burdensome unto him, but if he
continues in the work, and is colder and colder, this is very tedious, to those
that perform duties in a mere legal way, conscience puts them upon it at
first, and they go to duty with some vigor, but the truth is, they grow more
weary, and the work is more tedious, and yet conscience puts them upon as much
work as at first when a man has been at work and grows weary and desires ease
and a cruel task-master shall come and tell him there must be no decrease of your
work, nor no increase of your strength, this must needs be tedious; thus those
that perform duties in a legal way, conscience puts upon them as much work
when they are weary and tired as at first; here is the difference between the
works of sanctification and legal performances, though they seem to be hard at
first, yet while the soul sets upon them there comes in strength, and the more
work the more strength, they do not spend their strength and throw it away, and
grow more weary afterward then at first; but the more they have experience of
the ways, the more strength they have, they grow warm at their work, and being
warm they get further and further strength, and it grows easy unto them, but
it is not so with one that performs duties in a mere legal way, some have
been seven years in a profesion of religion and made conscience of their
duties, yet after seven years spent their hearts no more mortified then at
first, and they have got no more strength then, at first, their lusts are less
mortified, and their strength is less then at first, and therefore their work
must needs be grievous unto them.

The 4. Burden of Legal Performances.
4. Those that perform duties in a legal way merely, while they are striving
to do their duty, they are contracting still further guilt upon their souls,
they strive to do that that the law requires, and in their very striving they
are breaking of the law. You will say, so godly men while they are striving to
do their duty they sin also, there is imperfection in the best, I but yet their
sin is done away in Christ, their sin is not laid to their Charge, but those
that are merely legal, while they are striving, they sin and contract
Guiltiness upon their spirits, and it lies upon them, and they stand charged
with it. But then it may be said it were better that they did not strive, no
not so neither, conscience must have them strive, it would be a greater
guiltiness if they should not strive, though when they strive they stand
charged with further evil then before, now this is a grievous burden; as now if
a man were rolling a stone up a hill, and as soon as he had rolled it up, the
stone should come down upon him again, it would be a mighty tiresome work, it
is so with those that are merely legal, while they are in duty, in working,
still corruption brings them down again, and they contract continually
guiltiness upon their souls.

The 5. Burden of Legal Performances.
5. Those that perform duties in a mere legal way; what they do, they do
merely out of fear, they are put upon it in a forcible and rigorous way, they
are put upon al their duties in a rigorous way, merely by force and constraint,
if you put a man to do a thing merely by force, it is very tedious to him, and
especialy when your forcing of him is with rigor, as those that are slaves they
are not only exhorted to do their duty, but with blows and slashes they are
set upon their duty, now this is very burdensome: if indeed they might be put
upon it with love, gentle, and fair cariages, they should do as much as they do
with a great deal more ease, but when al means that is used is rigorous and
forcible this makes their lives burdensome unto them; so it is here, they that
are legal, perform duties, but how? the terror of the law, the flashes of hell
fire in their conscience, and the fear of the Judgments of God come unto them,
except you do this you may fear that the Judgments of God will pursue and follow
you. In the night season when they are in the dark they are filled with
terror, and when this terror comes upon them then they must go to prayer though
they have no mind to go to prayer, for their conscience else will fly in their
faces in the day time, these are just like the Children of Israel in Egypt, the
task masters put them upon their work with rigor, that their very lives were
tedious to them, whereas those that are sanctified they go to perform duties
out of love and so their duties are sweet and delightful to them.

The 6. Burden of legal performances.
6. From hence follows that those that are merely legal in their performances,
they do their duty with much straitness of spirit, they have no inlargment of
heart usually, very rarely in any thing they do, but they do it (if they do do
it) in a dull manner, and a dead way, merely the work done and no more, their
spirits are excedingly strait, pray they must, so much time they spend in
prayer, but when they are risen from prayer they find their hearts are as strait
as ever, I do not say but a godly man or woman may be so at sometimes, but when
duties are performed in a legal way, this is constantly so, and Oh what a
burden is this to a soul, to think that I can never go into the presence of God
but I have still a dead, straight heart, others have enlarged hearts, but I do
the duty and nothing comes of it, I feel my heart altogether straightened in the
duty and so I go on in the rounds, but still am straitened, dead, and dull in the
performance of the duty.

The 7. Burden of Legal Performances.
7. Those that perform duties in a mere legal way, find nothing to come of
their duties, but are merely as a horse in the mil, go the rounds, or as if a
man were to rive or cleave a knotty piece of wood, he strikes, but the
knottiness of the wood gives the rebound to the axe and wedges, and he can make
no mark of it, though a man strive and work hard, yet if he finds his work
goes on, here is some comfort, but when he works and works, and it continues so
still, this is burdensome. If a man should be set to pull a logg out of a ditch,
and enjoined to work from morning to night, and he pulls and pulls all the day,
and it stirs not, is no further on in his work at night then he was in the
morning, and he must go to it the next day and nothing comes of his work this
is very tedious, so it is with those that are merely legal in their
performances, they find little or nothing comes of al their performances and
this must needs be very burdensome: you that have been thus burdened, know,
this very text concerns you, and Christ has thoughts of you and calls you to
himself and says, Come to me, as if Christ should say, certainly there is
another way for you to have ease and rest to your souls, it is true you must go
on and do your duty; but you must come to know me in the gospel before yo^
(...) have ease and rest to your souls.

The 8. Burden of Legal Performances.
8. Those that perform duties in a mere legal way, the the truth is, let them
^oll never so much in that way, they can never attain to their end; let them
^oil never so much, perform duties never so many, increase their duties a
thousand fold, yet they can never attain unto their end* Their end what is
that? you will say, Their end is, that they might have peace with God, live and
have eternal life; it is true, base hipocrites look at profit, many will make a
show of religion, get into houses, and talk of good things, that they may get
good cheer, meat and drink, and a little gain, being of a poor, and unworthy
Spirit, but I speak of those that are grown higher then thu^, those that
perform duties out of conscience, and yet never attain to their end, nor never
will attain to their end in this way, til they come to know more of Christ; I
speak of such as desire rest to their souls, yet in this way of legal
performances never gain this rest to their souls, and and therefore it must
needs be burdensome unto them.

The 9. Burden of Legal Performances.
9. Those that perform duties, in a mere legal way, they go on and perform
duties, but whether God accepts of them, yea or no, they cannot tell, do them
they must, but whether God be their enemy or their friend they cannot tell,
tender up duties to God they do every day, but whether they tender them up to
an enemy or a friend they do not know; sometimes they have perhaps some good
hopes that God accepts them, but never come to any knowledge of Gods acceptance,
they go up and down continually with Jealous thoughts of God, fearing lea^ ^od
will take advantage of them at the last, this mus^ ^e burdensome. Many poor
souls have gone on in t^ ^tion, one seven years after another, and al for the
of coming to Jesus Christ for rest unto their souls, then comes rest to the
heart of a sinner when it knows and can say upon good ground, though my heart
have much corruption, though my duty have much imperfection, yet through a
covenant of grace what I do the Lord accepts of me, whereas the other never
comes to know that God does accept them though they perform their duties never
so well.

The 10. Burden of Legal Performances.
10. Those that perform duties in a mere legal way, their spirits are hurried
on to do the work, to do the thing that conscience requires, although in regard
of their weakness, the doing of such a thing, at such a time, will hinder the
doing of other duties that God requires of them, but yet do it they must, I do
not say duties are not to be done at this time, but such things as conscience
tells them are good they are hurried on to do them presently, though in regard
of their weakness the doing of them now does hinder them from doing other
things of more consequence: as we find by experience many that are weak, yet
under the command of conscience and are in a legal way, suddenly there comes
such a thing into their minds, I must spend so much time in prayer, says
conscience you cannot do too much for God, and why should you not spend so much
time for God, now by this means they are hurried on to do the duty, though by
the doing of it at that time, they shall hinder themselves in the performance of
many other duties afterward, and I have known by experience many that have
been greivously burdened this way, what they presently apprehend to have any
good in it, that they think they must do, although they by that be hindered in
the performance of many other duties afterward, whereas now if we were
acquainted with the liberty we have in Christ we would be able to satisfy our
selves this way, though I am weak now, yet I can appeal to God that my heart
is upright, and though I do forbear the doing of such a thing that in its own
nature is good, yet my conscience tells me, it is not through a wilful neglect
of what may glorify God, nor because I would neglect any duty that God would
have me do, but because I know through my weakness the doing of this at this
time will hinder me in the Service of God otherways: therefore I believe that
God will accept of me in Christ and pardon my infirmities; thus the Soul can do
that is in Christ, but those that are Legal, conscience puts them upon Duties,
without regarding their strength, and so puts them upon strong Duties when they
are in the weakest Capacity, when they are weakest, conscience will put them
upon the strongest Duty, now this is for the want of the knowledge of their
liberty in Jesus Christ, for they have this liberty in Christ, that Christ
accepts of them according to what they are able to do, the Gospel holds forth
this acceptance, that let them go on to do what they are commanded in
uprightness, and though they cannot do such Duties because they are weak, yet
God accepts of them for Christ sake, which one that is Legal cannot do but
conscience hurries him on to do the Duty when he is most weak, and so he does
less for God then otherwise he would or should do.

The 11. Burden of Legal Performances.
11. Those that perform Duties in a mere Legal way go on toyling but still they
do not know whether they shall hold out or no; I go on and do my Duty, but what
will become of me God knows, I do not know whether I shall hold out or no, I am
afraid that when I have done al, labored and toyled what I can, that I shall
prove an apostate, a backslider at last, thus they have many such jealousies of
themselves, as they are full of jealousies of God, so of themselves they are
afraid of themselves, well, if troubles and afflictions come I shall fall off and
turn, and manifest that I was but an Hypocrite and always unsound, now, these
very thoughts makes their lives and Duties burdensome unto them, whenas one
that has the benefit of the freedom of the Gospel, one that is in Christ, he
can go on; well, though I am but weak yet I have an everlasting principle that
will hold, for I do it by the strength that is everlasting, though I be weak yet
I am fastened to that that is everlasting, I am carried on by such a principle
that will hold on to everlasting life, and Oh! what a rest is this, here is rest
indeed, for the soul to know that though I am weak yet I shall hold on to
everlasting life, whenas one that is Legal he is ever jealous and he thinks,
what do I this for, I shall fall off at last, and so goes on heavily and is
troubled in his thoughts, and this makes both his Duties and his life
burdensome, still I say Christ calls upon al these to come unto him, still there
is a rest in Jesus Christ, it is impossible we should speak of all these things
at once, but now I would only find out those that Christ calls, you that find it
thus that are ready to say, just as it is said in the word, I find it in my
heart, I only speak to you to raise up your Hearts to attend to what is further
to be said afterward; only remember that of the poor blind man, when Christ
called him, they comforted him with this, be of good comfort he called thee, so
I say to you that Labor under this burden and long to know the true liberty of
spirit that the Saints have in Christ, Christ calls to you and says, Come unto
me al ye that are weary and heavy Laden and I will give you Rest.

The 12. Burden of Legal Performances.
12. Those that are thus Legal, their consciences put them upon performances of
Duties, but their Humiliation and trouble for not doing of what they ought to
do, does hinder them from doing what God requires, and this is a sad condition,
that when I have not done my Duty, and am troubled for not doing my Duty, that
does hinder me from doing my Duty, whereas those that have Evangelical
Humiliation, it makes them more fit to do duty, the other it makes them more
unfit, their hearts are more sullen, fretful, and untoward, and this is a sad
condition, that not only they fail in other Duties, but when they are troubled
for this they fail mo^e* first they fail of their Duties, and their hearts are
hardened a great while, and then they Complain, that their Hearts are hardened
and that they cannot be Humbled for their sin, after this complaint they begin
to be troubled for their sin, and then on the other side when they are troubled
after such away as they grow sullen and discontented, vexing and fretting of
themselves, and by this they come to be hindered as much in the performance of
their Duty as by the hardness of their hearts before; some are hindered by their
hardness of heart from performing of Duty, and others by their humility: now
this is a very great burden, you may some of you find it in your own
experience, that the trouble of your Heart has rather hindered you then
furthered you in Duty, as in Exodus when Moses came to the Children of Israel,
the text says they did not harken unto him, because of the anguish of their
hearts, so there is many people that have such Legal trouble in their Hearts
and that for their sins, as it does hinder them from harkening unto the blessed
sound of the Gospel, it makes them more unfit to harken to the invitation of
Christ to come unto him, yea such kind of trouble they have for their sin that
makes them as it were reason away the blessed comfort in the Gospel to their
Soul.

CHAP. X.
The Sad condition of such as are under the Burden of Legal Performances set
forth in Six Particulars. 1. That which should be accounted their happiness, is
their Misery. 2. It is a means to cause hard thoughts of God. 3. It causes
great discouragement. 4. They bring an evil report upon the ways of God. 5.
They keep no proportion therein. 6. They are kept off from Christ.

NOw that which remains is to show you the sad condition of men and women that
are under this Legal Performance, that are in this condition; we shall find that
the condition is very sad and insupportable to many: and this text will appear
to be a text of wonderful mercy, if we do set out before you the sadness and
grievousness of those that are under this Burden.

The first Misery.
First, Is not this a sad thing, that that thing which should be the chief joy
of ones heart in this world; which we should account our priuiledg, happiness,
and the beginning of eternal life; that we should account that a misery to us,
as thus, the performance of Duty, to do that which God calls for, we should
account it our privilege, happiness, and the beginning of eternal life. And
indeed it is so, if we do it in the way that God requires, but now one that is
under this burden does the things in the mere outward act, but does them as
necessary evils, accounts them as evil things, only he cannon avoid them; this
man and woman's condition is very sad, that that which others accounte their
happiness, life, and Glory, he accounts as his Misery.

The Second Misery.
Secondly, there is this evil also in the burden of Legal performances, that
this is a means to cause hard thoughts of God, and if God go no further with
them then this, that they perform Duties in a Legal way, this will occasion many
hard thoughts of God and of his ways, and they may find that they have so,
many times when their hearts are pinched with this burden, they have many hard
thoughts of God, and hard thougths of his Law, and hard thoughts of his ways,
this is very grievous when the soul comes to find the commandments of God to
be grievous and so to murmr and repine against God as many do that are in
trouble of conscience, they go on in Duties but because they get no peace, nor
comfort, nor Mastery over their corruptions, they begin to repine and murmr
at God, say they: I have done thus and thus, and I have performed Duties and
nothing comes of them, and there upon they begin to leave and hate them.

The Third Misery.
Thirdly, there is this evil also in the burden of Legal performances that it
causes a sinking discouragement; their heart does sink in exceeding
discouragment, after a while they go on in performance of Duties and find
nothing comes of it, and they sink under it in discouragment; they think it is
in vain to go any further, and they are desirous to cast it off wholly, and
think it is the only way for their ease and rest, hence follows, that therefore
there is a way open to temptation for the Devil to come and tempt them either
to looseness or to despair: it is many times the end of such poor creatures
except God be pleased to come in and reveal Christ unto them; one of these two
is the Conclusion, either they cast off the Duties that before they made
conscience of, and so grow to be loose and profane; or otherwise if conscience
pursues them more and more they grow to despair, and sometimes upon their sick
bed and death bed, come into a raving and raging distemper; as by experience we
find that many after they have been a long time under a troubled conscience,
and gone on in a Legal way they have grown very profane; there was a time that
they durst not neglect Duty in their family and closet, but they come afterward
to think that this was but Legal, and now they cast them off, and give
themselves to looseness, and then they have nothing to plead for themselves but
this, that they were under Legal performances, and they leave them off, and
thus they go this way to Rest, but Oh! woeful this is to go to the Devil for
Rest, if you had come to Christ you might have had Rest, but these give up
their Souls to the Devils Rest, and grow to looseness and are notoriously
scandalous in in their lives, I suppose if you will observe it, you need not go
far to find examples in this kind: but others that cannot get the Mastery of
their consciences, they grow to despair, when they come upon their sick beds
their hearts are overwhelmed with despair and so they die; Now Oh! what pity it
is to loose such Souls as have gone thus far in the way of Religion. As thus:
First, they do the same things that Gods people do for the outward act, they do
the same things the Saints do. Secondly, They are very Conscientious of what
they do, make conscience of their very thoughts, and of their secret ways.
Nay, Thirdly, they know they have to do with God in every thing, they have
their hearts so wrought upon, that they set themselves in the presence of God
always. Nay, Fourthly, They have the fear of God the fear of eternity upon
their hearts continually, and yet perish at last; and al for the want of
knowledge of the Gospel: it is true these men say right, that if their were any
such who did put them upon Duties and not open to them the Rest that is in the
Gospel and in Christ, if they did so, they are rightly blamed for putting men
upon Duties, God forbid that any that take upon them to preach the mind of God
unto people should rest here, in merely putting of men upon the performance of
Duties, for we know to be under the Law and to do Duties in a mere Legal way;
is a most fearful burden, but now this is our work, to invite you to come to
Jesus Christ that you might have Rest, if there be any that knows what it is to
be burdened with Legal performances, the maine thing I shall do is to invite
them to come to Jesus Christ, and we shall I Hope bring them to their Rest,
seeing Christ does invite them so graciously to come unto him for their Rest.

The Fourth Misery.
Fourthly, there is this evil in the burden of Legal performances, that they
who perform duties in a Legal way, do bring an evil report upon the ways of
God, for they go always heavily and dully on in Gods ways, and so they bring
an ill report upon the ways of God, whereas when the Heart is sanctified and
carried on by a divine principle, such a one makes the ways of God beautiful
and lovely to those that they converse withal, but they that perform Duties
merely in a Legal way they go on so Pensively, sadly, and dully, that there is
no beauty at al in their Conversation, and they make others afraid of those
ways that are so tedious and irksome to them.

The Fifth Misery.
Fifthly, There is this Evil in the burden of Legal performances: that those
that perform Duties merely in a Legal manner they do not keep any proportion in
the ways of God and in their Duties, but merely according to the stirring of
conscience, if conscience be awakened and stirred then they are careful to
perform duties, but if conscience do not stir them they are careless again and
therefore those that do perform Duties in this manner, you shall not observe an
evenness in their ways, but sometimes they are very strict and dare not for
their Lives omit any Duty, but at other times they are loose again, for it is
according to the beating of their consciences, they do not work according to
the new Nature, for that which works according to a new Nature works in an even
way, wherein is a proportion between one Duty and another, and this may be an
argument of trial whether that that you do be from the change of Nature, or
from other principles; if there be a proportion between one duty and another,
you be not very forward in something and backward in another, that is a sign it
is done from a new Nature, but if you make conscience of some thing, and at
other times in other things take more liberty this is a sign that what you do
is but Legally done, and this must needs be burdensome: as it is a burden to a
man to go upon uneven ground one Leg up and another down, so for a man to
perform Duties up and down, forward and backward, here is a Great deal of
burden in that way, whereas those that come to perform Duties by the spirit of
God, in them their way is made even for them; not but that Gods people may
sometimes be better then they are at other times, yet there is generally an
evenness and proportion between their actions.

The Sixth Misery.
Sixthly, there is this evil in the burden of Legal performances, that if so be
that by these Duties their consciences come to be quieted, then they are kept
of from Jesus Christ, there are no people more kept of from Jesus Christ, then
those that perform Duties in a Legal manner, and have quiet of Conscience that
way, ye^ not only kept from Christ, but further, they set up their Duties in
the place of Christ, and make them to be their very justification; what is it
that many people would present before the Lord for their Righteousness and Hope
of Heaven, but performance of such and such Duties, that the Law requires: now
here is a mighty mistake though we are bound to obey Gods Law, yet for us to
come and make this our Righteousness before God, and set it up before the Lord
to be our interest for eternal life, this is to put Jesus Christ out of his
office, and make our own Duties to be our Saviors, this now is exceeding
dangerous, and yet how many people are there that do thus, and therefore I have
been willing to be the Larger in this Point because it is not an argument that
we do every day meet withal, and also because I would have many whose
Consciences begin to be enlightened and much troubled to know where they are,
what is the ground of their trouble, and where the bottom of their trouble
lies; there are many people that are so far to be beloved, that they are very
conscientious of Duty and abstein from those sins that others live in, and
perform Duties that others neglect, but they go on very heavily and sadly for
many years together, and the truth is, they know not the ground of their
trouble, from whence their trouble comes: now by that that I have opened to you
in this Point, you may come to know whence al your trouble comes, whence it
comes to pass that you have gone on in that sadness and heaviness as you have
done, you have done your duties in a Legal way, you have not been acquainted
with the way of the Gospel. You will say, what is that way, how shall we be eased
of this burden, when I come to that, there I shall show in some measure the Rest
that we have in Christ from al those burdens, that I have opened, Christ will
not have us omit duties every a whit the more, but in Christ we shall see how
they are performed with a great deal more ease then before, not more easy to
the flesh, but in the spirit, and whosoever you are that are under this Burden
of Legal performances, if your hearts tell you this is my condition, the Lord
knows it is my condition, I have indeed made conscience of my ways a great
while, but I have gone on just in this Legal way as has been showed in this
Point: if this be your condition, so far be comfort to you, and know that Jesus
Christ calls you, it is true, your condition is for the present sad, yet there
is help, Hope, and Remedy in Christ, come to him and he has promised to give
you Rest, and teach you to honor God, that shall be more comfort to your Souls
than this way you are in, the way of the Gospel is a safe way, and a speedy way
for comfort, and it is as holy a way too, therefore the way of the Gospel does
not call to you to make less conscience of your Duties than you did; No, but it
is as holy a way, and a more safer and speedier way than that now you are in,
Christ calls you.

Quest. But you will say, Does Christ call to these to come to him for Rest, as
if he did approve of their condition, and as if it were a thing that ought to
be that people ought to be burdened by these Legal performances.

Answ. There are some of the burdens here, that it is true ought to be, and
Christ approves of them, that is to be sensible of the guilt of our sins and
the remaining part of corruption, etc. and Christ calls these as approving of
them so far as they are good, though not truly good, but there are other
burdens that are upon sinners that Christ calls to come to him to be eased of,
not as they are approved of by Christ, but Christ pities them, and has
compassion upon those that are under those burdens, as being under a great
misery, as now when a man shall make Conscience of his ways, when Christ shall
see a poor soul to make Conscience of his ways, to have the fear of God and
his eternal estate upon him, to Labor and do what he can and all this while not
in the right way, but thinking by this to make up his Righteousness with God
and eternal life, Christ sees that al his labor will come to nothing, if he go
on in this way he will loose all his Duties, and notwithstanding all the
conscience he makes of holy Duties he will perish at last, except he comes to
understand the way of the Gospel, of justifying sinners before his tribunal
fear, notwithstanding all the Duties he performs, except he come to understand
this he will perish, now in pity and tender compassion to such a Soul that has
done so much and gone so far, the Lord Christ does call such a Soul to come to
him, that it may have Rest and peace, that indeed it might have that
Righteousness that may make it stand with comfort before the great God, and
come to have eternal life at last, but for our coming to Christ and our Rest
in him, that belongs to the other Point, Thus much for the opening of the
burden of Legal performances.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Burden of Corruption, And that there is Corruption in the Saints. Being
a Burden. 1. Of Grief. 2. Of Shame. 3. Of Fear. 4. Of Care. 5. Of Labor, and
Toil.

THe next Burden is the Burden of the remaining part of Corruption in the
Saints, those that are godly and have their part in Christ, and have come to
Christ already but yet they must come again and again, that is though they be
believers and have exercised Faith to unite them to Christ, they have still
remaining in them much Corruption, much Sin, they must come to Christ again to
be eased of their Corruption, and still all the days of their Lives to be
exercising of Faith in Christ, to be eased of the Burden of remaining
Corruption that is in them.

That the Corruption that yet remains in the Hearts of the Saints is a Burden,
I suppose every one of you can witness, that are godly, there is no godly man
or woman in the world but knows what the meaning of this Point is, perhaps the
other Point of Legal performances was such a Point that many of you scarce
understood what it was, but because I knew it was of exceeding use to others,
though it might not be understood of many, they must not loose their portion;
but there is none that has any spark of godlyness but do and will understand
what I mean, and what I shall say in this Point of the burden of Corruption that
does still remain in the godly, in the best that live upon the Earth, and that
every one acknowledges, it is in every man's mouth almost, we are al sinners,
but now here is the Difference between the wicked and the godly, the wicked
have sin enough in them, but it is no burden to them, but the godly have their
sins to be their burden, the remainder of sin though it be never so little, it
is a most grievous Burden unto them, and to these I am to speak out of this
text, yea Christ himself speaks to them, Come unto me, ye that are Laden with
the Burden of Corruption, the burden of sin that still remains in you, Come to
me, and I will give you Rest in regard of that Burden.

Now to prove that there is a remainder of corruption in the godly that is a
burden to them, I will give you but one scripture that shall serve instead of the
rest, and that is in Romans 7.24. O! wretched man that I am says Paul who shall
deliver me from this body of death, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
here we have indeed a co^mentary upon this text, who shall deliver me says Paul
O! Wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death, there is
the first part, the burden of corruption and then he runs to Christ, I thank
God through Jesus Christ, So then I my self with my mind serve the law of God,
but with my flesh the Law of sin, I have got ease and rest by Christ by running
to him, but mark the scripture, O; wretched man that I am, Paul though a godly
man and one eminent in grace, yet had remaining in him a body of death, his sin
that was in him, he calls a body of death, it was as a deadly thing unto his
heart, and it was as a body because it was made up of many members as a body
is, there were many sins remaining in him, and all the faculties of his soul and
members of his body were defiled with sin, and therefore he calls it a body of
death. Now the Apostle is so sensible of this, that he gives a grievous shreek
as it were, O! wretched man that I am, he counts it his misery, in that it
appears to be a burden, and then he shreikes out under his burden, O! wretched
man that I am, As a man or woman that has a burden laid upon their shoulders
and being not able to bear it, they give a grievous shreik at the burden
falling upon them, so does the Apostle here. And observe further that the
Apostle Paul had as much of the burden of affliction upon him as ever any one
had; no man had more of the burden of affliction then he had as you may read in
the Cor. 1.4. and Cor. 2.4. the afflictions of Paul were exceeding grievous,
there was never any more abused then he was, he tells you of being stoned,
suffering of shipwrake, and abused of his own countri-men, that he suffered
nakedness and hunger, and was whipped as if he had been the most notorious rogue
in all the country, he had the burden of disgrace upon him, accounted the
off-scowring of the world, and the burden of poverty, wanted clo^ and bread,
and was fain to go up and down from place to place, yet notwithstanding these
burdens upon him, you never read that Paul did account himself a wretched man
in regard of these burdens, you never read that Paul cried out, O! wretched man
that I am that I want ^read, (...) I want clothes, O wretched man that I am
whipped, and abused, he does not cry, out, O! wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from affliction, who shall deliver me from persecution no, we find in
scripture that he rejoiced in affliction, when he was cast into dungeons he
could sing psalms, and when he had the whip, he could sing psalms and rejoice,
but when he comes to his sin then he falls under that burden, who shall deliver
me from that, as if he should say, O! Lord let me be never so much afflicted
here in this world, yet if I cold have my soul delivered from this burden of
my sin, I should account my self a happy man, and yet he was delivered from the
guilt of sin for he knew he should never go to hell for his sin, and he was
delivered from the dominion of his sin to, and yet he cries out under this
burden of his sin, who shall deliver me. I appeal unto many of you what closet
or secret chamber of yours can ever witness that you were thus crying out in
respect of your sin, O wretched man or woman that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin, from this wretched heart that I have, many of you we
hear cry out of poverty, disgrace, and trouble in your families and the like,
but who of you cries out who shall deliver me from this body of death, from this
sin of my nature; many of you perhaps do not know whether you are delivered
from the guilt of your sin, you do not know whether any of your sins are
pardoned, you are not delivered at al, and yet you do not cry out, but Paul he
was delivered from the guilt of his sin, yet the very remainder of sin in his
heart was a burden to him, there is much sin in many of your hearts, and you
cry not out of it, Paul he was delivered and yet he crye^ out of it, who shall
deliver me from this body of death.

But now to open this, I shall show, First how man^ ways the remaining part of
corruption is a burden to the Saints.

Secondly, What kind of burden it is.

Thirdly, Open the particulars, showing that sinful nature is a burden, and the
stirring of corruption a burden, and the prevailing of corruption a burden.

Fourthly, Why it is that God does so in his providence order things, that his
own saints shall be under the burden of corruption, and so make some
application of it.

First, Then in what respect the remaining part of sin and corruption in the
heart of the saints is a burden.

The First burden of Corruption.
First, It is a burden of grief unto them, you know grief causes heaviness
and sadness, now the remainder of corruption that they find in them, it is as
lead and lies heavy upon their spirits in regard of grief, it is the cause of
their grief and trouble; some will say perhaps sometimes to others, such and
such that are professors of religion they go very sadly and heavily, and when
once you come to be so strict in your way, you will loose al your comfort, for
such and such are always sad and pensive, but do you know what is the reason
of their sadness, you have as much cause to be sad as they, the burden is not
because they are religious, but because they are no more religious, not because
now they do more duties then they did before, but because they cannot find
their hearts come up to their duties as they would, do not atribute their grief
to their godlyness, but rather say to thy self thus, if they that do so much
for God, are yet so much troubled and greived, because they do no more for God,
how much cause of trouble and grief have I then, that do nothing at al for God.

The Second burden of Corruption.
Secondly, The remaining part of corruption in the hearts of the saints, it is
a burden of shame, grief is a burden, and shame is a burden, many that can
bear great burdens, that can bear the burden of poverty yet are not able to
bear the burden of disgrace, especially to those that are most ingenious, it
is one of the greatest burdens in the world, now the saints they are ashamed of
the corruption that remains in them, they account it a shame before the Lord
and before his blessed Angels, and in regard of themselves, what they know of
themselves that the world knows not of, they look upon it as ashame that they
do even loath and abhor themselves as the scripture speaks; it may be their
lives are such as others do honor and have high thoughts of them, but they
being acquainted with their own hearts, and looking into the secret working of
their own spirits, they see so much evil there, as they see much cause to abhor
and loath themselves, and to lie down in their shame before the Lord, whom they
know does see into their hearts a great deal more then they can see
themselves. I will appeal to any one that knows his own heart, if God should
open your heart and make it known to your friends and acquaintance so much evil
as is in your heart in the performing of one duty, if al men should know so
much evil as is in your heart at one time, in prayer or hearing a sermon, would
you not be ashamed, now God knows and sees all the baseness and vildness of
your spirits, and the godly knowing this, they cannot but be ashamed and go
under this burden of shame with heavy hearts.

The Third burden of Corruption.
Thirdly, The remaining part of Corruption in the hearts of the godly, it
carries with it a burden of fear, fear you know is a great burden as well as
grief and shame though the evil be not so great upon them, yet if their be an
evil apprehended to come upon them, it is a great burden to them, as those that
dare not go out of doors in the night because of fear, or dare not be in the
dark because of fear, when they are delivered from their fears, do they not
account that it was a great burden, now the godly they have a great deal of
fear upon their hearts, and the truth is those that are godly they fear more
what their own evil hearts should bring upon them, then what all the devils in
hell and all the creatures in the world can bring upon them, and that is a good
fear, but yet it makes them walk heavily: others fear, sometimes they fear
men, fear those that will come and take away their estates and undo them, fear
their enemies or fear the devil, but one that is godly he fears more his own
heart, the evil that may come to his soul by that, then all the hurt that all the
devils in hell can do to him, for they cannot afflict more then the body, I but
this brings an evil upon the soul, it breaks their communion between them and
God, and therefore they are afraid of sin before it comes, they have experience
of their hearts what evil it has done to them, and so are afraid of
miscarrying, and afraid of the evil consequences of their sin, they do not know
what mischief their sin might possibly bring upon them, and so they go under
this burden of fear along time together, even those that are truly godly.

The Fourth burden of Corruption.
Fourthly, The remaining part of corruption in the hearts of the saints, is a
burden of care, for men and women to be always careful, to be full of care, you
know that is a great burden that many of you are acquainted with, that when you
have a great deal of business upon you and much lies upon you, when your
thoughts are full of care, is it not a great burden to you? many men that have
been full of business, and afterward have got over their business, what a
freedom do they account it, the saints they have a burden of care upon them,
because they find so much to do with their own hearts that they had need be
watchful night and day over them, they have had experience what their hearts
have done, when there has not been a strict watch over them, and therefore
there is no Child of God but if he be in a right temper he is a careful man, so
long as we live in this flesh our condition is full of fears, and so we must
neds be full of care in this world, though there be a great deal of difference
between the distracting care that wicked men have about their outward estate,
and the care of the godly about keeping their peace with God, making up their
peace with God, avoiding the occasions and temptations to sin, and recovering
themselves again when they have been overcom by sin, I say this must needs make
them full of care, when a man has a great business upon him he is full of care,
there is no men in the world that have so much business upon them as such a man
and Woman that is godly, they know that they have greater business that lies
upon them, then all the world besides, the care of the whole world lies upon
them, yea and they have not only business of great consequence upon them, but
multitude of business, the life of a Christian is a busy life, a life of a
great deal of business, a Christian Woman has abundance of business to do,
and therefore it is a most vild thing for one that professes he^ self to be a
Christian, to be idle and to spend her time vainly, have thou nothing to do?
you speak of passing away time, a godly man or woman has enough to do they
have to provide for eternity, and to make their peace with God. And besides
there is multitud^ of business upon them and they have multituds of hindrances
too, if you have great business, multitude of business, and multitudes of
hindrances, and especially if you are undone if you should miscarry, this now
will make you very careful. A man though he should miscary in the world, it is
not so great an evil, as for a Christian to miscary in any one duty that he
does perform, a Christian when he goes to perform a duty he thinks thus, I
must now cause all the faculties of my soul to be working in every duty that God
calls for, well, and if I miscarry in the duty I look upon it as a greater evil
then if I were undone in my estate, or body, and I find abundance of
hindrances, that will endanger me to miscarry, therefore I must needs be very
careful; now in Christ there is a great deal of ease in this respect, those
that are acquainted with the way of Christ, they are mightily eased of the
burden of care, now those that do perform duties and do not come to Christ, so
much as they are kept off from Christ, so much the more will the burden of care
be, not only those that perform duties in a legal way have the burden of care
upon them but the Godly also.

The Fifth Burden of Corruption.
Fifthly, The Corruption that remains in us it brings a burden of Labor and
toil, for there is no such intensiveness in any labor in the world as a
Christian has against his corruptions, he does not only say as many slight
and vain spirited men and women do, Lord have mercy upon me, and we are al
siners, and I would do otherwise I have good desires: no, but a Christian
knows that he must draw forth all the faculties of his soul and bend them
against his corruption, and if ever he Toil, Labor, and spend his strength, it
must be in this way against his corruption, now there is ease in Christ for
this burden too, Why? because Christ gives power against corruption, the way of
rest in him is by coming to him, so that we shall not need to toil and Labor in
them as before; now if grief be a burden, shame a burden, Fear a burden, care
a burden, and if Laboring and Toiling be a burden, then those that are Godly
are under a great burden in regard of their Corruption, this five-fold burden.

CHAP. XII.
The Burden of Corruption set forth in eight particulars. 1. It is a soul
burden. 2. It has al other burdens in it. 3. It is a Continual burden. 4. It
makes al other things to be a burden. 5. It is a burden to God himself. 6. It
makes the sins burdensome to al others. 7. It makes him burdensome to himself.
8. How grievous soever, we cannot be rid of it in this life.

FUrther for the properties of this burden, what a kind of burden it is, that
the people of God fell under their corruptions.

The First property of the burden of Corruption.
First it is a soul-burden, other burdens are rather bodily, it is easier for a
man to bear a burden upon his shoulders, then to bear a burden upon his
conscience, their it lies with torment, and the burden of corruption it is a
burden upon our very consciences. Many heretofore have said that people must be
content to bear, though things were required of them that ought not to be, if
they went under them as a burden they thought they were well enough; many things
that were in the worship of God, false worship, they would say, for their parts
they could be content they were otherwise, and they went under them as a
burden, and they thought that was enough. It is true, if it was only a burden
of our estates that it was only in outward things it was something, but when it
comes to the burden upon our consciences, we must learn to distinguish between
the burden upon our shoulders, and between the burden upon our consciences, and
so many Christians they could bear burdens upon their shoulders as well as
others, but they could not bear any burdens upon their Consciences.

The Second property of the burden of Corruption.
Secondly, It contains in it almost al other burdens, as thus, is poverty a
burden, sin makes us poor, is dishonor a burden, sin brings dishonor, is debt,
for a man to be in debt, a burden, sin brings that too, forgive us our debts
says Christ, he teaches us so to pray, sin therefore has al other burdens in
it, and therefore a great burden.

The Third property of the burden of Corruption.
Thirdly, Sin is a burden that is Constant, night and day, continually it is
upon the soul of the godly a burden; if men have other burdens upon them
sometimes they have ease, porters that carry burdens all the day, yet they have
dinner times and at night they go to bed and rest themselves, so they have ease
that way, but now sin is always a burden upon the Godly night and day, they
cannot get off this burden, to lay of a burden a quarter of an hour it were
some ease, but now sin is so great a burden, as it is continually upon the
saints.

The Fourth property of the burden of Corruption.
Fourthly, it is such a burden, as makes al other burdens to be a burden, as it
contains in it al other burdens, so sin is that which makes al other things
burdensome that are burdensome, as now a man or woman that is poor, poverty is
a great burden, I but if there be sin with poverty, that makes it a burden
indeed; sickness is a burden, I, but so far as sin is mixed therewithal, so far
it is a greater burden, and so loss of estate and the like, as thus, I would
compare al other burdens to this, as water in a tankerd when your
tankerd-bearers carry water, it is a burden to them, but they have arts to make
their tankerds light as can be, but now if they carried their water in tankards
of Lead, though the water were no heavier, yet this would make it more
burdensome; so sickness, poverty, loss of estate, they are burdensome to all that bear them, but yet the corruption of sin when the heart is corrupted with
sin, that is as lead that makes it the greater burden, and therefore sin in the
heart is such a thing as makes al other things burdensome that are burdensome.
Though a man should loose al his estate in one night, this might be some
burden, but he that has sin upon him, that makes al other burdens to be
burdensome.

The Fifth property of the Burden of Corruption.
Fifthly, Sin is a burden unto God himself, much more to the saints, God cries
out that he is pressed under sin as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, it
is a burden to the spirit of God, and therefore it is said that the spirit of
God is greived, and it must needs be a great burden to thy soul, when thou
see and know it is a burden to thy father, it is a burden to the spirit of
God whereby thou art sealed to the day of redemption. Is it not a burden to the
heart of any ingenious spirit when he shall consider that that which I have done
is a burden to my father, to the spirit of grace? any ingenious child, it will
be a burden to him that he has done any thing against his father, now so long
as thou have any sin in thee, thou art a burden to God and to the spirit of God.

The Sixth property of the burden of Corruption.
Sixthly, As it is a burden to God, so it is that that makes us burdensome unto
all that we converse with all, and the more Corruption that remains in our
Hearts, the more burdensome we are to all that we converse withal; some there
are though truly godly, yet they have so much Corruption in them, that they are
burdensome to all that they converse withal, as in a family, take those that
are passionate, though they have godliness lies at the bottom, yet how
burdensome are they to those that converse with them, others they have extreme
stout and stubborn Spirits, others have sullen Hearts, extreme sullen spirits,
others have slight and vain spirits, others proud and envious spirits, and
others Covetous, now there is reason they should feel the burden themselves,
for others feel the Burden when it breaks forth from them, and therefore it
much more aggravates their Burden, those that are truly godly that are overcome
with passion when they think thus, Oh! what a Wretched Heart have I, that I
should break forth into passion, in such and such company, Oh! what a Wretch am
I, that I should not only be burdensome to my self but to those that I converse
withal, I make no Question, but I speak to many that have lamented their
condition in this kind alone, in that they have been so burdensome to others,
it is true, I have been a Burden to such and such, but the Lord knows it is
much more a burden to mine own heart, and to my self, therefore the remaining
part of Corruption is such a Burden to the godly, because it is a burden to
others, whenas all the people of God should be useful in the places where they
live, they should live so as that all that live by them and with them should
bless God for them, this they should endeavor to do, to live in such a manner
as all that come near them should bless God that ever they came near, or had
converse with them.

The Seventh Property of the Burden of Corruption.
Seventhly, This Burden is such a Burden, as makes those that are godly to be
burdensome to themselves, yea even to be weary of their lives many times, Why?
For their Corruption in them is a great deal more grievous then Death would be
to them. We use to express a thing that is very grievous to us, and say it is
death to us, those that are godly can say so of their sin, and that is one
Reason that Paul gave that Name to his sin, a Body of Death, Oh! Wretched Man
that I am who shall deliver me from this Body of Death, Why? because the
remaining Corruption that then was in his Heart was as Death to him, so it is
with the Saints, the Corruption that remains in their hearts it is Death to
them, and they can appeal unto God, and speak thus in his presence. The
bitterness of death would not be so much to me a thousand parts as this
Corruption that is in my heart, Oh! this Corruption that is in my heart, that
overcomes me after so many resolutions, so many Prayers, so many Sacraments, so
many engagements, it is that which makes me weary of my life, as Rebeccah said,
if Jacob should marry a Wife of the Daughters of Heth, it would make her weary
of her Life; so says the godly, this remaining Corruption in my Heart, makes
me weary of my Life, what shall I do that carry such a Body of Death about me so
as I do. There are many Men and Women that in a discontented mood, say, they
are weary of their lives, but this is in a discontented mood; but when could
you say so in respect of your Hearts, when did you say, I looked into my Heart,
and I saw a great deal of sin, Corruption, worldliness, Pride, Passion, and the
like, and this is that which makes me weary of my Life. The truth is, the great
thing that makes the people of God to be willing to die is this, because they
know when they die they shall be delivered from this Burden, and therefore when
Death comes they entertain it willingly, because they know they shall sin
against God no more. There is many of you, when you have lived a long time in
sickness, and poverty, and are in great straites many ways, you think if Death
should come to me I could be willing to die, because then I should suffer no
such things as now I do, I but that is no argument of Grace, but this is an
argument of Grace, that because of the great burden of Corruption that thou
carryest about in thy Soul, therefore thou would be willing to die.

The Eighth property of the Burden of Corruption.
Eighthly, Sin is a grievous Burden while we have it, and makes us weary of our
Lives, and yet it is such a Burden as we must certainly carry about with us,
such a Body as we know we shall never be freed from wholly while we live in this
world, it is true, we may be freed from it in a great measure, Christ says,
come to me and you shall have Rest, that is, some Rest for the present, and
whole Rest in the Life to come, but we cannot be wholly freed from this Burden
whilst we are in this World. And thus much for the properties of this Burden,
what a kind of Burden the people of God feel under their Corruptions.

CHAP. XIII.
In what respects Corruption is a Burden* 1. In that our Nature is opposite
unto the very Nature of God. 2. It presses down every holy Duty. 3. It affords
matter for any Temptation. 4. It has a Root from whence al kind of sin may
spring. 5. It dampeth all the activity of our Graces.

THe third thing is to show that Corruption is a Burden to them.

I.
First, For the corrupt Nature that is in them, besides the act of sin, this
must needs be a burden to the godly, to think I have a Nature contrary to God,
to think now and then that they sin against God, this is not the burden, but
here is the burden, Oh! Wretched man and Woman that I am, I have a Nature in me
that is opposite to the very Nature of God, to the infinite holiness of God
himself, though God has made me partaker of the divine Nature, yet still I
continue to be opposite to the Nature of God it self.

II.
Secondly, This is that which is as a heavy weight that presses them down in
every holy Duty, so in that 12. of the Hebrews, Wherefore seeing we also are
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience
the Race that is set before us. He speaks here of original sin, the sin of our
Nature especially, it is a weight that lies upon our hearts in the performance
of holy Duties, when we are striving to get our hearts up to God. This
corruption of Nature keeps them down. I remember the story of that good man,
that going abroad saw a Bird fluttering up, and when it had got up, it fell down
again, and then it would flutter up, and then come down again, and he looking
wishtly upon it, saw a stone tied to the Birds Leg, and upon that the good man
begins to weep, just so, says he, it is with me, I would fain get up to God,
fain would have communion with God, and sometimes I am getting up to God, but
straightway there is a weight that pulls me down. Do not you find it thus? You
that are conversant with God; you that get sometimes alone in Duty to God, and
you would fain have your hearts raised to God, but how are your Hearts brought
down again, and not only in these private Duties, but after public Duties, a
day of fasting and Humiliation sometimes, Oh at night your Hearts are up, and
now you resolve you will Live above the World. And above al these things here
below, and you will live more to Gods Glory, but how are your Hearts brought
down again by this corrupt Nature that is in you.

III.
Thirdly, Corrupt Nature is a burden, because it affords matter for any
temptation in the World, there is no temptation to any kind of sin, but our
Nature affords matter for all kind of temptation, what a burden is this, if a
ship be on fire in the midst of other ships, and we know that there is a great
deal of Gun-pouder in the ship that is on fire in the midst of the Rest, would
not he that owes the ship be afraid, and will he not toil and use al means he
can that the fire may not take hold of the Gun-pouder, I compare all the
temptations to sin about us unto the fire, now we are compassed about with the
fire and what are our Hearts in them, there is matter for the temptation to
take upon; as the Gun-pouder is matter for the fire to take hold of, so our
sinful Hearts are as ready to take upon every temptation as that is; now is not
this a great Burden? That I should carry about me in my Heart matter enough to
entertain al sin, any sin in the World, yea the sin of Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, if I had not the mighty power of God to restrain me, thus it is
with the sinful Nature of man.

IV.
Fourthly, The sinfulness of our Nature is a burden in this respect, to have
not only matter to entertain temptation, but it has in it a Root from whence,
(if God does not come in with his Grace) all kind of sin may spring up from it,
though there should be no kind of temptation, many of us do cry out of the
Devil and temptation when we are overcome by sin, but consider what I say,
there is not only that evil in your hearts that you are ready to entertain all
temptations, but there is that evil in your hearts that would breed al kind of
evils whatsoever, though there should be no temptation, though there were no
Devil in Hell; as thus now, you know there are the seeds of weeds in the ground,
though it is true, they do not come up to flowrish til the rain and the Sun
draws them forth, yet still there are the seeds of those weeds, so as they would
come up in time though not so soon, that except they be rooted up, they will
come up in time; so it is here, there is not only injections of the Devil in
us, but our corrupt heart rises to it, it is one thing to have some filthy
thing cast upon us, and another thing to have the Body so rotten that a
stinking steam should come from the Body it self, one may have some unsavory
thing cast upon him and so be unsavory, but when the Body is rotten and that
cast upon one, that would be more unsavory, so it is here, may be the Devil may
bring some temptation upon us and make some disturbance in our heart, I but
there is that in our Hearts that will make as great a disturbance in our souls
as the Devil can.

V.
Lastly, The sinfulness of our Nature is a Burden in this respect, that it will
damp all the activity of our Graces, the livelyness of our Graces, now the
Saints of God make it to be the joy of their Souls to be active and stirring
for God, but now this Corruption that we carry about with us damps al: as now a
candle, if it were in a Coal-pit a Mine, there would come a damp that would
make the Candle burn dim, so the Graces of Gods Spirit, in the best of us all,
are but as a Candle in a Coal-pit, thy heart is like a Coal-pit, and God has
set up a Candle, some Grace in thy heart that shines there, but now though
Christ takes care that all the damps of thy Corruption shall not put out thy
Candle, yet God sometimes dimmes this Candle that it does not shine sometimes,
takes away the beauty, liveliness, and activity of thy Graces, that though thou
have some life and burnings, yet thou burnest but dimly before others with whom
thou do converse. I do not now speak of the stirring of sin, the working of
sin, that is the next thing that I shall open, how that is a Burden to the
Hearts of the Saints; as for instance, you know that the Scripture tells us that
the flesh fights against the Spirit, and the spirit fights against the flesh,
there is a continual fighting by this Corruption against all that is good, now
that there should be Corruption in the Heart that continually fights against
God, that is a more fearful thing, so it is in thy Heart. Now to be always in
a fight or a combat it is a fearful thing, we count it a great burden that
there should be Wars and Rumors of Wars within our gates, I but, there is a
greater war in thy Heart. It is a thing that was not thought possible ever to
be in England, that there should be found such a Generation that should
endanger their lives to make them and their posterity slaves, and yet for this
they fight, who does not see but the victory will be this in the Conclusion. But
I will show you a worse thing then this in every of your Hearts, there are such
Corruptions in your Hearts, as put your Souls to fight to mischief your selves;
to bring your selves to be slaves to the Devil, this is in your Hearts, though
indeed some are not sensible of this; and what is the reason that if corruption
be a Burden that some people ^eel it not? One Reason is this, because they are
dead in sins, if this whole building should fall upon a dead man, he would not
feel it, and take this as an infallible argument, that thou art dead in sins
and trespasses, if thou do not feel the Burden of thy corruption, that man
and woman that is not sensible of the sin that is in their Souls, I dare in the
Name of God, pronounce that Man or Woman dead. As it is in Nature, though we
may loose the sense of seeing, or of smelling, or of hearing, yet we may live,
yet the sense of feeling or touching that cannot be lost, if we be living if we
loose the sense of feeling, certainly that man or Woman is dead, no sense
inwardly or outwardly, there is some sense of feeling, so long as there is
life. So here, though there may be many weaknesses in men and Women, yet when
they do not feel the Burden of their Corruptions at al, certainly they are dead
men and Women. Now you that are weary and heavy Laden, come to me, (says
Christ) And I will give you Rest, know, that Christ speaks to you, not only out
of pity, as to those that Labor under the Burden of Legal performances, but out
of love, and know, that by this you come to be fitted for Christ and it is that
that is as delightful to the heart of Christ to give ease and Rest to his poor
Servants that Labor under the Burden of Corruption as to do any thing in the
world; it was a special end why Christ came into the world, to dissolve the
works of the Devil, our Corruptions are from the Devil, and are tied close to
us, and they easily beset us, (as the expression is) now I say it was the end
why Jesus Christ came into the world, to dissolve the works of the Devil, that
is, when he sees his poor Servants under this burden and to cry out under it,
as Paul did, who shall deliver me, then Christ comes to cut this bond and so to
dissolve the works of the Devil and give ease and Rest to their Spirits. You do
well when you struggle and strive against your Corruptions with all the strength
you have, but the great work you have to do that you may be delivered from your
Corruptions is, to renew your act of Faith in Christ, to make use of those
Scriptures wherein Christ is said to be our Sanctification, as well as our
Redemption, and to act our Faith upon those Scriptures, and that is the way to
ease our Souls of these Burdens.

CHAP. XV.
In what respects the stirrings and motions of Corruption (...) very burdensome.
1. They continually fight against the Spirit of Grace in the Heart. 2. They are
sudden. 3. They are full of Confusion and disorder. 4. They work very
Maliciously. 5. They watch opportunity to do mischief. 6. They are very
unseasonable. 7. They are very prevalent.

NOw besides the Corruption of our Nature, the stirring of Corruption is very
burdensome unto the Soul; I suppose if a Man or Woman did know what corrupt
Nature is in them, and though this corrupt Nature did not stir, yet it would be
very burdensome, but we are to know that this corrupt Nature does not lie still,
but is always working, stirring, acting and putting it self forth unto that
that is evil, now the motions of sin are burdensome.

1. For First, they are continually fighting against the Spirit of God, and the
spirit of grace in the heart, the flesh lusts against the spirit, now to have
a continual fighting and Combating in the soul, is it not very burdensome; as a
family where there is a continual falling out, never a day that you come to
some families but there is falling out, and fighting, is it not burdensome to
live in such a family? now in the hearts of men and women there is a continual
fighting. If one should be in a family where the husband and wife is
continually fighting one with an other, and the children and servants flying in
the face one of an other that would be burdensome, now in the heart of man
there is the flesh and spirit continually fighting one against another, is not
war in a kingdom a burden? and especially, when men shall fight to make
themselves slaves, as I said before would any man ever have thought it possible
that there should be such folly in the hearts of any in England, to fight to
make themselves and their posterity slaves, that the very victory that they
should get was to bring them to be slaves, now the fight with corruption it is
for this end.

2, And then the stirring of corruption is sudden, many times a man or woman
that is gracious and godly, that finds their heart in some good temper and
working for God, suddenly their corruptions will be stirring in them
unexpectedly, which is extreme grief and damp to their spirits, and causes
many times exceeding much trouble to them suddenly, that no body can understand
the cause of it but themselves.

3. And then the stirring of Corruption is violent, the stirring of Corruption
in the hearts of the Saints are many times extreme violent and outrageous, the
devil stirs up their Corruption, and indeed the corruptions themselves are as
it were devils in them, that do as the devil that was ready to be cast out of
him that was possessed, he causes him to foam at the mouth, so there is
extreme violence of corruption in the hearts of the Saints. It was a
Lamentable conditition of the poor Child that was possessed in the Gospel, when
the father came to Christ for help, because when the evil spirit came it cast
him into the fire and into the water. So corruption is so violent in the hearts
of the godly, that it is ready to cast them into the fire and into the water,
to do those things that are against their own inclination, against their
prayers, against their resolutions, against their vows, against their
covenants, though they see such a thing to be evil, are convinced of it, though
they find a strong inclination against the evil, though they have been at
prayer to God to help them against it, though they resolve with the strongest
resolutions against it, yea though they vow and Covenant yea they come to the
sacrament and set to their seal, so violent is their corruption that it
carries and hurries them on in ways of evil notwithstanding.

4. Again the motions and stirring of Corruption are very burdensome unto the
Saints, in regard of the confused disorder that there is in the motions of
their corruptions, there is much disorder and confusion in the heart when
corruption does stir, which causes much disturbance; what causes more
disturbance in a State, in a Family, in a Town then confusion and disorder?
nothing is more disorderly and confused then the corruption in our hearts, and
therefore burdensome, it causes much perplexity in the hearts of the Saints,
because they find their corruptions working and stirring in such a confused
way, they find sometimes when they are in duty such strange confused working of
their hearts, that it is an extreme burden upon them.

5. Further the corruption of the heart works very maliciously and therefore
the more burdensome, that is, it watches especially those times wherein it may
do us most mischief, then it will be most stirring as a malicious enemy, will not
only be troublesome to one that he is an enemy unto at sometimes, but he
watches if there be any time wherein he may do him more mischief then another;
I will take that time, says an enemy; so the corruptions of the hearts of men,
they watch when they may do the soul the greatest mischief, now many a
christian may think, though I find much corruption stirring many times yet if I
could but be free when I get alone to have communion with God, O! that it would
let me alone at that time; and so though I find it stirring at other times, yet
if it would let me alone at the hearing of the word; but it comes at that time
especially, you will have evil thoughts at prayer more then ever you had, and at
the hearing of the word light workings of spirit more then at other times, and
not only at the word but if there be but one truth that does more nearly
concern the good of your souls then another, you shall find your corruptions
to hinder you then, more then at another time, and so at the sacrament, and
fasting, there it will be more working then at another time.

6. yea and further, if there be any time, that through Gods mercy in a day of
prayer, fasting, and the like, if you can get your hearts to any comfortable
frame, brokenness of heart, renewed resolutions to walk in the ways of God
more strictly then before; as many times it is in days of fasting and prayer,
above al times will your corruptions be stirring after that, more then any time,
thus maliciously when it may do you the greatest michief, then it will be most
working. Now what a burden is this to the soul! as it is said of Christ, in
Matthew. the latter end, There you have the story of Christ's baptism, and when
he was baptized, then came the holy Ghost upon him in the likeness of a dove,
and this manfestation of God from heaven, This is my beloved son in whom I am
well pleased; well, presently says the text, he was led into the wilderness to
be tempted of the devil, God was in the work, but the devil was malicious
against him presently after a glorious manifestation of God the father to him,
As it was with Christ your savior, so you must expect it will be with you,
Christ when he had such a glorious manifestation of God the father from heaven
to him, then he was led aside, then the devil presently came upon him, so it
will many times be with you, when at any time you have got your hearts up to God
in a day of fasting, prayer, or the like, and have got some sense of Gods love,
take heed of security at that time more then at al times and that is the reason
that you shall find, if you observe it, that very often after a day of fasting,
after such a day that you have got most in, if not the very night, yet the next
day, you will find strong workings of the corruptions of your herets, to keep
them down immediately after that time, for the stirring of corruptions they are
very malicious, and watch for the time that they may do us the greatest
mischief of al.

7. Further the stirring of the Corruptions that remain in us, are very
burdensome in regard of their unseasonableness by that I mean this, (to speak
plainly to your hearts) the stirrings of our corruptions, if we shall gratify
them many times, yield to them, as it were, for peace sake, as sometimes the
heart of a man or woman is so troubled with the workings of corruption that
they think they must needs yield that they might be quiet, well if thou shall
yield to them to quiet them, they will come upon thee more and more, with
greater strength they will come upon thee then before, as now, if any one that
is troublesome to us in seeking to get such and such a thing of us, and at
length because of trouble to us we yield to them, then afterward they grow
more and more upon us, incroach more and more upon us and are very troublesome
and burdensome to us, it is so in the stirring of corruption, if you yield to
your corruption for one thing, it comes more and more upon you, so that the
only quiet you can have is by being at open defiance with them; now this is
another thing whereby the corruptions of the hearts of Gods people are very
burdensome to them.

8. Lastly, The Corruptions in the hearts of Gods people are very burdensome,
because they are very prevailing, this is an higher degree: they are burdensome
in the root, and then in the working they are more burdensome, but then in the
prevailing they are yet more burdensome; If so be a Child of God, that looks
into his hear^, and finds what a root of bitternese there is, that makes him go
heavily al his days, but now when he finds such working and stirring of
corruption, this troubles him more; he thinks, though I have such a cursed
nature, though I cannot keep down the motions and stirrings of my corruption,
yet if I could keep them from working; yea though I cannot keep them from
working, yet if I could but keep them from prevailing, but alas! they overcome
me many times, and this is the greatest burden of al, that they prevail in our
hearts so much as they do, It is troublesome to fight with an enemy, but it is
a great deal more troublesome to have an enemy prevail and get the day: and
though it is true that corruption shall not get the day fully, that is, though
it may prevail for a while in some skirmishes, it may prevail Praelio but not
in Bello, as an enemy may in some skirmishes have the better of it, but yet the
other may Conquer at last, and may get the day; the day, that is, when it comes
to a pitched set Battle, that is the Bellum, and there he prevails, if I can but
prevail and get the day to be mine then, it is not so much. It is true, the
Saints of God they shall get the day at last, but here as long as they live,
their corruptions often prevail and foiles them which is very grievous and
burdensome to them.

CHAP. XV.
The Reasons of the former Point. 1. Because coruption (when it prevails)
weakens the heart. 2. By it God is dishonored. 3. By it our holy profession is
scandalized. 4. By it they over whom it prevails, are made useless in their
places. 5. Thereby the means of grace are made unprofitable. 6. Thereby our
peace with God is disturbed. 7. Thereby the assurance of our Salvation is
shaken.

NOw for that, to open it a little in the particulars, to show, how burdensome
it is to the hearts of the Saints when they do prevail in any measure, they do
not put it off as carnal people do with this, we are al sinners and it is Gods
grace to keep us, and Lord have mercy on us and the like, no, but they account
the prevailing of corruption the greatest burden that they can go under in the
world, and that in these respects.

I
First, Because whenever corruption prevails, in what degree soever, it
weakens the heart, it weakens the soul; it may stir in the heart, and if the
heart does repulse it, and get strength against it, the heart is not weak as
before, but if it prevail in any degree, it weakens the heart; now we know,
that which is weak, is sensible of a burden quickly, a sick man is a burden to
himself, and every thing is a burden to him, now when any corruption prevails,
it makes the soul sick, and every thing is a burden to it and I beseech you
consider, here is a reason why you are so weak and are able to bear no other
burdens, If any body cross you, when you come home, wife, Children, or
servants cross you, you cannot bear it, if neighbors cross you, you are able
to bear nothing, there is a reason in this that you do not think of, you have
weakened your hearts by some sin or other, and broke your peace with God it may
be, and now your hearts come to be weak, you are like a sick man, that cries
out upon any thing, one that is sick cries out upon every thing, whereas if he
were strong and healthful he could bear a hundred times more; so you have
brought a sickness upon your souls, there is some sin that has prevailed with
you: prevailed over you, and by that has weakened your heart and your spirit,
now being weak you can bear nothing, every thing is a grievous burden to you,
so that the prevailing of corruption comes to be burdensome in this respect,
because it weakens the heart, and makes every thing burdensome to them.

II
Secondly, The Saints and people of God they account the privilege of
corruption to be the greatest burden in this respect, because they know that
now they dishonor God, especially if it prevail so as to break forth
outwardly, that it comes to an outward actual sin, then it must needs be
burdensome to one that is gracious, for the name of the blessed God suffers by
this my sin that has prevailed, all the while sin was but stirring in my heart,
and did not prevail, the name of God has not that dishonor as now it has, now
when sin has prevailed it dishonors God, and therefore it is a burden unto the
Saints.

III
Thirdly, It is a burden because it may be my holy profession is scandalized by
it, and is not this a burden? howsoever many wretched men and women, will say,
they care not, let others say and think of them what they will: but now Godly
men, and women, when rhey think of this, they cry out O What will the wicked say
of this! how will they blaspheme the name of God, and dishonor the name of God;
and this will be a burden to them, because thereby their holy profession is
scandalized.

IV
Fourthly, 'Its a burden, because hereby they come to be made useless in the
places where they live: many though they may have some soundness of grace in
them, and may go to heaven at last, yet their corruption prevailing over them,
they come thereby to be very useless in the places where they live, they may
live, but themselves will be burdens upon the earth, for they are never like to
be used, to do any great service for God in the world, they have so scandalized
their profession by the prevailing of Corruption.

V
Fifthly, When corruption prevails over the Saints, as it makes them
unprofitable, so it makes the means of grace exceeding unprofitable too, it
hardens there hearts, and they come to prayer, hearing the word, and Sacraments
and find little good: many of you complain you find not profit by prayer, and
hearing the word, and Sacrament; what is the reason? such and such corruptions
have prevailed over you, it may be there are some sins that you live in, that
have prevailed over you, and therefore no marvel you do not profit as you
desire.

VI.
Sixthly, The prevailing of Corruption is a grievous Burden in this regard,
because it is that that does extremely disturb ones peace between God and our
Soul; though there be many temptations, yet if the heart can conquer them, it
has more peace by that means, never has the soul so much peace, as when there
has been strong temptations unto sin, and a conquering over those temptations:
but if temptation conquer, then there will be a disturbance of our peace, and
that is burdensome to those that do know what peace with God does mean.

VII.
Seventhly, The prevailing of Corruption is a grievous Burden, because it is
that many times, that shakes the assurance of those that are godly. I know not
what those men would make of the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our Sins, if so be
that they think whatsoever sin they fall into, yet still they can keep up their
assurance as much as before, I say, what would they make of that petition,
Lord! forgive us our Sins? at least, to pray thus, Lord! clear up the evidence
of the forgiveness of our sins, then it must needs follow, that the falling
into any sin, and the prevailing of any Corruption, must needs shake our
assurance while we live here in this world, now is not this a Burden to any man
or Woman that heretofore had assurance of Gods love, and was able to look in
Gods Face with joy, to have this assurance shaken? Yea, Many times, it makes
God withdraw his countenance, which made David Cry out, Restore to me the Joy
of thy Salvation. As if he should say, Lord, I was wont to have joy in thy
company, in communion with thee, but thou have estranged thy self from my Soul,
O Lord, restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation. Now is not this a burden, for
thee to loose the sweetness of thy Soul in communion with God? That now, though
it may be it is through thy weakness or what it will be, yet thou can not look
upon God with that comfort as thou would, but the thought of God comes to be
a terror upon thy spirit, is not this a burden? Now then, is there any poor
Soul that understands what these things mean? What a Burden the remaining
Corruption of the Heart is, either in regard of the sinfulness of Nature, or in
regard of the stirring of Corruption, or in regard of the prevailing of
Corruption, that now they have no Rest in their souls, but are Laden with such
a Burden, and cry out with the Apostle, Oh! Wretched Man and Woman that I am,
who shall deliver me? let such a soul know, that this text belongs to them, Come
unto me, says Christ, and I will give you Rest from this Burden, as well as the
other Burdens; and our Rest is only in Christ from this, as well as the Burden
of the guilt of sin, the Burden of the Law, and the other burdens that have
been spoken unto.

CHAP. XVI.
Why the Saints feel these things so burdensome, Namely. 1. Because the Life of
Grace is a tender and delicate thing. 2. Because Grace keeps the Soul in
continual acting. And why God suffers Corruption notwithstanding the
burdensomness thereof to remain in the Saints, Namely. 1. That hereby he may
show forth his own power. 2. Hereby their Faith be exercised. 3. Hereby they
are driven unto Prayer. 4. Hereby Stirred up unto Repentance. 5. Hereby make
known his Wisdom. 6. Hereby manifest his justice in laying a stumbling block
before the wicked. 7. Hereby the Saints may be induced to long more after
Heaven. With two Consequences issuing from hence. 1. The differences between
the Sins of the godly, and the wicked. 2. Why the Saints go on so sadly in
their ways.

NOw it must needs be that a gracious heart must feel these things to be very
burdensome.

First, Because the life of Grace, wheresoever it is, is a very tender and
delicate thing; nothing is so delicate and tender as the life of Grace, and
therefore it must needs be sensible of this burden of Corruption according to
what degree it does remain in the Soul. As thus, you know a man or Woman, the
more delicate and tender they are in their flesh, having had very curious
bringing up, or it may be their natural Spirits are very delicate more then
other men, some men their natural spirits are more gross, and can bear burdens
with less sense, but now those that are more finer and delicate, if you lay a
burden upon them, Oh! How burdensome is it unto them, now Grace makes the
constitution to be delicate, fine, and pure; a pure constitution, it puts the
Hearts into a most pure constitution, and therefore it must needs be sensible
of the evil of sin according to the remainers of it.

Secondly, Where Grace is, Corruption must needs be very burdensome in this
regard also, because that Grace keeps the Soul in continual action and
stirring, now look as a man that has a Leg that is broken, if he could lie
still, and never stir, it would not be so grievous and burdensome to him, the
pain and breaking of his Leg would not be so burdensome if he could lie still,
but if this man, whose Leg is broken, must be stirring, walking, and going up
and down, Oh! how burdensome is it that his Leg is broke. So it is with the
Soul, it is true, if the Soul might be still a sleep, and doing nothing, then,
though there be Corruption in them, it would not be so grievous, I but Grace
wherever it is puts the Soul unto action; and therefore it is called, the
divine Nature, because it is active, it puts the Soul on to be acting for God,
and in the ways of life, now Grace putting the Soul to be acting, and
Corruption that being as the breaking of the bones, it must needs be very
burdensome, that which most hinders their activity of Grace must needs be very
burdensome. You had need therefore take heed what you do when temptation to sin
comes, take heed you do not break your bones, and your Legs, Why? Because when
you have broken them you must be still stirring and acting for God. A poor man,
it is a great deal worse for him, if he break his Leg, then a Rich man; a Rich
man may sit by the fire, or lie in his bed a month together, but a poor man, if
he break his Leg he does not know what to do, he must to work, perhaps he
cannot have that harbor that a Rich man may have, so I say, those that are of
sluggish spirits, though Corruption prevail it is not so grievous unto them,
but those that are of active spirits and have Grace, and the more Grace that
any man or Woman has, the more burdensome their Corruptions are, because the
more Grace there is in the Soul, the more active it will be for God.

Quest. But you will say, Seeing the remaining of Corruption in the Heurts of
the Saints is so burdensome, why does God so order things in his providence, as
his own dear Saints should be so troubled with their Corruptions while they
live in this world? God could deliver them from their Corruptions, why will God
make them cry out, O Wreched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body
of Death? God could as well perfect our Sanctification, as our Justification:
why does God thus order things in his providence, that his own dear Saints
should groan under such a burden of Corruption al their days?

Answ. For that briefly thus, Though it is true, that God could presently take
all our Corruptions; as soon as ever we come to Jesus Christ, God could deliver
us from our Corruptions, but the Lord will not, he has many holy ends why he
does suffer his own people to be under this burden while they live here in the
flesh, As.

First, That hereby he may show forth his own power, the power of Jesus Christ
is exceeding magnified in this, that it can uphold little sparks of Grace in
the midst of an Ocean of Corruption, that it can uphold poor weak Creatures
under such burdens, and carry them on notwithstanding, and bring them to
eternal Life; the power and Grace of Jesus Christ, and the power of God, is as
much manifested in this thing, as it is in keeping Heaven and Earth upon the
Frame, or keeping it in being; the Lord does not appear more to be an almighty
God, in keeping Heaven and Earth in being, then he does appear to be an
Almighty God in keeping grace alive in the heart notwithstanding all the
remainder of Corruption, so that in this God has Glory in another way then he
has from the Angels in heaven; the power of God appears in upholding of the
Angels, for if he did not uphold them, they would fall into evil, as Adam and
the other Angels did, but therein appears Gods glorious power to uphold the
Angels: but the glorious power in upholding the Angels, does not so much
appear, as the glorious power of God in upholding the hearts of the Saints in
the midst of their corruptions; this shall be a special argument that the Saints
shall praise God for, to al eternity, when they shall look back, and see what a
condition they were in before their conversion, yea, in their conversion, that
though God granted them some grace, yet what abundance of Corruption was in
their hearts all that time, and what a deal of stir they had to maintain that
little grace; they will stand and admire to consider, that it should be kept
alive in the midst of sin, that a little spark should be kept alive in the
midst of the Sea, not only in the midst of the Sea, but when the sea is
tempestuous, you yil say it is no great wonder that the fire be kept burning
when the sea is calm; but when al is in a storm, and yet a spark of fire shall
be kept alive in the midst of all the tossings of the waves, you will grant here
is a mighty power: now the keeping alive of grace in thy heart in the midst of
so much corruption: does argue as mighty a power in God.

2. The Lord does so order it that still his own people shall be under the burden
of much coruption in this regard, because that hereby the Lord draws forth
the exercise of faith in his son, in which his soul takes infinite delight, the
soul of God takes infinite delight in beholding the working of the glorious
grace of faith in Jesus Christ.

But you will say wherein does it appear to be so glorious in regard of our
corruption? Thus, for the Angels in heaven to believe in God, that he will be
eternally good to them, it is not so much, as for a poor soul in the midst of
al his corruptions, yet to be able to Triumph in the free grace of God in Jesus
Christ; notwithstanding I am so vild, filthy, loathsome, and abominable to
myself, and justly God and his Saints may count me a burden to them and cast me
off for ever, yet for all this, my soul shall cling to him, I will cast my self
upon him, and look upon him as a gracious father, a merciful God, a God that
loves me, a God that rejoices in doing Good to me; for the soul to exercise
faith in the Grace of God in Christ, it is a glorious thing, only take heed you
do not mistake it for presumption.

Object. You will say, For men notwithstanding al their sin to believe in Gods
mercy this is rather presumption then faith.

Answ. True, it is presumpion in many, they mistake themselves, but in others
it is true faith, and God delights in it, and you shall know it by this; it does
draw the heart to God and the soul never finds such a prevalent way to overcome
those corruptions that are in it, as to exercise their faith in the grace of
God in Christ. I beseech you, mark the difference between presumption and faith
in Christ, presumption will trust in Gods mercy notwithstanding their sin, but
that does indeed foment their sin and makes them secure in their sin, makes
them the more secure in their sin, but now when the soul shall by the true
geminine act of faith rest in the free grace of God notwithstanding corruption,
if it be right, such a soul feels no means in the world of greater efficacy to
cure and prevail against corruption then this, to trust in the free grace of
God notwithstanding corruption: and if thou find it thus, thou have no cause
to fear, trust in Gods grace with confidence, for it is that which is well
pleasing unto God, and that which the Lord delights in, and that which gives as
much content to Gods heart as the exercise of any grace whatsoever, and in that
regard, because the Saints shall never exercise such an act of Faith in Heaven
^s this, God will have this in this world.

3. This is that that God sees does drive his own people to him in prayer,
nothing drives the Saints to God with more earnestness in prayer, then the
feeling of the weight of Corruption upon them, then they go to God above al,
God never hears such strong cries come up to heaven in regard of any
affliction as this; and by the way, you may find by this how your hearts are,
when the hand of God is upon you in afflictions, then you will cry to God, but I
put this to you, has there not come as strong cries to heaven upon the sense
of your Corruptions as upon the sense of any Affliction whatsoever.

4. The Lord has glory in this, in the exercise of the work of repentance, and
humility; the keeping the Souls of his people in humility, and the contrition
of their Spirits, that is exceeding pleasing to God, the Lord is near to a
broken contrite heart, a melting mourning spirit, the Lord does delight in the
evangelical workings of repentance, this pleases the Lord; the work of
humiliation, mourning and sorrow for sin in an evangelical way, is a grace that
is acceptable to God; God shall have none of that in heaven, and he has it
therefore here.

5. God hereby exercises his wisdom exceedingly, in bringing light out of
darkeness; God does many times turn, not only the afflictions of his people to
their good, but he works good many times out of sin, not that hereby we should
be bold and presumptuous in our sins, we must take head of tempting God, yet
know this, that God does many times work exceeding much good unto the Saints,
even out of their sins, by occasion of sin, though their sin has no efficacy
in this, but God takes occasion in this, in otherways of his providence and
workings of his grace to work good unto them.

6. There is Gods justice in it also, to lay a stumbling block before wicked
and ungodly men, for when they shall see, that the godly that have the most
grace they have much corruption in them still, they rejoice perhaps in it, and
they little think that God aims at the execution of his just judgment upon
them that it should harden their hearts, many wicked men, they think their
condition to be very good, because they see so much corruption in the hearts of
the godly, and they are hardened thereby, but they little think that God aims
at the execution of his just judgment upon them thereby.

7. God does it for this reason, that the Saints may long more after heaven,
therefore it is that the Lord in the ordering of his providence works so, that
they should be kept under the burden of Corruption in this world, that they
might long to be in heaven with their father, and that when they come to heaven
they might know the difference between heaven and earth, between their state
there in heaven, and their state here on earth. Thus though corruption may be a
great burden to us while we live here in this world, yet the Lord has many
great ends and purposes to suffer thee, a poor creature, to be under remaining
corruption, and therefore thou can not draw any such argument, God loves me
not, for if he loved me he would deliver me from this corruption, I have been
praying a longtime to be delivered, and yet I am not delivered, do not gather
any such arguments from it, you know Paul prayed once and again, and all the
answer he had was, my grace shall be sufficient for thee: so though thou prayest
under the burden of corruption again and again, yet if once God say thus to thy
soul, my grace shall be sufficient for thee, thy corruption shall not crush thee
and undo thee, but I will sstrengthen thee, this will be sufficient.

Now from all this that has been said, you may by way of consequence see.

First, a great deal of difference between the sins of the Godly and the sins
of the Wicked: the wicked they sin, and the godly sin too, we use to say we are
al sinners, but it is to the one a burden, to the other a delight.

Secondly, You may see from hence also one reason why the Saints of God go on
sometimes so sadly in their ways, thou do not know what burdens they are
under.

But you will say, we are better we do not feel it. No, they have not so much
sin as thou have, they have got some grace, thou have none, they have in some
degrees mortified their sins, thou have not; yea, they have their sins
pardoned, thou have not; but yet though they have some assurance, that the
guilt of their Sin is removed, yet the very remaining of the Corruptions of
their hearts is their burden.

Object. You will say Why should it be so burdensome if they know the guilt of
their Sin to be forgiven.

Answ. I beseech you observe it, there is a deal of difference between a
carnal heart, and a Godly heart; one that has a carnal heart, if he can be
eased from the burden of conscience, he is no more troubled; but now a gracious
heart, though he be first burdened with the apprehension of the guilt of sin,
and that burden be removed, yet there remaining a body of death, there is
another burden still upon him: so that the very remaining of some corruption is
a greater burden unto him, then al thy corruption that is in the full strength
of it, and together with thy corruption all the guilt that is upon thee; only
thou art dead in sin and do not feel it, if a whole building fall down, those
that are buried in the grave they would not feel it, but al you that are alive,
if it should fall down would feel it: so the wicked have the burden of their
corruption in the full strength of it; in the guilt of it upon them and they
feel it not, for they are dead; but the Godly, though they have the guilt of
Sin removed, yet the very least sin remaining in them is a burden, though they
have mortified their sin, and do it every day, yet the remaining of sin is a
great burden to them. And hence you may see the reason of the watchfulness of
the Saints over their spirits, why they spend so much time, and rise so early
to hear the word, what is the reason you will say, they know that if they do
not Labor under the burden of their Corruptions to a void sin, it will be a
greater burden to Labor under the burden of sin afterward. Now you do not
watch over sin, because you do not know what a grievous burden sin is when they
Labor under it, but such a one as feels the Burden of Sin, the Lord be merciful
to me, I had thought (says he) my Back would have broke under the Burden of
sin. And therefore David Prays, for the healing of the bones that were broken:
and that is the Reason of the watchfulness and carefulness of the Saints under
this burden.

Now the maine thing that has been intended in all that I have said about this
Burden is this, That I might point out those whom Christ calls to himself, that
you might be prepared to hearken to the invitation of Christ to come to him for
Rest (though we are not come to that) yet take notice that there is Rest in
Christ for all these, from under all these Burdens. And so much for the Burden
of the remaining part of Corruption in the Hearts of the Saints.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the burden of outward afflictions, and the grievousness thereof laid open
in three Particulars. 1. In themselves they are a part of the curse of the Law
2. They hinder much in doing Service to God. 3. They often help forward many
strong Temptations. Why God will have his Saints to be under this Burden,
Namely, 1. Because he will have his Servants to honor and obey him, merely out
of Love. 2. Because he knows that thus their Corruptions may be best
mortified. 3. To be a Stumbling Block to the wicked.

THe next Burden is, The Burden of affliction, the Burden of outward
afflictions, Poverty, disgrace, sickness, or any kind of trouble in this world;
you shall find these things to be very Burdensome to you. Now Christ calls such as
Labor under this Burden to come to him, and promises to give them Rest, Christ
has a tender affection toward poor Creatures under outward burdens, toward
all those that the Father has given to him, especially when they are Burdened
with outward affliction and the Gospel has in it abundance of refreshments to
help and ease sinners that feel the Burden of afflictions in this world, no
such way of ease and Rest unto them as by the Grace of God in Christ as we shall
open more fully when we come to the promise.

Now the burden of affliction is very grievous to many, the Burden of poverty,
disgrace, sickness or the like; those whom God lets prosper in their ways,
little think what burdens are upon their Brethren; how many in these days are
there of our Brethren, that groan under these Burdens, though we do not feel
them? We know not how soon we may be brought under them, and therefore it will
be very seasonable to show the Rest that we have in Christ even from under
these Burdens. I have spent some time in opening the grievousness of other
Burdens, now this burden of outward afflictions men are so sensible of, that
there needs not much for the opening of them, but only to tell all that feel
these burdens, that they may come unto this promise* Yea, and they are under
this invitation, Christ invites them to come to him for Rest for these Burdens.

First, Outward afflictions are burdens, because they are in themselves part of
the curse of the Law, and if they be sanctified to any, it is by virtue of this
promise in the Text; if any affliction upon you be Sanctified it is thence.
Before you come to Christ al outward afflictions, poverty, sickness, or any
disturbance you have in your estate, it is in it self the fruit of the curse,
and is so to you til you come to Christ: now to bear that that is in it self a
fruit of the curse, must needs be a burden, because it is so contrary to Nature
most afflictive to Nature, therefore burdensome?

Secondly, Outward afflictions are burdensome, because they do hinder us much in
doing Service, that Service that we were born for, that we were born to do in
this world, they do hinder us of many opportunities of doing Service for God,
outward Afflictions do. As now sickness of body, what a Burden is it? Because
it does hinder those that are continually sickly from doing the Service that
God requires of them to do, and indeed that makes it to be most burdensome to
one that is gracious, it is not such a Burden to one that has a sickly body,
because of the pain that he feels, but because by this means my Soul is hindered
in those operations that I would be glad to be exercised in for God, and doing
good in the place I am set in. And so poverty, is therefore a burden, not
because I cannot live so bravely as others do, and have as fine Houses,
Clothes, and Diet as others have; No, but because I must spend all my time
merely in getting provision for my family that I have little time for Gods
Service; others can spend time in Gods Service, hear, pray, and meditate, but
the chief time that I have to spend is spent to get bread; now this is a
burden: And besides because of poverty I have little opportunity to do Service
for God, those that have Large estates, they have opportunity to do God
Service, they are called forth to public Services, but I am not so as others
are, now this is that that to one that has any beginnings of Grace in his
Heart is a great Burden. And by the way, it were a good argument of true Grace,
if you that are under the Burden of affliction, if you felt the burden where it
lies, I appeal to you that complain of the Burden of affliction, poverty, and
the like, that you feel, I put this Question to you in the name of God, what is
it that makes your affliction most burdensome? It is true, it is painful to
Nature, Oh! But the Lord knows, this is that that makes it grievous, and
burdensome to me, that by means of this affliction, I am fain to spend so much
time about mean works that I have little time to do good in my generation:
others that have greater estates, I count them happier in this, that the Lord
has given unto them Larger opportunities to do him Service, then I have; I do
not count them happy because of their wealth, but because they have larger
opportunities to do God Service, but it is God that orders things thus, and I
must be content to bear this Burden. I say, if thou have a heart thus
complaining of thy Burden, it is a good sign, and know, that in Christ there is
abundance of Grace to Sanctify these burdens to thee, diverse other things
might be spoken about the Burden of Affliction, I will add but one more.

Thirdly, Outward afflictions is a great burden in this respect, because it
many times occasions and helps forward many strong temptations: outward
afflictions do strengthen, and do occasion strong temptations, which are very
grievous to the Soul: As thus, when one is under affliction more then others,
then comes this temptation, surely God loves me not, because of this
Affliction; then comes temptation to envy others, because I am afflicted more
then others; then comes temptation of distrust, I shall perish one day or
other; then comes temptation of murmuring under the hand of God; temptation to
take shifting Courses, to shift for ones self by unlawful means, Oh! what
temptations have many that are under strong afflictions in poverty,
imprisonment, disgrace, dishonor in the world; what strong temptations have
they to stretch their Consciences. And this makes outward afflictions a
grievous burden, because they occasion great temptations to poor Souls to
stretch out their hands to folly, to unlawful courses many times to help
themselves; Yea, The apprehension many times before it comes is so grievous, as
it occasions temptation to much Evil to prevent those burdens, and yet for all
that, the Lord is so pleased to order and dispose of things in this world, that
even such as he intends everlasting good to in Christ, go under such burdens as
these, most part of their Lives, they go under the burdens of Poverty,
Sickness, and outward troubles here in this world.

Many Reasons might be given why the Lord so orders things in this world, that
his ^ear Servants, for whom Christ has shed his precious blood, shall go under
these burdens, though others that are wicked and ungodly shall scarce know what
they are.

1. The Lord does hereby show, that he will have his Servants to serve and honor
him, merely out of Love, and not in a mercenary way to get outward things in
this world, he will have us serve him out of Love, and out of Faith; if we
should prosper in outward things always, our Service would be more Carnal; but
now though his Servants meet with never such Afflictions in this world, yet
they love the Lord, and love his ways, and love his service, and go on in
faithful obedience to him; this shows the excellency of Grace, more then if
they prospered in this world.

2. And the Lord sees this the best means to mortify our Corruptions; many
times thou complainest of thy afflictions, but who knows if thou had not
such afflictions, what sins thou would have.

3. And God does this to be a Stumbling block to the wicked, that they should
stumble at the afflictions of the Saints, and so perish that way. Diverse other
Reasons might be given, but all is to make way to that which is to come after,
that the Lord calls all these, not only those that Labor under the Burden of
sin, under the burden of the Law, etc. But poor Creatures that Labor under the
burden of affliction, poverty and the like to come to him for ease and Rest.

CHAP. XVIII.
Christ's Invitation of Sinners, laid down in these words, Come unto me. Opened
in five Particulars. 1 It is to look to Christ as an All-sufficient Savior. 2
It implies an unsetledness upon the Creature. 3 A stirring of the heart after
Christ. 4 A laying of all our burdens upon Christ. 5 A leaving of the Soul with
Christ for life.

NOW then we come to the Invitation it self, Come to me, says Christ, Come to
me; that is, Believe in me: For among many other expressions of believing in
Christ, or of accepting of the Condition of the Covenant of Grace; the Holy
Ghost does express this believing and acceptance of the Covenant of Grace, by
coming to Christ. Believing in Christ is expressed very often by coming to
Christ: In John 5.40. You will not come to me that ye might have life. They did
come to Christ in his outward presence, Christ conferred with them, and they
with him; but yet says Christ, ye will not come to me that ye might have life.
And so in John 6.37. Those that the Father has given to me, come to me, and I
will in no wise cast them out. All that the Father has from Eternity given me
to redeem, they come to me, that is, they believe in me. And in verse 44. None
can come to me except God the Father draw him: That is, none believes in me
except my Father draw them: and so, He that has heard and learned of the
Father comes to me: That is, believes in me. And that is the meaning of the 55.
of Isai. Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, buy wine and milk
without money, and without price: that is, believe in me, that is the meaning.
All you that labor under al these several Burdens, come to me, believe in me,
and I will give you rest.

But this must be opened more largely: And in this Invitation, there are these
Five things that I desire to open unto you, and to work them upon you.

First, What Christ would have us do more particularly, when he bids us Come to
him.

Secondly, What kind of Invitation it is that Christ does make to those that
the Father gives to him, that shall indeed come to be saved by him; what kind of
invitation they have from Christ, how Christ calls them to him; for this is a
calling, and an inviting.

Thirdly, That all that Christ requires as a Condition of the Covenant of Grace
for rest unto our souls, is to come to him, nothing else is the Condition of
the Gospel by which we come to have Christ to be ours, but this, to come to
him, Come to me says Christ: that is the great Condition of the Gospel, only
to come to Christ.

Fourthly, There are some Rules to be propounded and observed, for our Coming
unto Christ.

Fifthly, The Laboring to draw your Souls unto Christ.

For the first, Come to me, what is that? what would Christ have you to do?

For the opening of that in particular, it is this, When Christ calls you to
come to him, you are to know, this notes a motion from Christ, to come to him.

First: It implies a beholding, a looking unto Jesus Christ, as being the
All-sufficient Savior, to save our souls from all the evils that are upon us,
and to supply unto us al good we stand in need of: As if Christ should say,
when he says, Come to me; That is, O! poor, troubled sinners; that are under
these burdens, Do you behold me to be the great Mediator that is come into the
world, to stand between all the wrath of my Father, and your souls, and to
bring life and salvation to you, that is employed, when I would go, I must know
whither I must go, to whom I must go, so says Christ, I am the great redeemer
sent into the world by my father to that very end, that I may ease poor souls
of their burdens, and such souls as you are, look unto Christ therefore, as
the great reconciler of God and man, the great mediator between God and man,
having the fullness of al mercy and goodness in him, the great means of
conveyance of all the grace and riches of God the father to sinful souls, that
is the first work of believing in Christ, for to look unto him to be such a one
as God the Father has tendered unto us; that is employed, but yet the soul
comes not.

Secondly: But then the second is this, which goes further. To come to Christ,
implies an unsetledness, when we come to a thing, there is the Terminus a quo,
and the terminus ad quem, we come from something, so says Christ, you have
settled your hearts upon creature comforts, and you have looked upon them
heretofore, as those things wherein your good and happiness does consist, but
now your hearts must be taken off from those, you must come to me that is there
must be a removing from that station you were in, from that kind of settlement
you were before in, I cannot go to another place, and stay in the place where I
was too: and so the heart cannot come to Christ and stay in the state it was in
before, therefore that implies, that whereas you poor creatures, have settled
your hearts upon creature comforts, and settled your hearts upon sinful things
heretofore, O! now, let your hearts be taken off from al those things, know,
that your good, your happiness, your peace is not here, if you abide here, and
settle here, you are lost and undone creatures for ever. Let it not grieve your
souls to part with the comforts that are here below in the creatures, for
certainly, you mistake, here does not lie your good and happiness, so that when
the soul is beginning to stir after Christ, it is taken off from the creature,
taken off from al creature comforts, looks upon every thing as vanity; O! Says
the soul I am clearly convinced that my happiness lies higher then the things
here below; these are the reasonings of the heart that is in motion to go to
Christ. And not only to be unsettled from the creature, but I must be taken off
from my self too, from al my righteousness and duties, I must not think to
satisfy God by any thing that I can do, no, but I must be convinced, that
there is a greater thing required to make up my satisfaction with God, then any
thing that I can do; and therefore my heart must be taken off from these
things, Heretofore, I rested in duties, that I was not so bad as others, but
now I see there is another manner of righteousness that I must have in a
mediator, these though they be good in themselves, yet they are not the things
that can ever save my soul, but if ever I have peace with God and stand before
him at the great day, it must be through another means then ever yet I have
had, if I had gone on, and had thought to make up my satisfaction with God by
what I have done, I had been an undone creature; yea, my heart must be taken
off from mine one bottom, not to rest in any thing that is in my self, but I
must go out and deny my self, and so look for the principle of life out of my
self. This is the second thing that is here noted. Come to me, that is, first
behold me, see and believe that I am the great mediator that is come into the
world to save your souls: and then secondly, let there be an unsetling of your
hearts, a taking your hearts off from whatsoever you were settled upon
heretofore, that so you may be removed from thence, and that you may take
another course for your life in Christ, and happiness in him.

Thirdly, Come unto me, that is, let there be a working and a stirring of your
hearts after me; Christ calls for the heart of sinners, after he comes to be
revealled to them, they should be in a working, stiring, disposition making
after the Lord Jesus Christ, for union with him to the utmost that possibly
they can, the thoughts should be working, and the conscience working, and the
will opening it self to receive in the grace of God, and the affection should he
stirring, and the whole soul should be in a working disposition after him.
Incline your ear and come, as if Christ should say though you are under great
burdens, yet do not you sink under them in a discouraging way, and lie down in
a dull and a heavy way, No but let your hearts be stirring, working and acting
after me continually, have a care of this, to keep your hearts in a stirring
and working way after Christ, and the grace that is offered to you in Christ,
this is that which young beginners should observe in a special manner, if God be
beginning to work upon your hearts, you should have a great care to keep your
hearts in a stir-working, acting frame and disposition after Christ; and above
al things in the world, take heed of a dull, heavy dead spirit at this time when
God calls you to come to Christ as the Apostle says of himself, in Phil. 3.14.
I press hard after the mark, so it should be with every poor soul that God is
drawing after Christ, it should be always in a coming disposition and they
should press hard toward the mark of the high prize of the calling that is set
before them, Christ is set before thee, God sets his son before thee with the
treasure of grace, and thou should press and follow hard after God (as it is
the expression of David in one of the Psalms 63, 8.) a hard following,
stirring and working of the soul after the Lord as David said to his son
Solomon in 1. Chron. 22.16. Up and be doing and the Lord will be with thee, so I
say to al unto whom the grace of God is offered, they must not be dull and
sullen, but up and be doing As the Apostle speaks, in 1. Phil. 20. According
to the earnest expectation, the word that is translated, earnest expectation in
the original, signifies to stretch out the neck, to look after some good that I
would fain have come, that is the propriety of the word in the original text:
so this should be coming to Christ, that is, when Christ is propouned in the
gospel, there should be the stretching out of the soul, in looking after the
Lord Jesus and a working of the soul after Jesus Christ, keeping the soul
working and stirring after Christ. Many poor souls, whom God is beginning to
work his grace upon, loose abundance of time and comfort, for want of this, of
keeping their hearts in a working and stirring frame after Christ, they spend
their time in the afflicting of their souls, but they do not keep their hearts
working toward Jesus Christ. As Jacob said to his sons, when they wanted bread
in Cannaan, says he, We have heard that there is corn in Egypt and why do we
stand looking one upon an other? says Jacob to his sons, had you gone (says
he) you might have been come back again, and brought us bread by this time, so
I say to many burdened souls, have thou not heard, that there is grace and
mercy in Jesus Christ, had thy soul bin working, stirring, and kept in an
acting frame after Jesus Christ, thou might have bin returnig, and have
gotten rest to thy soul by this time, thou stand looking unto this thing,
and the other thing, and poring upon thy corruptions, had thou kept thy heart
continually stirring in a working frame after Christ, the work might have been
done by this time.

Fourthly, Come to me, that is, says Christ, come and lay al your burdens upon
me, come and role your hearts upon me whatever burden it is, either of your
souls or afflictions outwardly, what ever your fears and troubles are, yet
come, and do you cast al your burdens upon me, I am content to bear them al.
That is a special work of faith, for the soul to role it self upon Jesus
Christ, to cast it self with all its burdens upon the infinite rich, free grace
of God in Jesus Christ, as if Christ should say, is it the burden of sin? I
have borne the burden of sin already, Is it the wrath of God that is a burden
to you? come and cast this burden upon me, I have born the wrath of God; Or is
it the burden of the Law? I have borne that burden for you, I was made an
offering for you. I was made under the law, to deliver you from under the law.
Is it the burden of any affliction? That was upon me. It is true, the burden of
corruption was not upon him, but Christ will deliver us from that too. Come to
me, and whatever burden is upon your souls, cast it upon me, role your souls
and al your burdens upon me (says Christ) and I will give you rest.

Fifthly, and lastly, Come to me, that is, come and leave your souls with me,
and commit them to me for life, for salvation, for peace, for whatsoever good
you would have, be willing to betrust me with your souls, be willing to betrust
me with all your comforts, be willing to betrust me both with your present and
with your eternal estate, in all your transanctions with God and dealing with
God, trust me withal; that is coming to Christ. When Christ bids us come to
him, it is as much as if he should say, come to me, and leave your souls, leave
al your care, and commit to me all that you have, and whatsoever you are commit
your selves wholly to me, to be disposed of by me for all good whatsoever, and I
will take charge of you, I will engage my self and al my faithfulness to have a
care of you, and suply you in all your wants, and strengthen you under al your
burdens, and carry you through al difficulties, and bring you at length to life
and salvation and perfect rest together with my Father and my self, that is the
meaning of Christ when he says, Come to me. So the Apostle in 1. Tim. 2.12. I
know in whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him. That which I have committed to him, what is that? that is,
his very soul, his life, his peace, his comfort, al his happiness, he had
committed to him, and so left al with him. Now then, take al these together,
and when Christ calls the sinner to come to him, that is. O! Sinner first
believe this, that I am the great redeemer that is come into the world, to
stand between Gods wrath and your souls, and to make up peace between God and
you, and let there be an unsettling of your hearts from whatsoever heretofore
your Souls did Rest in, Creature comforts, your own Righteousness, Duties, self
respects and ends, whatsoever they are, let your hearts be taken off from them
all, and let your hearts now be in a stirring, working disposition toward me,
let all your whole Souls be stretching forth to me, and come and cast all your
burdens upon me, and leave your Souls with me, and I will take care of them,
thus come to me.

Now then, when any soul that is thus Laden, shall answer to this call of
Christ, and shall say, Lord, I come, here is the very voice and answer of Faith,
when the Soul can say, Oh! Lord, I come, I see thee to be the blessed Mediator
between God and my Soul, and for whatsoever my heart has settled in heretofore,
Oh! Lord, it shall be no more, and my heart begins to stir after thee, and I
stretch forth my Soul to thee, O, Blessed redeemer, and here I cast my burdens
upon thee, none can ease me but thy self, and I leave my self with thee, I
commit all to thee, and betrust all that I have or can do, my eternal estate
with thee, Lord, I come, here is the soul that comes to Christ. Then may the
Soul be said to come to Christ when there is an answer in these five
Particulars. All this is contained in this word COME, though you cannot
apprehend it, til it be unfoulded: as a piece of needle work, when it is
foulded up, there is all the work indeed within, but we cannot see it, til it
be laid open, and spread before us, then we can see all that is in it: So
though there be many expressions in the Scripture that we understand not, yet
there they be, but this is the work of the Ministry, to spread them, and to lay
them before you, and lay them open to you, that you may see the Grace of God in
another manner when they be unfolded, now thus does Christ call those that are
Laden to come to him.

CHAP. XIX.
How Christ calls Sinners unto him, set forth in two Particulars, Namely, 1. By
an outward and general call. 2. By a Particular call to Particular Sinners. And
how to know the voice of Christ.

YOu will say, how, and in what manner does Christ call to me, Christ is in
Heaven, I cannot hear Christ call to me.

Now for the call of Christ, First, There is a general call in the word, there
Christ calls under the sound of the Gospel to come to him, but this call is
rather a command of Christ then an invitaion, to show unto al what is their
Duty to do, rather then to invite them. But now, there is a more special call
unto those whom the Father has given to Christ, and though they make use of
the general call in the word, yet there is a special call to them, that is,
Christ by his Spirit does open the Riches of the Gospel of the Grace in him to
their Souls by his Spirit inwardly, he does show them to their Souls. Others
come and hear the outward call, that is when a Minister of God shall come and
open the Gospel, and there show how God has given his Son to us, he has taken
our Nature upon him, and died for sin, and tell them that God requires all here
in the Gospel to believe in his Son, they hear his outward call, I but they whom
the father gives to Christ have the Spirit of God sent together with the word,
to open the Riches of Christ, that though they have heard it a hundred times
before, Yet when the spirit comes, there is a showing of the beauty and Riches
of the Gospel, more then ever, that allures their Souls to come to Christ.

Secondly, Not only this, but the Lord when he calls such as shall indeed have
mercy by Christ, and have his invitation to be effectual, he does give a
Particular call unto that Soul, besides the general call: God does not only in
the word call sinners, and says Christ came to save Sinners, and those that
were lost, but Christ comes in Particular to such and such Souls, and calls them
in a Particular special manner. For the Ministers of God they are bound in the
Preaching of the Gospel, to give a general invitation to come to him, but God
beside the general has a Particular call, there is a voice of God in Particular
to the Soul that he intends to bring to his Son, such a one hears a voice
behind him (as the Scripture speaks) saying this is the way, to Salvation, the
way you have gone all this while is not the way to life, you will perish in
that way, Christ is the right way. As thus; I will open it in the general and
Particular call by this similitude. A Prince that has had many of his subjects
Traitors, yet he is pleased to send forth a general Proclamation, makes a
Proclamation to those subjects, and makes it in general terms, that though you
have been thus and thus Traitorous against me, yet I am content every one that
will come to such a place, at such a day, and submit himself, he shall have a
pardon; here is the general Proclamation, and this is encouragement to come.
But now suppose there were some poor Traitor that because sensible of his
wickedness, and how unreasonably he has dealt with his Prince, and may be sits
alone bemoaning his condition, and troubled in his spirit, and thinks with
himself, how shall I be able to see the Face of my Prince, Oh! woe to me for
the wickedness of my ways: Suppose the Prince should come by and behold such a
one, take notice of him that is got into some corner or other, and is there
smiting of his Breast, and lamenting his condition that he should so provoke
his Prince as he has done. And should call this poor creature, and say to him,
Oh thou poor Creature that art in such a place, come thou to me. For so is the
work of faith, God comes in particular to the soul, does not only come in
general, but after his general Call, when he does see the soul troubled, the
Lord does give a particular Call to him, and says, O! thou poor Creature, thou
art under this burden, and thus sensible of it, and lamentest that thou have
lived thus and thus, and made such a breach between me and thy soul, do thou
come to me. And the truth is, till God speak in particular to the soul, the
proclamation of God in general, will not bring in sinners, so Christ does not
only say in general, Come to me, but calls them in particular.

3. You will say, How shall we know it is the voice of Christ? that is the
third particular. Christ does by the Spirit, secretly persuade the soul, that
it is his voice, and not the voice of delusion; according to that in Cant. 2 8.
The voice of my beloved. As it is, when the Soul is departed from God, and
comes again to him, the Lord Christ makes the Soul to know his voice. So when
he was in this world, after his Resurrection, he confers with Mary a while, and
she thought it had been the Gardener, and Christ he speaks but a word, speaks
to her, and says, Mary; Rabboni, (says she) Master presently. Christ did not
tell her, he was the Christ, but he said Mary, and presently Mary knew it was
the voice of Christ. And so when the Spirit of Christ speaks to the soul, there
is such a secret instinct, a persuasion and manifestation of God to it, that it
does know indeed that it is the voice of God. I have been often at a Sermon,
and heard many good men preach Christ, but I hear the voice of Christ this day
in my soul, and I know it is the voice of Christ: Thus does the soul that comes
to Christ effectually.

4. And further, The invitation of Christ, when it is indeed effectual, as I
know it is Christ's voice, Christ comes and knocks at the door, and the soul
knows who it is (that is to be applied to his particular Call). As Christ
says, I stand at the door and knock: that is to be referred to the second
particular, I stand and knock at the door, and if any man will open to me, I
will come in to him, and sup with him. God does not only proclaim pardon, but
comes to the door of the soul, and stands at thy door particularly: you cannot
but find this by experience, you that have the work of Grace upon you, you have
lived under the means a long time, but God comes and knocks at your doors also;
which is a mighty condescension of a Prince, that does not only send sorth a
Proclamation, but knocks at the poor Traitors door; and so does Christ: and
when that is done, before the soul does indeed come and cast himself so upon
Christ, and commit himself to Christ, there are some secret items and
intimations that God does intend love to it in particular, that he has
thoughts of love and mercy to the soul, though I have been very vile, and very
wretched, yet partly I gather it, by the way of God toward me, that there is
thoughts of mercy to me.

Quest. You will say, How does that appear, that there is any such intimation
of Gods go^ness to a soul in particular when it is called to come to Christ?

Answ. I will give you this Ground, When the soul comes to Christ, and casts it
self upon Christ, it does it not at a mere venture, and knows not whether he
shall have mercy or no. It is true, I come to Christ, and there is no other
help, but I know not whether I shall have mercy or no, or whether there be any
mercy or no for me, this is not the work of faith, this way is near to faith
indeed, when the soul can say thus, It is true, in the way I have been there is
no mercy to me, and I know not whether there be mercy for me, but I will try it,
it has not the reflect act of faith, but some secret persuasion of the soul,
whereby it does cast it self upon God, though not by a reflect act, it can
certainly say, God intends mercy for me, but though it be very weak, yet some
intimation the soul has that there is mercy from God toward it, because Faith
is not a bare venture, but Faith has some kind of certainty though very weak,
for to say, I will cast my soul upon God, but I may perish, I have no ground to
think why God should save me, this is unbelief; the work of Faith, according to
the degree of it, has some kind of certainty in it, though the soul for the
present, be not able to discern it.

5. The invitation of Christ, when it comes to be effectual, has, together
with the voice of Christ, an inward effectual power that goes along with it, a
prevailing power to draw the heart to him. Christ does not only speak to the
heart, and say to it, Come; but with the voice he lets out a power upon the
heart to come to him: I express it thus: When Christ was in the flesh, he goes
and calls Disciples to him; comes to Matthew that sat at the receipt of Custom,
says he, Come and follow me; presently Matthew leaves his sitting at the
Custom House, leaves all his Friends, and leaves all he had, and comes to him
presently. And so when Christ comes to Peter and Andrew his Brother, that were
a fishing, and says to them, Come to me; they leave their old Father, leave
their Nets, leave their Ship, leave all, and follow Christ. Certainly we cannot
but apprehend that there was a secret virtue went out from Christ with this his
Word, that did thus prevail upon their hearts. As the poor woman in the Gospel
that had the bloody issue, she did but touch the hem of Christ's Garment, and
she finds a secret virtue to cure her: so, where ever Christ's invitation comes
to be effectual, it comes with a mighty power, a secret virtue that goes
together with his word to the soul to prevail upon it.

Come to me, say many, Why does Christ call me? am I able to come to him?
Christ says, Come; to them as he did to Matthew, Peter, and others; Christ did
not call them, and say, Come, only; but he put virtue into his word: and look
what virtue was then, the same is now in the ministry of the word, when he
speaks and says come to Christ, together with this word there goes a secret
power to prevail upon the Soul that they must come. Now it may be, the Father,
or Mother, or friend of a poor young man persuades him not to come, but he must
come to Chirst for all that, the truth is, it is as strong a work of God to come
to Christ now, as it was then to call Matthew and Peter to come to Christ.

Lastly, He not only calls them, but he reaches out his hand, before he comes
to be joined with Christ, to have union with him. Christ when he sees the Soul
making after him, he reaches forth his hand to draw the Heart. You will say
what is that for Christ to reach forth his hand, and invite that way? By that I
mean those gracious encouragements that Christ gives to all the beginnings of
the working of the Soul after him, the Lord Christ not only invites such, but
gives forth his hand to reach forth strength unto them, he will not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench the Smoking Flax. Thus you see what the second thing
is, Christ invites in another manner.

CHAP. XX.
That there is nothing required of Sinners but to come to Christ, with nine
Consequences arising from hence, and what has been laid down in the two former
Chapters. 1. There is not any worthiness required in such as come to Christ. 2.
The Soul needs not to be troubled about the time and measure of its Humiliation
before its coming to Christ. 3. Nor about what interest it has in Christ,
before its coming to him. 4. That the least degree of Faith will give the Soul
interest in Christ. 5. That the work of Faith is Supernatural. 6. That Faith is
an humbling Grace. 7. That believers after their coming to Christ should be
willing to do and suffer much for Christ. 8. That they who are once in Christ,
shall never be cast off. 9. That they know not what to do when they loose their
interest in Christ.

NOw the third thing is, That there is nothing else required, says Christ,
Come to me and I will give you Rest. Blessed Christ! is this all that thou
requirest; yes, come to me, and you shall have Rest. You have it often expressed
in Scripture thus, Come, and buy Wine and Milk and Honey without price, it is
but coming: and indeed the very coming is buying. And so in the 22. of the
Revel. and the 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that
hears, say come, and he that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take
of the Water of Life freely. Here is nothing but come, three times come, and
there is nothing else required, nothing that thou should bring with thee,
but only come. Only in this remember how I opened it, what it is to Come, and
then there is nothing else required, but only come. Then this gives light to
many things.

1. That there is no unworthiness of any sinner, be he what he will be, before
this invitation, that is sufficient to hinder, Why? Because Christ does not say
you that have been thus vild and wretched, you shall do thus and thus first, and
then come to me. No, Whatever you have been, the first thing that Christ
requires to ease, Rest and peace, is, to come to him. It is true, there are
some things in the Nature of coming required that must needs be done, before
the complete act of coming; as I must know what Christ is, and know my self,
etc. these things of necessity are required not because these are any condition
of the Gospel, but because the other cannot be done without them. For I would
open it thus to follow the former Metaphor. Suppose the King should tell a
Traitor, that upon condition that you come to such a place at such a time, you
shall have your pardon. Well, all that is required for his pardon is but coming
to that place, how if this man be at a great distance from that place, and many
difficulties that hinder him, S^ormes, Tempestuous weather, and many friends to
hinder him, this is employed, that he must have such a deep apprehension of the
worth of his pardon, and of his miserable condition if he be not pardoned, that
there must be a strong resolution in him to go through all difficulties
whatsoever. But mark, this resolution of his and the difficulties that he
meets withal in the way, these are no part of the condition of the pardon; all
the condition of the pardon is, but to be at such a place, such a time, but yet
the other things they follow of themselves, that if he does come, and there be
such difficulties in the way, then he must have such a sense and apprehension
of the good of his pardon as may stir up in him such resolutions, to pass
through all difficulties. But the first thing that brings him his pardon is his
being there. So it is here with the Soul, its true, the thing that bring^ my
Soul and yours to pardon. Rest and Peace with God, it is our coming to Christ,
but now because there is a great distance between Christ and us, many
difficulties in the way, many things that would keep us from Christ, the
wickedness of our Hearts, this temptation and that lust. Now it cannot possibly
be, If we come to Christ, but we must know, and become apprehensive of the
worth of the pardon, which may raise up in our hearts such strong resolutions
to pass through all Difficulties whatsoever, and there is no Reason, why God
troubles any man for sin, but only this, that he might have such an
apprehension of the Good of the pardon of his sin, as may stir in him strong
resolutions to get to Christ. But now this resolution is not the condition of
the Covenant, the condition is only to come, the condition is not because we
are afflicted, because we see our sins, but to come to Christ.

2. It follows likewise from hence, That no Man or Woman, that God is working
upon to come to Christ, need trouble themselves about the degree of
humiliation, or the time of humiliation. You have a great many, that are ready
to take advantage and to cry out against men that they Preach legally, when
they say, they must be humbled and the like. I know no man living that ever
Preached so, that they must be first under the Law, thus long under the Law,
before they come to Christ, but if you would know what degree of humiliation is
sufficient, only so much as can bring you to Christ, that is, so much as can
stir up your Hearts to resolve to pass through all difficulties to come to
Christ, then you have the measure, and the time of humiliation sufficient, and
you need not trouble your selves any further about this, I have not been
humbled so long as another Man, or such a time, but if you come to Christ. For
if I come to Christ, I must know what I come for, for a Pardon. A pardon of
what? for my sin, my sin that I am condemned for; there must be a sense of
this, and if you come thus far, you need not be afflicted for any degree, or
time of humiliation, or the like, for you have that that is sufficient, and God
will accept of your coming: if once you be come to him, God will not say, Oh! but
Friend, how have you been humbled in your coming, God knows you have past
through many difficulties, God knows you would never have prised Christ, except
you had known what the worth of Christ is, by knowing what a miserable creature
you are without him; God will not do this, but will welcome you when you come,
let the sinner be what he will, Christ will own him.

3. This helps us about interest in coming to Christ, you will say, come to
Christ, but how shall I know that I have any right to come to Christ? This very
point answers it, that nothing is required but coming, that which has given
any soul from the beginning of the world any interest to come to Christ, is only
coming to Christ; thy coming to Christ does give thee right to Jesus Christ.
If thy grace, the grace of God does make thee come, that very act of thine in
coming gives thee interest and right in him, though thou had none before.
There needs no other right and challenge to Christ but Gods offering of Christ
in the Gospel to thee, and thy coming to him. But now (for it is pity to let
this pass) it may be, some may think, will not this tend to looseness to say,
its nothing else but to Come to Christ? I know it is extremely abused many
ways, many will abuse it thus, when we are preaching the Gospel, that if at any
time we preach the miserable condition of men to humble them, they will say, it
is a contradiction, but I beseech you take heed of these vain Spirited men, who
seek not Jesus Christ in the way of the Gospel. And though it may be through
their weakness or the distemper of their hearts, they will not, or do not see
the way of the Gospel, but they will come to young people and weak Christians
and say, there is contradiction in this, for if this be true, how can the other
be true? But these things that seem contradictory, they are very agreeable one
with another, if you would seem to give judgment upon what we apprehend we shall
make the Scripture to contradict it self. But now those that are versed in
Scripture and understand the mind of God in the Scripture can tell how to join
these together, though others think they contradict one another. As that of
Paul to the Romans, That we are justified by faith without the works of the
Law. And that in James, he says, we are Justified by works. A stranger would
think, these contradict one another, but they that are acquainted with the way
of the Scripture, they can understand what this means: So these men that would
make contradiction in the preaching of Gods Ministers in the Gospel, they are
strangers to the way of God in the Gospel, did they understand the way of God
clearly in the Gospel, they would know how to make a sweet agreement of such
things as they would make poor young ones, and weak believers to believe there
is a contradiction in them. And therefore this I would hold, and hope we shall
for ever hold as a strong principle, That the condition of the Gospel is only
coming, and that which the weight of our souls and eternal estates lies upon
is, not our humbling, but it is the coming to Jesus Christ. Do not say, that
this tends to looseness, for that soul that sees Christ as the glorious mediator
to come to save him, this sight of Christ, has a great deal of power to
sanctify the heart, for when I see this, I see, first, that I have to do with
God, and that there must be a mediator between God and me, my sins have made
such a breach between God and my soul, this tends not to looseness. And then as
you were taught before, coming notes a removing from one condition to another.
Then it notes secondly, that my heart is taken off from the world, from my
lusts, from my corruptions, my coming implies this. And thirdly, when I
consider the end of my coming, what the soul aims at when it comes thus, I
come to Christ to save me from the power of my sins, as well as the guilt of my
sins. I come to Christ as the fountain of al my happiness, I come to him for
life and grace and all good. I come to him that I might live in him, and that I
might live to God by him, Certainly to say that Christ requires only to come to
him, this does not tend to looseness. I come to Christ that I may commit my
whole soul to him, is not this a sanctifying grace? Indeed to preach thus, that
you may come to Christ and no more, this pleases Libertines, but when we
consider what is the way of the Gospel, I must first know what it is to come,
and then I must know that it is to leave somewhat; to know wherefore I come,
that I may have al my happiness in him. I come to him for life, for salvation,
for union with God the father, that I may enjoy communion with him to
everlasting, here is no liberty to looseness in coming, but a blessed
maintaining of the condition of the Gospel in the way of the souls coming unto
Christ.

4. It follows from hence that the weakest, and the least degree of Faith that
is, will give us interest in Christ because that nothing but coming to him is
required. It is not run to me, or come strongly to me, if I can but get to him,
though it be crawling, though it be never so poorly, never so weakly, that
does it, by coming and closing with Christ. If that be the condition to come
to such a place for a pardon, though they come creeping upon their hands and
feet through weakeness, yet if they be but there, they shall have that that is
promised: so say I, though the soul in coming to Christ creep as it were upon
hand and feet, come with much weakeness, it is that that gives interest in
Christ, not such and such degrees of Faith and confidence as some have. It may
be some poor, weak Christians, are troubled at this, that they have not such
confidence and assurance as others have, they are full of doubts and fears. We
are to know, that it is not the degree and strength of Faith that is required
in coming, but coming to Christ, Come to me, though it be with shaking, with
trembling, though with mixture of much fear, yet come to me, and you shall have
rest.

5. It follows from hence, That the work of faith, and bringing true rest unto
the soul is a supernatural work, it is coming to him, that is, its the looking
forward, by a righteousness that is beyond our own, it is a leaving our own
righteousness, not resting upon that, and confiding in what we have, are, or
can be enabled to do by the power of God; I say, that the way of the souls
getting rest in Christ by faith, it is supernatural, for it is by such a way,
wherein the soul comes to deny it self in whatever it has, whatever it does,
whatever it can be enabled to do by the power of God. It rests not upon any
thing that is in it, or done by it, no nor in any thing that God himself by his
grace and infinite power can do in it, I do not say, do for it, for that is in
Christ, but do in it, beyond what is in it self, or Gods infinite power is able
to enable it to do, it is coming to Christ, and therefore going out of our
selves, this is supernatural; for there is nothing more natural to mankind then
this, to rest upon his own bottom, to desire the staff in his own hand, to
lean upon some worthiness, and some good in himself, this though he will
acknowledge that it is through grace, that he has but somewhat which God works
through him, that is the most natural to a rational creature, to rest upon
somewhat that he does to make up his peace with God, and to be his
righteousness before God, And it is a mighty work of God to beat off the heart
from this especially. The heart comes thus far, to say it is true, I can do
nothing of my self, but it is by the grace of God that I do al: now for the
heart not to rest upon this as its own righteousness, this is the hardest thing
in the world. And although men may be convinced in their judgments, that they
should not rest in any such thing, but go out of themselves to another
principle, yet it is the hardest thing in the world to come off from it, and it
is that makes the work of faith the most difficult thing in the world, because
it carries the soul out of it self, from its own bottom, from its own
principles, and the mistake of this thing, is that that is the undoing of
thousands of those that live under the sound of the gospel, that when they have
somewhat reformed their lives, and think they are able to do thus and thus, yet
here they rest and go not out of themselves, to look for rest out of themselves
and do not come to Christ.

Quest. You will say, What, not rest upon what we do, and are enabled to do upon
Gods grace, Faith it self is a resting upon Christ.

Ans. No, but this you must observe in your coming, you must not rest upon
your coming, but upon Christ, that you come unto, for their may be a deceit in
that too. There be some that rest upon works of humiliation, mourning for sin,
reforming their lives, and they think that is their rest and peace. Others go
further, and think they must believe in Christ, but they will rest upon their
believing, so they rest upon their coming, and not upon the object that they
come unto; but we must be taken off from resting upon our coming, upon our
very believing, and Christ must be all in all to have true rest in. Therefore
faith is a Supernatural grace, because by that we are taken off from what we
are in our selves, and carried on to somewhat else.

6. Upon this follows likewise That faith is an humbling grace, it is that that
must needs humble the soul where it is, for indeed it is the greatest self
denial in the world, for a creature to come to be willing to rely upon free
grace, for the soul to be so emptied of it self, as to acknowledge, there is no
worthiness no good at al in it self and yet it is content to live eternally
upon mere alms, and to give God the glory of al. Is there any thing more hard
to any of you, then to live to be beggars al your days, to be beholding to
others, so as to live upon mere alms and nothing else all the days of your
lives? Now for the creature to be so emptied of it self, as to live upon mere
alms to al eternity, upon nothing but mere free grace, and upon a principle of
life without our selves, this is a mighty work of emptying of our selves, and
of self denial. And therefore in Romans 10.3. Its spoken of the Jews; For they
being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. This
plainly shows, that the bringing the heart to rest upon the righteousness that
is of God by faith (for that is meant here) requires a submission of the heart,
a laying down the heart, and a humbling of the heart; and indeed, this is the
very ground, why the Lord does so humble the spirits of men and women when he
brings them to Christ, because that the Lord knows, that the very act, the
coming to Christ, is an act of the greatest self denial in the world, because
the heart must be emptied of it self in that that is so much against the pride
of man's heart, to live eternally upon mere free grace and nothing else. For
there is nothing that man does more desire, then to have somewhat, some stock
of himself to live upon. And indeed herein man comes to be more humble then
Adam in innocence could be, for Adam had a stock to live upon in his own hand,
to live upon in himself, not but God was the principle of it, but then God gave
it him to live upon, the stock of Grace he had in his own hand. But now in the
second Adam, the way of God toward us is otherwise, the second Adam keeps the
stock of life and grace upon which our souls must live eternally, in his own
hand, I say, they are in Christ's hand, not in our selves, and therefore our
life is a better and safer life then that was, and thereby we cannot fall from
God because we live by the principle of life that is in him. It is a great
mystery, and almost impossible to unfould, only some glimmering we have in the
word that this is so.

7. If there be nothing required but to come, then another consequence will
follow from hence, and that is this. Hence then believers that come to Christ
may learn this lesson, to be willing to do and to suffer very much for Christ
after they come, because there was nothing required of them to the pardon of
their sins, but only to Come. I strengthen the inference thus; If God had said
thus indeed, I have sent a mediator to pacify my wrath and to pardon your
sins, and before you come to Rest, I require that you should suffer so many
hundred years of torment in fire, and that should be a preparation to come,
and then after you have suffered so much, then you shall come and have rest;
suppose this had been the condition of the covenant, now had it been so, we had
al had cause to have fallen upon our face and have blessed his great name, that
we can have peace on any terms, and we should have been, not only willing to
accept of these terms, but to magnify Gods grace that we can be thus saved at
last. But the Lord has not required that first we should suffer such and such
hard things, and then Come to Christ, but he calls upon us first to come, and
requires nothing before. And therefore before we are able to do the Lord any
service, the Lord will first accept of us, and pardon us, and heal us, and
interest us in himself, and be our God, and take us to be his Children, and
make us heirs of heaven and eternal life, and this at first before we shall ever
be able to do him any service. What an infinite grace of God is this? how is he
beforehand with us? for he calls to the greatest sinner, that knows what his
sin is, and is Laden, says God, I require nothing before the receiving you to
mercy, but merely to come and cast your souls upon me. You may say, Lord! we
that have been guilty of so many sins, so many years, might it not be just that
God should require, and say, I but, you shall live so many years to my honor,
live so many years to my service, and then I will pardon and accept of you, no,
but says God, I will receive you, and accept of you upon your coming, before
ever you are able to do me any kind of service; no, says God, come to me, and
you shall have first my favor, and you shall be first accepted, and first
pardoned, and then indeed I expect service from you, then I expect that you
should live as the redeemed ones of the Lord, and all that you shall do
afterward, shall be but in way of thankfulness to me for my grace. And indeed
thus do believers live in the world, though they look upon what they do in a
way of duty, but they do it in a way of thankfulness, that is the special thing
that carries them on, the grace of God in his son, and that is a stronger
argument to al kind of duties that now God requires of them, then what they had
before. God does not call upon you to suffer first, and then he will pardon your
sin, no, but says God, I will bestow my favor first upon you, and try whither
you will suffer afterward. God will not do as men, try them whether they will
suffer and deserve their favors, before they bestow them on them, but says
God, I will first bestow my favors upon you, and then I will try whether you will
suffer for me and do me service. And therefore the less God requires as a
condition before we come to Christ the more should we be willing to do for God
after we are come to Christ. As a man that shall receive a poor child into his
family, and make him his heir, the less that was procured to the favor of the
man, the more if the child be ingenious will he do to him in way of
thankfulness. Indeed if the friends of the Child come and indent with the man,
and promise him a hundred pound, the Child thinks he is not so beholding to his
master, for their was money given with him, I but now, if you should ly at the
door and no friend to look after you, and not a rag upon you, and if then he
will take you in, and teach you his trade, and make you the heir of al he has,
Oh! now how infinitely engaged are you to him, that how my master does all this
for me, and there was nothing done before to procure his love. Thus Jesus
Christ is a forehand with us, Come to me, only come to me, that you might have
Rest.

8. Hence follows another note of very good use, seeing nothing is required
first, but only coming to Christ, here is a strong ground of assurance, that
those that are once in Christ, shall not be cast away, but shall have eternal
life, for there is not so great a distance between eternal life and the members
of Christ, as there is between one that is in his Natural estate, and a member
of Christ. Now God has done more for thee in bringing thee unto Christ, then
he shall do for thee when he brings thee unto Heaven. For there is a geater
distance between thee and Christ, than there is between thee a Member of Christ
and a glorified Saint in Heaven, and if God bring thee over this great
distance, merely out of free Grace, and nothing required but coming, that now
thou art a member of Christ and therefore have right to Heaven, and thou can
challeng Heaven through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and God has put a
principle of life into thee to live unto Jesus Christ, a principle of
everlasting life into thee, when there was no principle at all; God brings thee
to Jesus Christ merely out of free Grace. Now if thou come so freely to him,
surely thou shall not be shut out of Heaven, and therefore it may be a mighty
incouragment. What, if when we were enemies, we be Reconciled to Christ, much
more now shall we be saved by his life. If when I was in the Gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, God gave me mercy upon coming to his
Son, surely he will not cast me out of Heaven.

9. Another note that we may learn from hence is this, That those that are
believers, if at any time through their negligence, sluggishness, or falls, they
loose the assurance of Gods love in Christ, loose their Rest in Christ, here
they have a direction to know what to do. Look how thou did at first, when
thou attainedst first Rest in Christ, it was not by any Righteousness of thine
own, nor by thy humiliation, though that might make some way toward it. So now
when thou art a believer, and have lost the assurance of Christ's Love, and the
comfort of Rest in Christ, now thou must go and take the same way again, Christ
calls those that are believers to come to him; those that have lost the
assurance of Faith, that is the way for Rest, to renew the act of thy coming to
Christ, just as thou did before. Though God did humble thee, yet the thing
that did bring thee Rest was, the coming to Jesus Christ, so much more
should thou do now, being a believer. When thou have not the Rest in Christ
thou desire, thy way is to renew thy act of coming, of going to Christ, and
so you may sooner come to have Rest that way, than by thinking thus. I know not
whether my evidences be right or no, and I had need look to them, and therefore
I had need to look whether my humiliation be right, and my Sanctification be
right or no. I say, the renewing the act of thy faith in coming to Christ, will
bring Rest sooner, and safer Rest, and therefore thou shall come to see thy
Sanctification better too, by renewing the act of thy Faith in coming unto
Christ, and thou will have thy Rest sooner that way, it follows from hence
because at first conversion there is coming. Thus much for the Consequences
that follow from the point of Christ's requiring only to come.

CHAP. XXI.
Nine Rules to be observed in right coming to Christ. 1. Rest not in outward
means that lead to Christ, before Christ himself be enjoyed. 2. Pitch rather
upon Christ himself, than upon the good things of Christ. 3. Come with the
whole Soul. 4. Keep Christ continually in thine Eye. 5. Be convinced that
whatsoever keeps thee from Christ, comes not from God. 6. Take heed and beware
of al discouragements, and hindrances. 7. Keep the Heart still tending to
Christ. 8. Give up thy self to Gods Spirit. 9. Often renew the act of coming,
come often to Christ.

NOw there is only two things remain, and that is, some Rules to be propounded
about our coming to Christ, And then some means to draw the Hearts of sinners
to come to Christ.

First, For the Rules, that we may observe them aright in coming to Christ, and
come to Christ in a right way, I speak to those whose Hearts are about coming
to Jesus Christ, their hearts are stirring after Christ, and they are setting
upon all the means to come to him.

RULE I.
First, Though God requires that thou should seek Christ in all his
ordinances, in the performance of all Duties, yet it must be thy great care not
to rest in the means that lead to Christ, before thou come to enjoy Christ
himself. This is the great mistake in the world, that those things that are the
means to lead to Christ, they rest in, though indeed they have not Christ. As
now for instance: to come to hear the word, I suppose if I ask you, why you
come, you will say, you come that you might find Christ there, yet how many
people rest in this merely, that they do hear the word, they hear Sermons, and
scarce ever call this into question, have I met with Jesus Christ in the word to
day, have I found Jesus Christ there, this their Hearts are not so much
troubled about, but they come merely to hear the word, it is a good thing, But
now they Rest in the means, that lead to Christ before they are got thither. As
if a man were a going a journey to such a place about such business, and he
satisfies himself in this, I am going on my way, but have I got the thing I go
for? We are to know that Prayer, the word, the Sacraments are all but as means
to bring us to Christ, now what a foolish thing is this, to satisfy our
selves, that we are in the way, going to the thing, but have we the thing that
we journey for? Jesus Christ is the thing that we seek for, have we him? The
wise Merchant had the Field, I but he saw that there was a Pearl in the field,
and then he went and sold all that he might have the Pearl. The field is the
Preaching of the word, and other ordinances, in these ordinances is the Pearl,
now that which we should look for in the ordinances is the pearl, and so use
the field but only for the Pearls sake. So that this is the way that we should
take to come to Christ, that is, in the use of all duties, and all ordinances,
to look at Christ, that we would have by them, and be sure to pass through the
ordinances til we get hold on him whom our Soul loves: most people in the
world, they stick in the ordinances themselves, and have got no hold on Christ,
but merely spend all in duties and ordinances, that they will do. God requires
of them to pray, and they will pray, and God requires of them to hear the word,
and they will hear the word, I but, they do not consider, that there is
something beyond Prayer, and beyond the word. Have I got to Jesus Christ in
Prayer, have I got to Jesus Christ in the word. And that is a good sign when
the hearts of sinners are satisfied with nothing, with no ordinances except
they find Jesus Christ in those ordinances, be sure to go through the
ordinances unto Christ.

RULE. II.
Secondly, In your seeking after Christ, be sure that you rather pitch your eye
and your heart, upon the person of Christ himself, then upon the good things
that come from Christ, that is the way to pitch your eye and your heart upon
Christ himself, rather then upon the good things that come from Christ, for
coming to Christ, and being in him, is only as being married to him. Now the
party that marries, he looks more upon the person then upon the portion, he
looks upon the excellency of the person; so should the Soul in coming to
Christ, look upon him as the only great mediator of the Covenant, as the only
reconciler of God and man, as the only person in whom all our good, happiness,
and glory lies. Labor to see an excellency in Christ himself, as well as to come
to Christ. There are many souls that would come to Christ, why? because they
think there is no mercy but in Christ, and they would be loath to go to Hell,
and therefore they cry to God for mercy in Christ, I but, they see not any
excellency in Christ, but thou must look upon the excellencies of Christ, and
look through the ordinances unto union with Christ, look after union with the
person of Christ himself, and see an excellency and beauty in the very person
of Jesus Christ, to be able to say, I see the glory of the Father in him, and
my Soul makes after him to have union with him.

RULE. III.
Thirdly, In thy coming, be sure of this, to come with thy whole soul; that
is, do not come to Christ only as one means of help for you, and thinking it
is Good to make use of al means we can, and Christ I see to be as likely a
means as any other. No, but come to Christ as the only means, so as to cast thy
whole soul upon him, not to hang upon any thing else, and so to give out, as it
were, an arm to him, and yet to have somewhat else to rest upon if that fail.
As we come to a friend sometimes, and desire somewhat of him, but how? so as we
would make a friend other where, that if that fail we may have two strings to
our bow: but we must come to Christ and lay the full weight upon him alone, the
full soul upon him. We must come to Christ, not as if we were over some deep
pit, and here is one thing to rest upon that is strong enough, that if we would
lay weight upon that is alone we might be safe. Well, but there is another
thing, that is a rotten thing, now we are loath to venture upon the strong, the
sound, not knowing it to be so, but we lay a part upon the rotten, and part
upon the sound, by this perhaps we may come to fall and perish, because the full
weight was not laid upon that that was sound. So here, the Lord propounds his
son as an alsufficient redeemer for us, in whom there is righteousness and
salvation, and requires of those that come to his Son, that they shall come with
their whole souls, and lay the whole weight of their souls upon him for life and
salvation, and al their good and happiness. Now if they think to have two
strings to their bow, they would have Christ, but they would have the world
too, and their own ways too, upon this a Thousand to one but they miscarry. It
was an excellent speech of Joseph, sending for his father Jacob in Genesis
45.20. Joseph sent to have his father Jacob brought to him, now there was many
things that Jacob had regard to before, but now, says he, regard not the
stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours. So when the Lord does
call any poor sinner to come to him, the Lord says to it, regard not the stuff,
let your Heart be wholly taken off from all Creature comforts that are most
dear unto you it is all but stuff, here is Heaven, here is the Riches of
Heaven, the Riches of Christ is yours, and then does the Soul come to Christ
indeed, when it lays all upon Christ, and is satisfied with him alone.

RULE. IV.
Fourthly, When thy Soul is making toward Christ, labor to keep him
continually in thine Eye and look upon him in his excellency, Glory, and
beauty, keep the object before thee all the while thou art coming toward him.
As it is in any journey, if I am going to a place, and I can see the journeys
end, it is in mine eye, I can see the steeple before me of the place that I am
going unto; when the Mariner can see the harbor that he is going unto, this
is comfortable. So the Soul that comes to Christ must resolve and say, I must
keep him in mine Eye, in his luster, Beauty, and Glory, that so I may see a
greater good in Jesus Christ than in all things else, that the goodness that is
in him, does out-bid all good whatsoever. Now this is a great help to come to
Christ: for one of the greatest hindrances of the Soul in coming to Christ, is
this, that it loses the sight of Christ in coming, and the Devil propounds
other spectacles before its Eyes in coming, and so it looks into the deep pit
of its own Heart, and sees no other matter but discouragement, whereas it
should keep up its Eyes upon Christ the Son of God, who is opening his Arms
ready to embrace it. And there is a secret power and influence that comes from
Christ unto the Soul to draw the Soul to him. So long as the Soul keeps Christ
in his Eye, as the poor Woman said, If I can but touch the hem of his Garment;
Nay; you may go further then so, and have a degree of Faith, Nay, If I may have
but a sight of Christ, I say, there is that in the sight of Christ that will
draw the Heart unto Jesus Christ. As they say of some kind of creatures, the
very sight of them will kill a Man, that if they do but see you, or you them,
there will come poison from them that will kill you, say the Naturalists. But I
am sure it is true of this, that if you can keep Christ in your Eye, the very
sight of the excellency of Christ, will be of excellent virtue to draw the Soul
to Christ. And therefore you that are coming to Christ, observe this, some that
are coming to Christ it fares with them, as with the Children of Israel when
they were going to Canaan; they had gone a pretty way, and made some progress,
but then they fell into discontent when they found a little discouragement, and
upon that they were brought back again, and wandered forty Years up and down in
the Wilderness, and this was the punishment of their murmuring and discontent;
So it is with many that are going out of their natural State unto Jesus Christ,
they are come very near to him many times, and then fall into fits of
discontent, pining, fretting, and discouragement, and so are brought back again
and made to wander in the Wilderness of discouragement for many Years together.

RULE. V.
Fifthly, Labor thoroughly to convince thy Soul of this thing, that whatsoever
sorrow for sin, whatsoever humiliation, whatsoever trouble of spirit keeps thy
Heart from Jesus Christ, it is not of God, but rather from thine own
corruption; it is not of God in thee, except you will say, it is of God as an
affliction, it is not of God, but suffering the Devil to try thee, but whatever
sorrow it be for thine own wretchedness, or unworthiness, if this keep thee off
from Christ, and discourage thee from coming to Christ, convince thy Soul of
this, that it is not the gracious work of God in thee, but the troubling of the
Devil in thee. The truth is, many poor sinners, when they are once troubled for
their sins, they take a kind of Satisfaction in this, they think this is a good
thing, and they are glad of it. I grant you, trouble for sin is a good thing,
and you are to be glad of it, but if your trouble for sin hinder you from
coming to Christ, and makes you think, because you are so unworthy you may not
come to him, this trouble is not mixed with godly sorrow, be convinced of this.

RULE. VI.
Sixthly, Take heed of all kind of discouragements and hindrances in your
coming to Christ, but then take heed especially of all determinations, take
heed of insnaring your Souls by determining against your selves, as saying,
surely the Lord will never show mercy to me, the time is past, the Lord has
forsaken me, I have used so much means so long time, and God is not yet come
to me, No, The Lord never intends good to me, Oh! Take heed of these
determinations, for they are sinful, wherever they are, there can be no just
cause in thy Heart, be it as vile as it will, for such determinations as these
are: and know, when thou give way to such determinations as these, thou do
but ensnare and fetter thy Legs by this, and then thou say, thou can not
come to Christ; Christ calls to thee, and thou art infettered with thy own
thoughts, for so, one may lay fetters upon ones own Legs, by ones own thoughts,
to hinder this spiritual coming to Christ. As if a man should tie fetters about
his Legs, and say, when he is called to come to such a place, I cannot come. Do
not sit down and say, I shall never have Mercy, and I am one that belongs not
to the election of Grace, and I shall never come to Christ, take off such
thoughts when thou art about coming to Jesus Christ.

RULE. VII.
Seventhly, At those times when thou can not feel thy Heart active as thou
desire to go after Christ, yet keep thy Heart still toward Christ, keep it
tending that way. Why cannot I go to Christ? Christ calls me to go to him. Oh!
I have a dead Heart, and a heavy dull Heart, yet I know I am nearer Christ
there, than if I should neglect his Ordinances, I will present my Soul where
Jesus Christ is, and may be he may cast in some Virtue into my Heart to make it
more stirring after him, but however I am resolved upon this, I will not turn
away from Christ, I will keep my Heart where I am howsoever, If I can go no
further, and here I will stand, and here I will look, and I will cry to him, and
cry to God as the Church does, Draw me and I will run after thee; and though I
cannot believe, yet here I will stand, and sigh and cry, and call, and if I
perish I will perish crying to God, that God would draw my Heart, Oh draw, draw
our Hearts, and we will run after thee. Blessed Redeemer, do thou call us?
send forth somewhat of thy spirit, that may draw our Hearts, and then we will
run after thee. Keep thy Heart in such a frame, for this is a great
discouragement about coming to Christ in the Hearts of many. Christ calls, and
we have many sweet encouragements in the word to come, I, but it is to them
that have their Hearts stirring and working toward Christ, to go to him. But I
have a dead, and dull Heart, and cannot work toward him. I but if thou can
not stir and work after him, yet set thy Soul in sight of Christ, and look
toward him, and wait til Gods time come, when he will let some influence into
thy Heart, this will be a mighty help this way.

And take heed of listening to any temptation that may draw away thy heart from
coming to Christ. It is a notable Scripture that you have in 1. Sam. 12.20. it
is of Samuel Speaking to the people of Israel that had sinned against the Lord,
and were troubled for their sin, and Samuel said unto the people. Fear not, you
have done this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
fear the Lord with all your hearts and turn ye not aside, for then should ye
go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. You
have sinned against the Lord, and you are troubled, what shall we do? Says
Samuel, though you have thus sinned, yet do not turn aside to vanity. So do I
say, you have sinned against the Lord, and Christ calls you to come to him, and
you complain you have a dead and dull heart, I but then, do not turn from
Christ to vanity, set your selves still in the sight of God, and attend upon him
in those Ordinances, that he uses to present himself in.

RULE. VIII.
Eighthly, When thy heart begins to come to Christ, give up thy self to the
stream of Gods spirit, for the spirit of God will be stirring ever and anon,
though not at al times alike. Thou art attending upon the Ordinances, and
waiting when the spirit of God should come to draw thy heart to Christ, wait
upon this stirring, and if thou feel the Spirit beginning to draw thy heart to
Christ in any measure, Oh! then join with the work of the spirit of God, and
give up thy soul to the stream of Gods spirit; do not thou draw back; it may be
Gods spirit is drawing thy heart to Christ, and thou presently drawest back
with discouraging thoughts, upon consideration of thy Vileness, and that thou
art not humbled: now when thou feel Gods spirit stirring in thee, give up
thy soul to the strength of Gods spirit. As when a man goes to learn to swim,
he is not to lay down himself, and keep a padling with his hands and feet, but
there must be a giving up of himself to the water, Sometimes a man keeps ten
times more stir to keep himself from drowning, then another that can swim; one
that has got the art of swimming, while the other sinkes to the bottom, the
water helps him, and he keeps himself above water. Just thus is the
difference, between some that are troubled in their consciences for their sins.
and others, between some that are coming to Christ and others. Some that are
coming to Christ, and have not the right art of giving up themselves to Christ,
they are sinking, and in mighty confusion of spirit, and keep such a do with
their own hearts, and strange confused thoughts they have, and horror of
spirit, and al because they fear they shall sink down to the bottom of
destruction. Now there are others that are afraid of sinking and drowning as
well as they, but coming to understand what the way of Christ is, and what it is
to come to Christ, though they have nothing in themselves to keep them from
sinking, yet they come to learn how to give up their souls to the stream of
Gods spirit that carries them on to Jesus Christ in a more solid way, and with
a great deal less trouble they come to Jesus Christ, and there they get into
the arc and so are safe for ever. Whereas others they skrabble on the outside
of the arc, as if a poor man should be skrabbling upon the ship, no body
looks after him, he falls down and is drowned at last. So those that skrabble
and do not give up themselves unto the arc, they fall down again and at the
last perish You have a scripture for this in 1. Kings. 20.33. The Servants of
Benhadad, they diligently observed whether any thing would come from the King
of Israel, and they say, thy brother Benhadad, this is the thing, they go in a
way of seeking to the King of Israel for his brother Benhadad, and this is the
way, they watch for any word that might pass from the King of Israel, whereby
they might have any hope, and at last he said, my brother Benhadad, and they
take hold of this presently. So it should be with a sinner that is seeking
after Christ, he should diligently watch what may come from the Spirit of
Christ, that may give any encouragement; does the Spirit move in thee, and
begin to work in thee to draw thee to Jesus Christ? Oh! thou might have got
a great way thither, it may be thou might have been in his bosom, and in his
arms by this time if thou had taken this course.

RULE IX.
Ninthly, The soul that is about coming to Christ, that does not yet know
whether it is truly got to Christ, it should often renew the act of coming, for
certainly there are many that are at Christ, but do not know it. It may be some
soul may say, I had thought I had got to Christ before, but I see my
Corruptions prevail, and I am afraid I am not come to Christ; will not these
souls think that they must not come to Christ til they have overcome their
Corruptions? whereas the best way to overcome thy corruption is to come to
Christ, to renew the act of thy coming to Christ, and the longer thou staiest
from renewing this act of thy coming to Christ, the more strong thy corruptions
grow in thee. Certainly do thou ly down as long as thou will in any sullen
mood, and say, my Corruption is thus and thus, and I am afraid I never went to
Christ, thy corruptions would grow stronger in thee, thou must not stay til thy
corruptions be subdued before thou go to Christ, but renew the act of coming
to Christ again, say I will try it again, may be I did not do it aright at
first, and if I miss it the second time, I will try it again and again, and the
hundredth time. Do not say if I had overcome sin thus and thus, I would come to
Christ, it is as much as to say, if I were first sanctified by Christ, then I
would come to Christ for justification, and is this the right order? No, thou
must come first to Christ, that thou may have thy corruptions subdued. It
would seem a strange thing that if a king should come to a woman and tell her he
would be married to her, and she should say, no, if I were a Queen I would
take him, but she must first be married to him, and that makes her to be a
Queen. So here, the soul must not first say, if I were first sanctified and had
overcome such and such corruptions, I would come to Christ no, but by coming to
Christ and renewing thy act of coming to Christ, that sanctifies thee. That is
a rule that I would leave with all young beginners, spend more time and more
strength, in renewing the very act of believing, of rolling thy soul upon the
grace of God in Christ, and casting thy burden upon him, then in any other
work what soever, there is no other thing that thou can spend thy time and
thy strength more profitably in, then the renewing the act of coming to Christ.
Come says Christ; says the soul, I had thought I had come, but I was
deceived; says Christ, yet come again, and come again and again, this is the
only way to overcome any corruption in thy heart. So that when Christ calls
thee to come, remember these rules, Oh! that you would lay them up to make use
of them at al times. When you hear such things out of Gods word, remember what
has bin said in this text what is employed in the coming, what way you would
come, and O! that the Lord would help poor souls thus to come to him, and know
for your encouragement, that if God give you a heart to answer to his call, to
come to his Son, this is an evident sign of your predestination, for whom he
calls he has elected, yea, do but think thus with your selves, what an infinite
mercy is it to me, that I am in such a condition, as that, God calls me to
come, I might have had my ears filled with this, depart from me ye cursed.
Thus many are cast off from God, and God bids them depart from me ye cursed,
thou art as great a sinner may be as they are, now whereas God might have said
depart from me thou vild soul, thou passionate soul, thou filthy unclean soul,
I say, this sound might have been in thin ears, but instead of that sound
there is the spirit of Jesus Christ in the ministry of this word calling to
thee, come to me, yea, he does not only call thee, but he has given thee many
rules, how thou should come to him. If a Prince shall first make a
proclamation for a rebel to come to him for pardon, and shall send to him, and
make out many rules how he shall come, and direct him to such a place, what a
mighty encouragement would this be to such an one to come in. Now this the Lord
Christ has done to thee, he has not only proclaimed that he is mediator
between God and thee, but he has sent his spirit to call thee, and he has sent
his messenger to give thee rules how to order thee, that thou should take
heed of such a by way and such a turning, and observe these and these things
for thy help, thus Christ has done for thee. If the Lord does give thee a
heart to answer to Christ's call, know, that this calling to thee by Christ in
his word, will be no other but a forerunner of that call that Christ shall make to
thee another day, There Is a call, come to me al ye that are weary and heavy
Laden, and I will give you rest, Inherit the kingdom prepared for you. This is
worth ten thousand worlds, and when the soul answers to his call, such a soul
may go away, and be comforted that Christ will call you after another manner. He
calls the poor laden soul to give you now rest, but he will call you afterward
before men and Angels to receive the inheritance, Come not to rest only, but
come to an inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of
the world.

CHAP. XXIII.
Nine means to draw Sinners to Christ, namely, That, 1. He that calls us is the
Son of God. 2. He is our near Kinsman, (wherein three strong arguments are
included. First, The terror of Gods glory is taken away. Secondly, He is
infinitely inclined to do good unto the Sons of men. Thirdly, In uniting the
divine nature with the human, he has done a greater work than to save a soul.)
3. He is the mediator. 4. He deserves that we should come to him. 5. The soul
gets infinite good by coming to Christ, instanced in four particulars. 6. We
are miserable in our selves. 7. Christ will certainly receive them that come to
him, which is opened in three particulars. 8. We stand in great need of Christ.
9. The not coming to Christ will aggravate all other Sins. With an answer unto
some Objections.

NOW that which follows to be spoken unto in this second part of the text, the
invitation it self, is the drawing of the hearts of sinners to come to Christ,
the work that we have to do, is, that in Luke 14.17. He sent his servants at
supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready,
There the gospel is set out unto us by a rich man's making a great wedding
supper, and when he had prepared al his dainties, he sends his servants to
invite the guests, saying, al things are ready, this wedding is nothing else
but the excellent things in the Gospel, the excellent things that are in Christ
and the servants are the Ministers of the Gospel, they are sent out to call
sinners, to call the guests to come, for all things are ready. So then in the
name of Christ I call unto al laden sinners to come to Christ. And for the
drawing of the souls of those that are thus laden, these several things are to
be propounded.

ARG. I.
First, consider who Christ is that calls, and what he is; Come to me, says
Christ. What is Jesus Christ that does call you to come to him? The very
knowledge of him, what he is, would be a mighty argument to prevail with the
heart to come to him, he that calls you to come to him, is the Son of God, the
second person in the Trinity, the brightness of the glory of God, the character
and image of his person, as he is said to be, in Heb. 1.3. He is equal with the
Father, he has the glory of the Father in him, he is the glory of heaven and
earth, the adoration of Angels, he has al fullness of al good in him. If a
great Prince should call to you as you go in the streets, and say come to me,
would not you presently adress your selves to make toward him, to go to him?
know, when Christ calls you to come to him, it is more than if all the Angels in
heaven should stand together, to call you to come to him. When once the soul
comes to know who it is that calls, to know the voice of Christ, and what he is,
it is a mighty argument to work the soul toward Christ. But you will say, alas,
Christ is so glorious, how shall we come to him? his glory is enough to
overwhelme us, when the Angels did but appear in some glorious manner, even
some of the prophets and holy men, were not able to stand before them, we
cannot come to Christ because of his glory.

Therefore know, in the second place, That as he is so glorious in himself, the
luster of heaven, so he has taken our nature upon himself, he has clothed
himself with our nature, and he is so united into an hypostatical union with
us, to be made the same person, yea, so to be the same person, that the second
person in Trinity is, to be of the person that he is, that the son of man
should be the same person that the son of God is, this is the greatest mystery
in the world, and it is the greatest work that ever God did, abundantly greater
than making heaven and earth, for God to unite our natures so near unto his
son, this God has done, so that Christ that calls you to come to him, is not
only God blessed for ever, equal with the father, and full of Glory, but he is
your kinsman, he is your near kinsman, that has taken your flesh upon him.
Now had you one that were near a kin to you, that were advanced to be the
Emperor of all the world, and he should call to you and say, come to me, would
you not make toward him? Jesus Christ has your nature in heaven with him, and
it is in an hypostatical union united to the divine nature, and the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily in him, as in Col. 2.9. Now it is he that calls you to
come to him, certainly, there are great things in him, and to be had by him, as
you shall see more by and by.

Now consider this one particular, viz. who Christ is that calls to come to
him, and in the consideration of this there are two or three mighty strong
arguments to prevail with the soul to come to Christ.

First, in that Christ is the son of God, and yet man, God man, so united,
hence the terror of the Glory of God comes to be taken away, so as poor
wretched flesh may be able now to converse with God, being veiled with our own
nature, God being veiled with flesh. It is true, if God in his own Glory, as he
is in himself in the highest heavens, should call us to come to him, we might be
afraid least we should be overwhelmed with his glory, we cannot stand before
him; we cannot look so much as upon the glory of the sin, how shall we be able
to go to the body of the glory of God? Are we able to go to the body of the
Sun? No, it would burn us up, how can we be able to go to the glory of God
then? Now because the Lord knows that his glory is so great, he has been
pleased to provide such a way to take off the terror of his greatness, though
we be frail flesh, yet the Lord has done that which may encourage us to come
to him, for he has veiled his glory with Human Nature, and therefore we may
now through Christ be able to stand before, and converse with the infinite
glorious God. This is a great mystery, the greatest, that God has taken our
flesh upon him, and veiled his glory with our flesh, that he might have his
terror taken from us, and we may be able to come to him, here was one special
end that Christ was made man, that the Lord might deal with us in a more
familiar way, than otherwise he could.

Secondly, In that Christ that is God-man, in one person, calls us to come to
him: hence we have this Meditation, That certainly, the Lord is infinitely
inclined to do good unto the Children of men, this is a mighty encouragement
for all poor Souls to come to Christ, for when thou hear, that Christ the
Son of God is made man in one person, by that thou may gather this for thy
encouragement, that certainly God is infinitely inclined to do good unto the
Children of men, God would never have wrought so strange a work, as to unite
our Natures into one person with his Son, if he had not meant to do some
infinite good unto mankind; the Lord has given a most evident demonstration of
it, in uniting man's Nature to his own Son. As if the King should be pleased to
marry his Son to one that is the nearest Kinswoman you have, you would by that
gather such an argument as this, and all your friends would conclude, surely
the King does intend much good to this family, that he is strongly inclined to
prefer this family: So when God is pleased to marry his Son to our flesh, Yea,
to take our Nature into a nearer union with him, then the Wife is taken into
the Husband, we may gather this argument, and conclude, Surely, God does intend
much good unto the Children of men, and therefore come.

Thirdly, From this consideration, who Christ is, God manifested in the flesh,
we may gather this encouragement to come to him, That the Lord in uniting the
divine Nature with the Human in Christ, has done already a greater work for
the Children of men, than the saving of their Souls comes to; the saving of thy
Soul is a difficult work; thou think thus, Alas! for me to come and think to
be saved by Christ, this is too great a thing, too good to be true, it is not
possible that ever such a poor sinner as I am, should be raised to the glory
that I hear of in the word, that God will raise his Saints unto, thou think
that the Salvation of thy Soul is so great, and so mighty a thing, and
therefore that perhaps does somewhat discourage thee in coming: but then, when
thou hear what Christ is, and how God has united the divine and human
Nature together in one person, from thence thou may gather this
encouragement, that God has done a greater work than to save thy Soul, for so
it is: It is a greater work for God to unite the divine and humane Nature
together in one person, than to save all the Souls in the world. As if Christ
should say thus, Oh, Come to me, know what I am, I am the Son of the Father, of
the same Nature and being, and I am likewise made man, God the Father has
united my divine Nature to your flesh, and in this he has done a greater work
than the saving of your Souls, in this he has showed what intentions he has
for the good of mankind, and in this the terror of the almighty is taken away,
and therefore come to me, that is the first Argument, come to Christ.

ARG. II.
Secondly, Come to Christ, Why? For Christ has come to you; do you come to
him, for he has come to you; that Christ might come to you, he has even come,
as it were, from the Bosom of the Father, and for a time was willing to have
his glory Eclipsed, to come into this world, to be in the form of a Servant,
to be in a mean condition here in this world, Christ has suffered more in
coming to you, than you can possibly suffer in going to him, Christ is content
to come from the Father to you, what is it that you can go from to come to him.
He is said in the Book of the Canticles, to come leaping over the Mountains,
he comes leaping over all difficulties to you, if you think there are some
difficulties in your going to Christ, know, that there was far greater
difficulties that lay in the way in his coming to you, but whatsoever there was
in the way, he was resolved to go through them all, and did come, and was here
in the world, in the flesh, that he might save you, and he that is thus come to
you, calls you to come to him.

ARG. III.
Thirdly, You must know, That Christ is the great Mediator that is set between
God and the Children of men: it is he that has undertaken the great work, the
greatest work that ever was in the World, to Mediate between the infinite
offended God, and your sinful wretched Souls, for through your sins there was
such an infinite distance made between God and you that it was impossible you
should ever have gone without this Mediator. It is an argument of mighty use,
if rightly understood, and thoroughly considered of, the vast distance that sin
has made between God and sinful creatures, that they can never come to God,
but through the glorious Mediator that is come into the world, the Lord Jesus
Christ, God and man, that was made by God the Father the Head of the second
covenant, and has undertaken to make up all the wrongs that our sins have done
unto God, to pacify the wrath of God, and to satisfy the justice of God, it
is he that has undertaken to make peace between the Father and you, and it is
he that calls unto you to come to him. If there were a company of Prisoners in
danger of Death, and one should come to the Prince to mediate for them, to make
peace between the Prince and them, one that the prisoners should know to be the
only Son of the prince, the delight of his Soul, and he is sent by the Prince
himself to come to make peace and undertake it for them, and he comes unto the
Prison doors, and calls to the Prisoners lying in their dungeon, and says,
arise, and come to me, hearken what I shall bring to you, observe my direction,
and peace shall be made between the Prince and you, you shall have pardon, you
shall have your lives; would not this stir them up to hearken unto him, and
greedily to come unto the grate? Christ is come for this very end, this was the
work that God the Father sent him into the world about, to be a Mediator
between himself and poor, wretched, sinful creatures, and now he comes unto
them, calls unto them and says, come to me, If you did but know what Christ
was, and what his work was in coming into the world, it could not but mightily
draw your hearts to come to him when he calls.

ARG. IV.
Fourthly, Come to me says Christ, for if ever there were any that deserved to
be hearkened unto, and to come unto when he calls, certainly I deserve it; For I
have not only come to be a Mediator, but the truth is, it has cost me my
blood, I have manifested such Love unto you, that I have laid down my Life for
you, I have shed my most precious blood, I have been willing to be made a
curse, and all for the saving of your souls; my Love has been more to you,
then to mine own life, for that was laid down for you. I have undertaken,
indeed, to mediate between my Father and you, but it has cost me much, yet in
Love to you I have thus done, all my blood is shed, the work is done, the price
is paid, Come to me that you may have Life. And this is the meaning of that
forementioned place, The Servant is bidden to go and invite the Guests, for all
is ready, so here, the work is done, Christ has done the work, there could not
be that argument to our fore Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they could not
have such an argument to draw them, Christ could not say to them, Come to me,
for I have not only undertaken to Mediate between the Father and your Souls,
but I have laid down my life for you, shed my blood for you, I have paid the
price already for you, I have purchased your Souls, I have done the whole work,
it is finished. But now there is this Argument to draw your Hearts to Christ,
for the work is finished, the greatest work that ever was, or shall be
undertaken in the World, the greatest work of all is finished, and upon the
finishing of this work, Christ calls you to himself, and says, Come to me.

ARG. V.
Fifthly, Consider the infinite good that your Souls shall have by Christ in
your coming to him, this draws the Heart indeed, not only to see who it is
that calls you, for commonly when we hear one call, we will ask, who calls, and if
it be one that we expect good from, we come to him. (This we showed already.)
But this argument is from the infinite good that your Souls shall have when you
come to him, the very first moment you come to him, you will be blessed
creatures, there will be an infinite change of your condition, for consider.

First, If there be any good to be had in all the mercy that there is in God
himself, if there be any good to be had in God the Father, in the divine
essence, in the infinite, eternal, first-being of all things, it is to be had
by coming unto Christ, for Christ says, in John, 14.6. No man comes unto the
Father, but by me. You cannot come to God but by Christ, as was intimated
before, in regard of the distance between God and us through sin, you cannot
come to God til you understand Christ to be the great means of conveyance of
all good from God to his creature. Christ is the great means of conveyance of
all good unto the creature. All are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods,
says the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 3. and the Last verse. All things are Gods, that
you will acknowledge, but how come they to be ours, all things are yours, that
is the happiness of those that are come to Christ. He does not say, all things
are Gods, and you are Gods, No, but all things are yours, and you are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods. Whereas other people, in seeking after mercy from God, go
this way to work, they go immediately to God, and think that if ever they
receive any mercy or good, it must come from God, they must have it from God,
but there is something comes between God and you, all things are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; so that God himself is the infinite Fountain
of all good; Christ is as it were the Cisterne, into which all the mercy and
goodness of God is to be conveyed, and believers by Faith have every one a
Pipe, as it were, put into this Cisterne, so they come to have conveyed all
good, the fullness of the divine Nature, they are united unto Christ, and so
have all Mercy conveyed from God unto them, here is a strong argument to draw
the heart to come to Christ, because Christ is the great conveyance of all good
from the ^her unto the Soul, is not the mercy of God sweet unto a Soul, that is
Laden with the Burden of Sin? This mercy you must have in me, says Christ, or
else you shall never have a drop of it. We are to know therefore, that by our
sins the conduit Pipe of all the Mercy in God is stopped, so as not one drop of
saving mercy for eternity can be let into the Soul, and though we should cry
for mercy never so much, and shreeke out, yet we are to know, that the Pipe is
stopped by sin, and there is no other way to open this pipe, but only by Jesus
Christ, he is the opener of the pipe of Gods infinite Grace, let out to the
Children of men. Now if we look upon the Grace of God, we are first to
consider, that by our sins we have stopped the current of all the Grace of God,
and it is only Christ that lets out this current, and now Christ says, come to
me, all you that would have mercy. Would you have Mercy? O yes, it is true, we
would have mercy, but we find this Mercy of God is stopped by our sins. Now says
Christ, come to me, and by me, all the sluices of the Grace and mercy of God are
opened to poor Souls, we know God is a God of mercy, the God of all
consolation, in himself the Father of mercies, he is infinitely merciful, so
that when we come to God, we come to the God of mercy, the God of all
consolation, we come to the Father of mercies, we come to him who is infinite
in mercy, whose Nature is mercy, to him that is imfinitely above all creatures
in mercy. All the merciful creatures in Heaven and Earth in comparison of him
are nothing, Yea, take all the merciful Saints in the world, the most merciful
dispositions that were in all the creatures in the world, and put them into one
man, you would say, this were a merciful man. If all the mercies, in all the
bowels, of all the Saints, that ever were from the beginning of the world, were
put into one man, would not you think him to be a merciful man? if he called
you to come to him for mercy, would you not come? Such a man that has all
mercies, of all the Saints that ever were in the world put into him; yet this
man would be a most cruel man in comparison of the infinite mercy that is in
God. If we were in cruel straites and had to deal with such a man that had the
bowels of the mercy of all the men in the world; those that are in misery, they
go to their friends, and say, Oh! it is well I did fall into such a merciful man's
hand. But now thou that art a poor troubled sinner, if thou come to Christ
thou come into the Arms, into the bowels of the infinite God, that is
infinitely above the bowels of all mercies that are either in Heaven or Earth,
and therefore come to him.

Secondly: Further, not only come unto the bowels of mercy, but by coming to
Christ, thou come to God as a Father, Come to me, says Christ, thou shall
not only come to the Father, but the first moment you come to me, I shall
present you to God as a Child, and God to you as a Father, the infinite God is
a deadly enemy to all out of Christ, but by coming to Christ there is peace
with him, you come to have union with him, and you come to be made one with
God, into the nearest union with God next unto the Hypostatical union. There is
diverse sorts of union with God, there is the Hypostatical union, but next unto
that is a Mistical union, and such a union have the Saints, the Soul that was
before an enemy unto God, and cast out from him, the first moment that such a
Soul comes to Christ, it has such a union with God, that is the nearest union
that any creature can have, next unto the human Nature of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly: Yea, Not only to be united to him, but thou shall come presently to
have his Image stamped upon thee, his Spirit put into thee, to live the Life of
God, to have communion with him here, and thou shall be saved: the very moment
thou come to him, thou shall have Righteousness to stand in the presence of
the infinite Holy God.

I, You will say, if we come to God, we come by Christ, but God is a Holy and a
Righteous God, and how shall we be able to stand before him, being a Righteous
God and we such sinners? Therefore this is answered by this, that the first
moment thou come to Christ, he will put the holy Robes of his Righteousness
upon thee, that shall make thee able to stand before the infinite God, so that
whatever thou art in thy self, it is impossible but God should be well pleased
with thee, and should take delight in thee as his own, thou may walk up and
down in the presence of God, and all because He sees thee in the Robes of
Christ's Righteousness.

Fourthly: And further, The first moment thou come to Christ thou shall be
safe to eternity, for all the hazard of miscarrying to eternity is over at the
first moment thou come to Christ, this thou shall have in the first moment of
thy coming to Jesus Christ, this is for the comfort of those that come to
Christ. More of these Particulars we shall have, when we come to the promise
that is here made in the Text, And you shall have Rest.

ARG. VI.
Sixthly, For a further argument of drawing the Heart unto Jesus Christ when he
calls to come to him, consider, what a poor wretch thou art in thy self, a vile,
base, forlorn, Deformed, Miserable, Succourless, Helpless, Shiftless Creature,
a Beggar. If a Prince as he goes along in the Streets, seeing a poor Beggar
lying upon the ground in the dirt, should be pleased to call to such a
creature, and say to him, come to me, would it not reviue his Spirit? If one
should tell him the King the Prince calls, how would he stir himself. Now thou
art the poorest Creature in the world, never any poor creature that lay
grovelling in the dirt full of Sores and wounds, was in a worse condition then
thou art, when thou see such a one, think that thy condition is far worse
then his. If the King were going in his Robes to the Parliament a long the
streets, and should see such a poor creature lying by the Walls, and should
take special notice of him, and call him to him, and say, let that poor
creature come to me, it would encourage him exceedingly; this invitation from
Christ is just the very same, for the Lord Jesus Christ sees thee lying in thy
gore blood, as it is described in Ezekiel. 16. where the miserable condition of
them that are in their Natural estate is most elegantly set down, they lay in
their blood, none Eye pittyed them, then I came, says God* and said unto thee
live, and this time was the time of Love, so when thou lie in thy poor,
wretched, miserable condition, in thy filth, in thy baseness, in the Gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, this blessed Redeemer this great Prince of all the world, he calls to thee and says, Oh! thou poor creature, Come to me.

I, You will say, this is the discouragement of all, I would be glad to go to
Christ, the Lord knows this is that my Soul pants after, that I might go to
Christ, but I am such a poor, vile creature, so Wretched, so Miserable that it
is impossible for me to be accepted, you tell me that for an argument, that is
the greatest discouragement of my Heart, because I am so vile, and because I am
so Wretched, this is that discourageth me from coming to Christ.

ARG. VII.
To that I answer, in the Seventh place, Come to me and I will certainly
receive you whatever you are, Christ will certainly receive all those that come
to him whatever they are, and for that consider these three things, that may
make it plain.

First, The Solemn expression of Christ for this purpose, that you have in
John, 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes
to me I will in no wise cast out. He does not say, he that has been such a
great sinner, such a vile wretched sinner, but he speaks indefinitly, he that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Now this that is translated in your
Books, In no wise cast out, it has a greater force in the Greek, there is two
Negatives, for though we in English say, two Negatives make an affirmative, it
is not so in Greek, for it is for a stronger confirmation of a thing, and so it
may be read, He that comes to me, I will not not cast out, as if so be Christ
should say, he that comes to me I will not, I will not cast out. As we, when we
would express the fervency of our Spirits, we double our speech; so does
Christ, he would express the Fervency of his spirit, and therefore he says, he
that comes to me, I will not, I will not cast out.

Secondly, Whoever thou art upon coming to him he will not cast thee off, for
this was the great errand that Christ came into the world for, to receive poor
troubled souls, and to ease poor Laden sinners; it was the very business that
Christ came into the world about, it is the work that God the Father has sent
his Son into the world about, that he might receive such poor wretched sinful
creatures as thou art, and if it were not, that he should receive those that
come to him, he should lose the end that he came into the world for, and
therefore he will receive you when you come, for Christ says, I shall else lose
the end of that that was the greatest work that ever was done since the world
began, or shall be done to al eternity, that is, my undertaking the Mediation
between God and you; if I should not receive poor Souls that come to me, that
great work would be lost, that work wherein my Father and my self is so much
glorified, for this is the glory of Christ to do so, and Christ saw there was
so much glory to be had this way, that it did move Christ to come into the
world, to take such a course as this is to save Souls, Christ knows that he
should to all eternity be magnified by Angels, for the saving such Souls as
thou art, Yea, Christ knows, that the Father will love him more, for he says.
The Father loves me, because I laid down my life for the Sheep, John, 10.17. It
is that that will delight God the Father, it is that that will make God the
Father to delight in the Son, it is that whereby Jesus Christ gets the very end
of his death; til he had laid down his life; till he had made his Soul an
offering for sin, he was not satisfied. This is it that satisfied him, that he
should see his Seed, and amongst others, thou art one, thou that come to
Christ, thou art of the Seed that Jesus Christ is so satisfied with, that he
gains the very end of laying down his life for thee, and certainly, Christ
will not cast thee off, but will receive thee and therefore come to him*

Thirdly, He will receive thee, for he has heretofore received as vile
wretches as thou art.

You will say, There was never any so vile as we are. Its true, we may, and
ought to judge our Selves as vile as the worst; though we have not committed
such vile sins outwardly as others have, yet because we know not the Hearts of
other men, nor do we know what means others have had, therefore we are to judge
ourselves as vile as any: but know, that Christ has received as bad as thou
art, those that pierced Christ, that shed his blood, Christ received 3000. of
them in one day, he received three thousand in one day of those that had
inbrued their hands in his blood; and the story stands in the Scripture for an
everlasting Monument, to encourage poor sinners to come to Christ.

And besides, though thou art a vile sinner, and a wretched creature, yet know,
the greater thou have been in thy sin, the more will the Grace of God in Christ
be magnified, and certainly, there is in Christ such a Grace as is able to
swallow up great sins as well as little, as the infinite Ocean of the Sea, is
able to swallow up great Vessels as well as small: were it not a silly thing,
when we were to cast a Vessel into the Sea, to say it is too great a Vessel:
God is willing to have his Grace magnified to thee, though it be to the
hardening of many thousands. If there is an infinite Ocean in God to swallow up
great, as well as small sins, so long as this keeps thee off from coming to
Christ, so long thou dishonorest this infinite Grace of God in Christ. Were
Gods mercy only such as his common bounty is to other of his creatures, this
might keep thee off, but now, it being the infinite Ocean of mercy in his Son,
and purchased by Christ, it is an infinite dishonor to the Grace of God in
Christ to stand upon terms, and not to come to Christ, what do thou think
that mercy is worth, that cost the Blood of Christ? Thou think thou art a
great sinner, and that it must be wonderful mercy that must save thy Soul. Its
true, and it is well thou think So, but now consider further sinner, what
do thou think of the mercy that shall be as much worth as the Blood of the
Son of God? For him to be made a curse for sinners, will that do it? If that
will do it thou may come to him. How much do thou think the mercy of
Christ's coming to take Man's Nature upon him is worth, to take our sinful Nature
upon him? If he will do it, thou may come to Christ. Yea, Further, know,
That the Lord Jesus Christ never receives any that come to him, but Beggars,
none but Beggars, none but miserable creatures, none but those that are
wretched, that are vile; and Christ did never yet from the beginning of the
world receive any man upon these terms, because he was not so vile as another
man, as thus, here is one that is thus vile, here is another that is not
altogether so vile, I will receive him upon this ground, because he is not so
vile, this was never the ground; but when he receives them, he receives them
upon free Grace, and therefore it is not how vile thou art, for that is the
Glory of Christ to save vile creatures, and he saves none but those that come
as Beggars, those that come and do see themselves, as vile wretched, worthless,
unworthy, miserable, damned dust and Ashes in themselves. Only such are objects
for the Heart of Christ to be set upon; rather make it an argument to drive
thee more to him, as David did, in the 25. Psalm. O Lord have mercy upon me,
pardon my Sin, for it is great, So, Lord, I am vile, I am wretched, I am
unworthy and therefore Lord receive me, Lord, therefore I come unto thee, do
not say as Peter once did, Master depart from me I am a sinful Man, No, but the
truth is, he should rather have said thus, Master, Come to me, or Master I come
to thee, because I am a sinful man: So thou should not say, O Lord, depart
from me, because I am a sinful creature, Or, Lord, do thou come to me, because
I am a sinful wretch.

And know, that upon thy coming to him thou will have wonderful welcome,
wonderful great entertainment above all that thy Heart can think of. O the
great embracing by Jesus Christ, of those Souls that come to him; and this is
the very Reason why poor sinners, at their first conversion, have their Hearts
so filled with joy, because at their first coming to Christ, Christ does give
them such wonderful imbracements, til they come to be more Strengthened, and
then perhaps Christ will have them live rather by Faith, than by sense. It is
in the new Birth as in the Birth of Nature, Children when they are first born,
they shoot up mightily; take a Child that comes very little out of the Womb,
come to it a quarter of a Year after, the Child is shot up a great deal, you
may see it a great deal taller, and bigger, every Limb increased, but take it
at ten years Old, and it grows not so much then as at the first, and the Reason
is, because it coming out of the worm Womb, it could not subsist if Nature did
not hasten to strengthen it self at first: so men, when they come to Christ at
first, they shoot up and grow to such enlargement of Spirit, and they do so
sensibly perceive, Yea, and others do so sensibly perceive a greater growth at
their first coming than afterward, because when they first come, Christ will
Strengthen them against all discouragements, Christ will use you tenderly,
Christ will not upbraid you for your former sins, and say, What! you that have
lived a profane life, a prophaner of my ordinances, a scorner at my ways, and
at my people, Christ will not upbraid the Soul, but he will be render of you, he
will pass by your sins, and heal your weakness, He will not break the bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.

ARG. VIII.
Eighthly: Further, Consider, The infinite need thy Soul has of Jesus Christ,
and therefore that should drive thee to him, if the other Arguments do not draw
thee, Oh! Let that drive thee to Jesus Christ, thou art an undone creature for
ever without Jesus Christ, all the mercy in Heaven can do thee no good without
Christ, all the Ordinances can do thee no good without Christ, all the duties
thou performest can do thee no good without Christ; for before thou come to
Jesus Christ, there is no Prayer, no Duties that ever thou tenderest up to God,
that can be accepted, and this is a sad condi^ion, that all my Duties, my
Prayers, my services, are all cast away till I come to Jesus Christ. Certainly,
this is so, for thou must know, that Jesus Christ is not only the great
conveyer of all good from God to us, but also, all that comes to us from God,
must go through him, and therefore there is cause thou should hasten to
Christ, and never be at quiet all thy Life, til thou have some comfortable
evidence that thy Heart has closed with Jesus Christ! there is an infinite
necessity, because al Ordinances, Duties, services, whatever thou do, does
thee no good, til thou come to Christ.

ARG. IX.
Ninthly: Yea, Further, Christ is such a one, as all the creatures one day will
see a need of him, Yea, all that live under the sound of the Gospel, they shall
see a need of him, and they shall curse themselves that when they lived under
the sound of the Gospel, and were called to come to Jesus Christ, that yet
notwithstanding they would satisfy themselves in the lusts of their spirits,
Christ came from Heaven once to us in the days of his flesh, but know, that
Jesus Christ shall come again in his Glory, with all his Angels, all his Saints
about him, and then how happy will those appear, that in the time of their
lives, when they were called by the Ministry of the Gospel did come to Jesus
Christ. When Christ comes thus in his Glory, perhaps you would then all go to
Jesus Christ, no friend, if you will stay till then, you will hea^ another
voice from Christ, he will not come to call sinners to come to him then, but he
will come to bid them depart from him, for all that the father gives him do
come to him before then.

ARG. X.
Yea, and yet further, let me tell you this, that while you have heard the word
of God by a poor minister, in the name of Christ to call you unto him, to draw
you to come unto him, if you shall reject this invitation, and other
invitations, that you have by the ministers of the Gospel, know that of all the
sins that ever you committed in all your lives, this will prove to be the
greatest, that you have stood out against this invitation, it is that that will
aggravate al your sins. It may be some of you may think, well, this is an
incouragment to sinners, we are called to Christ, and we are told, that the
vilest may come to him, and Christ will receive them. This is well, but yet if
thou will reject this invitation, and shall yet let out thy heart to other
vanities, and to the satisfying of thy sinful lusts, this I say, this
invitation of Jesus Christ, will be the greatest aggravation of al thy sins that
ever thou Committedst in all thy life, thy whoredom, thy drunkenness, thy
swearing, al thy sabbath breaking, will not be so heavy upon thee, will not be so
deep upon the score as one rejection of Jesus Christ calling thee to come to
him, and therefore take heed of abusing the grace of Christ in calling you to
come to him. For know, if there could be any sign given to know who are
Reprobates and who not, I would rather pitch upon this sign, one that should
go away after the grace of God is opened to him, and he invited to come to
Christ, one that should go away notwithstanding hardened in sin, I say, I should
rather pitch upon this than any other sign. There is no sin hardens the
heart of God more than this. I will give you one Scripture for this. In Luke.
14.16, 17. When God as the master of the great feast, sends his servants and
invites men to come to the wedding, that is in truth to do that that I have
been doing all this while to invite poor sinners to come to Christ. Now diverse
make excuses, some had bouhgt oxen, others had bought farms, and others had
married Wives, well, mark (at the 24. verse) the doom of those that did not
come in upon their invitation, Verily (says God) those men that were bidden
shall never taste of my supper, What! says God, to his servants, have ye
invited them to come in, and will they not? No they have other things in their
heads, their Farms, their Yoke of Oxen, their profits and pleasures, what will
they reject such grace and favor, when I invite them to come to the marriage
of my son, verily, says God, they shall never have any good by Jesus Christ.
Oh! it were a dreadful doom to be past upon any soul, God forbid it should be
past upon any soul, and yet when we come to open the grace of God in Jesus
Christ in the ministry of the Word, we cannot speak of it without trembling
hearts, without fear, least some should be hardened, and so God provoked by
their resisting of thi^ grace of his, this man, and this woman that sits upon
such a stool, that is not taken with this grace of God offered in Jesus Christ,
they shall never taste of my supper.

Beloved! Sermons of mercy are more quicker, than any other sermons whatsoever,
men and women may sit under a minister of the word, that may preach many
wholesome points of Divinity, and many moral truths, against drunkenness,
swearing, profaning the sabbath, deceit, cozening and cheating, they may sit
along time under such a minister, and God may be patient with them though they
do not obey the voice of the minister: but now, when the Lord comes to invite
men and women to come to his son, let them look to it then, God expects that
they should fall down before that infinite grace of his, and should admire it,
and their hearts should be taken with it, and they should join with him, and
say, Oh! Lord, we come, and our hearts do close with this bountifulness of
thine in thy son, and the neglect of our not profiting by such sermons, and
casting out what we hear, letting of it pass from us does the quickest seal up
men's hearts to condemnation, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life.
Wherefore take in what has been spoken to you, and labor to work it upon your
hearts.

Quest. You will say, Here are many things that have been spoken to poor sinners
to come to Christ, if these things be so, what is the reason then, that there
is no more that come to Christ? how comes it to pass that the hearts of men and
women can stand out against such offers as these.

Ans. Would you know the reason, Christ himself gives it you, in John, 6.43.
after he had been inviting some to come to him, and told them that he was the
bread of life. Jesus answered and said unto them, murmur not among your selves,
there were some murmured against Christ, and Christ's words did not prevail with
them; no marvel, that the ministers of Christ do not always prevail, when
Christ's words, Christ's own preaching did not prevail with many, but they did
murmur at him, and went away from his sermons, and did reject his sermons, at
the 44. verse, says Christ, There can no man come to me, except the father
which has sent me draw him.

Quest. You will say then, why are you speaking all this while to exhort people
to come to him, we are dead, and you had as good speak to dead men?

Ans. To that is answered, God the father does use to draw those souls that
belong to his eternal election by the ministry of the word, by such
exhortations as these God the father does make use of the ministry of man, to
set before poor miserable souls, the excellency of Jesus Christ, and so to draw
their souls to him; and therefore if you do belong to Gods election, God will
make use of his ministry to draw your hearts to come to Christ. Does God begin
to draw you by the ministry of his word, have you found God by the ministry of
his word begin to draw your souls, Oh! do not you draw back again, as loath to
leave your sins, to leave such a sweat pleasure, such a profitable lust, but if
God has taken hold of your hearts, to draw you to him, Oh! do not you draw
back again.

Indeed the scripture says, many are called, but few are Chosen, few do come
to Christ, but you are al called to come to Christ, Oh! let not that scripture
be made true that many are called but few chosen, if thou find God drawing
thy heart, and thy heart ready to answer unto the Lord, that is an argument
that thou art not only called, but one of the Chosen ones of the Lord. There
are three ways that God the father draws those to his son, that he intends
shall be saved for ever by him. First he draws them by the cord (as I may so
speak) of Illumination, by enlightening their minds, by showing them what his
son is. Secondly, He draws them by the cords of mercy. Thirdly, he draws them,
by setting conscience upon them, to put them forward, when the Lord is drawing
the soul to Christ, he makes use of the consciences of men and women, to put
them on to come to Christ. O! thou wretched soul, is not that that thou hear
in the word the truth of God? is it not the word of the Lord? have thou not now
a gracious offer? Is it not a mercy that thou art out of hell this day? and is
it not a mercy that thou art not drowned in the sea? that thou art brought to
land, to hear one more offer to come to Christ? Will thou yet go on in thy
sins? Will thou yet prize thy lusts, before all that infinite good that is in
Jesus Christ? do thou think this will be peace in the end? How will thou be
able to look God in the face another day? Its mercy thou need, and Mercy
thou must have, or else thou art for ever miserable, and will thou reject this
mercy? Oh! that the Lord would call in your consciences to help on this work.
There has been I hope by all that has been said, some Illumination about
Christ, yea, and some cords of Mercy have been fastened upon your hearts. Now
if God would but stir up conscience, give a command to conscience, and say,
never suffer this man, or this woman to be at quiet til they come to my son,
til their hearts be taken off from al things, that hinder them from coming to
my son, let them never be at quiet til then, it were a happy thing, if God
would give this command to conscience, that so many might answer to this
invitation of Christ, that when Christ says, come to me ye that are laden; the
soul answers, Lord I come.

Quest. I but you will say, Suppose God has been calling me, and I have
rejected him, I have been in some forwardness to come to Christ, and my lusts
have drawn my heart back again, for you tell us, that the Lord uses to be quick
with sinners when they have rejected his grace; now have you any word of
comfort for such, if these shall come that have abused Gods grace and mercy, and
turned back upon him, have you any comfort for such?

Ans. I will only give you one scripture for those, and that is in Jeremiah, 3.
and the 22. verse, and Oh! that the Lord would fasten this scripture upon your
hearts. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings.
Mark, here is the answer; Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God. This scripture in the name of God, do I present to you that have drawn
back from the grace of God, that once were in a good frame, and now are
back-sliders, once more in the name of God do I call to you, Oh! return thou
back-slider, the Lord Jesus Christ is ready now to healthy backslidings, now
then secretly, say, Lord I come, and when thou come into thy closet, in a
more solemn manner and art al alone, resign up thy soul to Jesus Christ, and
say, Lord, thou have invited me this day to come to Christ, now Lord I give up
my self, and all that I have and am to thee, my estate, my Body, my honor, and
all that I have to come to thee: and then, not only those good things shall be
made good, but the promise likewise, then Christ shall give you Rest. These
times are times of distress, and therefore seasonable to hear of Rest, whatever
troubles fall out yet if thou come to Christ thou shall be safe thy self, Christ
does engage himself to give Rest unto thy Soul.

And so much for the Invitation it self.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Doctrine arising from the dependence of the promise upon the Invitation,
That God will have us when we are coming to Christ, to have respect to our
selves.

NOw the next thing that follows is, the promise that Christ makes to poor
Laden sinners that do come unto him, He will give them Rest.

And I will give you Rest. It is too much for any creature to say thus, Yea, it
were too much boldness and presumption, for all the Angels in Heaven to make
these words as their own, for them all to say thus, Come unto us, all ye that
Labor and are heavy Laden, and we will give you Rest. Yet here in this text,
there is not only one that is greater than Solomon, but one that is greater
than all the Angels in Heaven, and men that ever lived upon the Earth, that
says, Come unto me, all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden, and I will give you
Rest. They are the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, that
is equal with the Father, God blessed for ever. He says, Come unto me, ye that
Labor and are heavy Laden, and I will give you Rest. This is that that now we
are come unto, The gracious promise that Christ makes to draw Souls unto
himself, he will give them Rest, And I will give you Rest. And what more fit
Argument and seasonable can there be at this time, this time we know is a time
of trouble, a time of disturbance, there is much perplexity and distress in our
Nation, and what will be more acceptable unto us than this, to hear of Rest?
this is that that Christ does promise to al them that come to him, that believe
in him, he says, he will give them Rest.

Before I come to open this gracious promise, which is exceeding full of marrow
and fatness, as we shall find, when we come to the opening of it. I shall
first, give you one note, briefly, from the connection of these words with the
former, Come to me, ye that Labor, and I will give you Rest. You see Christ,
that he might draw sinners to himself, makes a gracious promise of that that he
knows will do good to sinners at the Heart, he will give them Rest. From hence
the note is this in the general.

That God would have us, even when we are coming to Christ, have some respect
to our selves, and Christ encourages us in coming to him, even to have some
aim at our own good.

That is the note clearly, from the Connection of the words.

Before we open the promise (I will give you Rest) says he, if you come to me,
in that Christ does propound that which he knows will take the Hearts of
sinners, as a great good unto them, to draw them to himself, hence I say, the
note it clear, That in our coming to Jesus Christ, it is lawful for us to have
some aim at our own good, Yea, not only lawful for us, but we ought so to do,
for we are to look upon Christ so as Christ propounds himself unto us, not only
lawful, I say to look upon Christ so as he propounds himself to us, but it is
our duty so to look upon him. Now when Christ propounds himself unto us as an
object to draw our Hearts to him, he does propound himself as one wherein our
souls shall gain abundance of good, one that we shall get much by. Now though
it is true, we should Labor to be above our selves as much as may be, we should
Labor to deny our selves, in some sense, yet not so, but that we are to look at
our own good, even in our coming unto Jesus Christ. Now this I might show you
in abundance of Scriptures, in the very first commission that Jesus Christ gave
unto his Apostles, after his Resurrection, to go and Preach throughout the
world, he says unto them, in Mark, 16.15. verse, Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believes and is Baptized shall be
saved. This is clear, that Christ would have us in our first believing, to have
an aim at our own good. And so we find such a kind of promise as this is in
the Text, In Jer. 6.16. verse. Thus (says the Lord) stand in the ways, and
see, and ask for the old paths, where the good way is, and walk therein, and ye
shall find Rest for your Souls. Inquire after the good ways, and you shall
find Rest for your Souls. So that you see, God propounds duties together with
promises, the Lord knows what is best for us, and what will work most upon us,
and therefore, for us to think, that we must have no aim at all of any good to
our selves in coming to Christ, and that it is no grace, but self-love to come
to Christ for our own good, this is a temptation. I speak the rather this
point, because I know how useful it is unto many poor Souls, whom the Lord is
drawing unto Jesus Christ, the Lord has taken off their Hearts from sinful
self, they would not enjoy themselves in the lusts of the flesh as formerly,
the Lord has made them willing to deny their own opinion, their own wills,
their own affections, their former ways, to deny themselves in the comforts of
the things of this world, so as to prize him, and Christ, and his ways, the
way of Christ more than they prize their very lives here in this world, and yet
for all this, there comes a temptation upon them. I but, you seek Christ only
to free you from Hell, and to save you, and therefore it is but self-Love, it
is no true Grace, because that you aim at your selves, rather than Christ, the
Devil cannot prevail with a Heart that is drawing to Christ, thus, telling of
it, Oh! but you prize your lusts more than Christ, or you prize your ease more
than Christ; or you prize your estate, and your liberty more than Christ, or
your life more than Christ, if so be that the Devil shall come thus and tempt,
such a soul could in some measure be able to answer, and to appeal unto God,
and say, Lord! thou that know all things know it is otherwise, that
howsoever my Heart heretofore went after my lusts, after the world, after my
ease and liberty, and I followed the common course of the world, and made those
things to be my greatest good and comfort, yet Lord, thou know it is
otherwise with me now, my Heart is set for Christ, and I can say, from the
bottom of my Soul, with that blessed martyr Lambert, None but Christ, none but
Christ. Now when the Heart is got thus far, one would think thou might be
above the Devil, and come to get assurance, I, says the Devil, though you be
taken off thus far, that you dare not commit any known sin, and you seek after
Christ, more than your estate and your liberty, yet there is one thing more
that your hearts is not taken off from, you do not prize Christ most of all,
you seek Christ to save you from Hell, and bring you to Heaven, that is it that
you seek Christ for, and therefore I know your Heart is not right all this
while, this is a temptation that seizes upon many men. Now I confess, it is a
temptation that is beyond many men, they do not know what this temptation is,
that I prize Christ only to deliver me from Hell, and bring me to Heaven, this
temptation is above the highest form of the course of the world, then ordinary
professors. Now the Spirit in the Text thus answers this temptation, the Soul
thus answers: It is true, I do seek Christ to save me from Hell, and bring me
to Heaven, the fear of the wrath of the great God under which I saw my self to
be, and the displeasure of God, was mighty upon my Spirit, the Lord has made
my Soul to be sensible of the dreadful breach that sin has made between him
and my Soul, and the Lord has caused the fear of eternity to fall upon my
soul, and I come to be convinced of this, that such is the breach between God
and my soul, that there is none but Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the second
Covenant, that is able to make up the breach, and my soul makes after him as
the Mediator, as he is propounded in the word, in the Gospel, to be a Mediator
between God and mankind, so my soul makes after him, and closes with him: and
what can the Devil say to this? For my heart does close with Christ, in the way
that Christ is tendered unto me in the Gospel; for so he is tendered, God
himself says thus, God so loved the world that he sent forth his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life. Thus God sets forth his Son, as if God should say thus, Be it known unto
you, O poor wretched sinful creatures, that are in danger of eternal perishing,
that I have sent forth my only begotten son into the world, and tender him unto
your souls, to the end that your souls may not perish, but have everlasting
Life. Thus God tenders his Son. Now then, when a soul shall be made sensible of
the danger of eternal perishing; and the Lord shall make it apeare to the soul,
what the excellency, and the glory of eternal life is, and the soul shall come
to see that the being delivered from perishing, and the obtaining of eternal
Life, is only to be had in Christ, and upon this does close with Jesus Christ,
and cast it self upon him, and adventure it self to lay the weight of its
eternal estate upon Christ, the soul that does thus receive Christ, according
as he is tendered in the word, whatever objection may be to the contrary, this
is to receive Christ, according as he is tendered in the word. Yet further, for
the helping against this temptation it falls full in this Text, Come unto me, and
I will give you rest. Now many poor souls do come to Christ that they might have
rest, but then the devil puts this in, Oh! but you come to Christ for your own
good.

Now for the helping against this temptation, know,

1. That the Lord at the first conversion, does ordinarily make use of the
creatures self-love, but it is of self-love for eternity, and that is a higher
degree of self-love, than the most people in the world do attain unto; Some
people in the world they love themselves only for this present life, but when
God makes a man or woman to love himself for eternity, it is a good sign that
the hand of God is upon the heart, and that the Lord does intend good unto that
soul, when the Lord begins to make thee to love thy self truly for eternity, to
love that that is true and of eternal good, it is a good sign that the Lord
does intend good unto thy soul.

2. When the Lord proceeds, not only to make thee to begin to love thy self for
eternity, that is to love that immortal soul that the Lord has put into thee,
but when the Lord comes to show thee wherein thy true good for eternity lies,
that it does lie in this, that thou shall be delivered from the wrath of God,
and shall not be cast out of his presence, but shall come to have union with
God, and live in his presence to the praise of his Grace to all eternity, this
is thy good, this thou do account thy happiness, that thou may be delivered
from being cast out of Gods presence, and that the Lord would bring thee unto
himself to live with him, and to join with the Angels and Saints to the praise
of his infinite Grace in Christ eternally: Thou accountest this to be the good
that thou would have in thy salvation, I say, the revealing of this to thee,
and the carrying of thy Heart unto Christ upon this ground, this is faith, it
is true Grace, for here God has so twisted, (as I may so speak) the glory of
his own Name, and the good of his creature together, as they both are joined in
one, and so the Heart may be carried to both of them at one time, to join in
one.

3. Yea further, Let me tell you, when thy Heart looks at this as thine own
good, and this is the Rest that thou would have, whereas I see, that by my
sins I am cut off from God, and so I can have no peace nor Rest, and I see my
happiness, and the Rest of my soul is, to have union with that God, that my
sins has cut me off from, and that I might live for ever to the praise of the
infinite and glorious first being of all things, I say, herein though thou
aimest at thy own good, before thou art aware of it, and thou do, it may be,
explicitly Reason with thy own Heart; but I do regard God above any good in my
self, yet in that thy Heart is upon it to that end, that thou may have union
with the Father, and live eternally with him to the praise of his Grace in his
Son, I say, in this act, though thou art not able explicitly to conceive how
thou look at God above thy self. Yet God sees it, there is that work of God
in thy Heart, to raise God there above thy self: and therefore, those poor
sinners, that are much afflicted under the Burden of their sins, let them but
Labor and Eye God, so as to look at Christ as one that is a Mediator between
God and them, to bring God and their souls together, to aim at this, and they
need not trouble themselves with answering any further that temptation, O! I
come to Christ, but it is only that I might be saved. I do not know that in all
the Book of God (to give you this one note about it, and then we pass from this
point) that we find this as a note of an Hipocrite, that he does love his own
salvation too much, we never find it as a note of an Hipocrite, that he does
come to Christ that he might be saved, and seeing the word of God does not set
it out, as the note of an Hipocrite, let not us nourish this temptation in our
own Hearts, so as to hinder us from coming to Christ, thy Heart would have Rest
in coming to Christ, therefore come to him, that thou may have Rest. And
thus much for this note from the Connection of the promise, Come to Christ for
Rest.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Rest promised by Christ in general: And that there is no Rest for a
Soul out of Jesus Christ.

BUt now for the promise it self. We read in the 16. of Isai. the first verse,
that Christ says, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to Preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken Hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
prison to those that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord,
and the day of Vengeance of our God, to comfort all that Mourn, etc. Here we
have a prophecy of Christ, and in this my Text, this prophecy of Christ is
fulfilled, Christ is come here in the Text, to Preach good tidings to the meek,
to bind up the broken Hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound, all this is contained in this
promise, I will give you Rest. Rest is that that all creatures in the world
desire, the end of all motion is Rest, so the Philosophers say, the end of
motion is quietness, it is the end of all motion whatsoever, if the creature
were where it would be, and had what it would have, then it had Rest. But now
in motion, what is the Reason that the fire ascends upwards? but because the
proper place of the fire is above: and that the Earth, and all heavy things fall
downward? But because their proper place is below; but let them be where they
would be, and have what they would have, and then they are at Rest.

So it is with the rational creature, when the rational creature is in its
proper place, that that is the proper place for an immortal Soul, and when an
immortal soul comes to have the Capacity of it to be filled, when it comes to
have what an immortal Soul is capable of, then it comes to have Rest, and this
is a Rest that Christ does promise here in the Text, and I will give you Rest:
that is thus, If you come to me, you shall first be delivered from all your
burdens, from all misery whatsoever. And Secondly, you shall be where you would
be, and enjoy what you would have; so that indeed, this promise contains the
freedom from all evil, and the enjoyment of all good, there cannot be Rest
until there be a freedom from evil, and an enjoyment of all good, that is the
general here in this promise, I will give you Rest. There is a great deal of
difference between the Rest that Christ here promises to give, and that that
men seek after in the world. We read of the Rich Glutton in Luke, 12. says he,
Soul take thine ease, Soul be at Rest: for the word there in the Greek, it is
of the same that here this word is in my Text, of Rest, Soul take thine ease,
or Soul be at Rest, Why? For thou have goods laid up for many Years. Now mark
the difference of the Rest of the Soul of a worldling, and the rest of the Soul
of a Christian: A worlding says, Soul take thy Rest, for thou have meat, and
drink, and thou have goods laid up for many Years. A Christians Rest is this,
Come (says Christ) to me and I will give you Rest; the Rest of a Christian, it
is in the Son of God, it is in the Mediator of the second Covenant, it is in
him that brings the Soul unto the Father, and brings all the treasure and
Riches of the Grace of the Father unto the soul, it is in him that a Christian
finds rest; and a worldling only, in meat, and drink, and other things, as we
shall see more afterward. Thus in general what the meaning is.

Now in this promise of Christ, there are two things to be handled; the First
employed, the Second expressed.

That which is employed is this, That there is no rest in the Souls of the
Children of men out of Jesus Christ, that is plainly implied, Come to me, and I
will give you rest. So that here is plainly implied; That there is no rest for
an immortal Soul out of Jesus Christ, it can have no rest out of Christ. And
then that that is expressed is this, That in Jesus Christ, as soon as the Soul
comes to have union with Jesus Christ, it shall have true rest indeed, there is
full rest to be had in Christ.

Now for the first, That out of Jesus Christ, there can be no rest unto the
soul: As we read of the Dove that Noah sent forth; when his Ark was floating up
and down on the Water, he sent forth a Dove, and you find in the story of Noah
there, in Genesis, 8.89. That when the Dove was sent forth, she flew up and
down, but she had not whereon to rest the Sole of her Foot, and therefore she
comes flying to the Arc again: so it is with a soul that is not in Christ (for
the Arc was a type of Christ) it may floate up and down in the world here, but
certainly, there is nothing for the soul to rest it self upon out of Christ.
Indeed, we read, that when Noah sent forth a Raven out of the arc, the Raven
came no more, but the dove came again, and the difference between the Dove and
the Raven does elegantly express the difference between those souls that God
has an intent to do good unto in Christ, and those that are left by God, and
have no other portion appointed for them than the things of this world: men of
this world whom the Lord intends no higher good, than the things of this world,
they are like the Raven, they flutter up and down in the world, but never come
to the arc, never come to Christ; the other that the Lord has an intent to do
good unto, although they may for a while be floating up and down here in this
world, yet so will God order things, that their souls shall never have any rest
and quiet, til they come to Jesus Christ, nothing in this world shall satisfy
them, but the Lord will make them seek to be sensible of any emptiness, that
they have not that good that their souls were made for, no rest to be had out
of Christ.

There is a Scripture or two that is very observable. I might Name multitudes,
But I shall content my self with one or two. That place in Isa. will be
sufficient if I Name no more, it is in the 57. Chapter of the prophecy of Isa.
and the two last verses. There you shall see al men that are out of Christ
described in this, of having no rest, the 20. verse. But the wicked are like
the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, there
is no peace (says my God) to the wicked, or there is no rest, says my God, to
the wicked: ye that are mariners know what a troubled sea does mean, a sea
that is troubled casts forth mire and dirt; and just thus is a wicked man's
heart, it is like the troubled sea, it casts forth mire and dirt.

And as when the sea is most troubled, it casts forth most dirt, so it is with
wicked men, when wicked men are most troubled, then they cast forth most
wickedness. So sometimes it may be, you find it, when you are in a storm at
sea, some kind of men, instead of seeking God and praying unto God they fall a
cursing, and swearing, and railing, and so their hearts are more troubled, than
the troubled sea, and thereby cast out more filth and dirt out of their hearts,
than is cast out by the troubled sea. Or if not at sea, yet when they are here
at land, as men that have no rest and peace with God, every thing troubles
them, having not rest in Christ, they are troubled in their family, and with
their neighbors, they do cast forth nothing but mire and dirt, oaths, swearing,
and blaspheming, Oh! how do they come forth of wicked men when they are crossed
at any time: when you see at any time the husband, or the wife to be crossed and
troubled, when you see them in a distemper, and hear them swearing, cursing,
railing, blaspheming, speaking wicked speeches in their passion, remember this
text, of the 57, of Isa. the 20. verse, That a wicked man is like the troubled
sea that casts forth mire and dirt. Oh! that you would remember it, and apply
it to your own hearts, is it thus with my heart. I fear that there are many,
whose consciences tell them, that this text does lively set forth their hearts,
their consciences tell them, that when they are troubled they cast forth mire
and dirt, Oh! what mire and dirt has been cast forth by many, when they have
been in trouble! now, that the Lord would settle this text upon your hearts,
for the Lord says it is the wicked man and woman, when they are troubled that
do cast forth this mire and dirt. But the special thing I aim at is in the
next verse, There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked, no peace, no rest,
this is a truth that does belong unto al men and women that are out of Jesus
Christ, there is no peace, no rest unto their souls, and as he does deny al
kind of rest that such a one can have, so you may observe, what a confirmation
there is, Says my God. It is God that says it, as if the prophet should say,
I am now preaching unto you about the restless condition that you are in,
remaining in your natural estate, as unconverted to God, while I am preaching
of this, it will be a sad thing to you, it is a sad argument you will say, the
prophet tells us, there is no rest, no peace; but as if the prophet should say,
it is not I that says it, it is my God that says it, God does pronounce this
upon every ungodly man and woman, that there is no peace, no rest unto such;
let the world have never so much rest and peace, though there should be no war
abroad in the world, yet there is no peace unto wicked men, no rest unto their
souls. I shall demonstrate this more clearly afterward that there is no rest
nor peace to any wicked men in the world, though they seem to others to live in
never so much ease, rest and peace.

Further, there is no peace to the wicked, says my God; it is not I says the
prophet, but God that says it, whereby he would teach us this note, That when
any ministers of God preaches that which is hard to us, we should consider
that it is not their words, but Gods that speaks to them, that God that will
make al good, that he speaks by them, which is according to his word,
according to what he says in his word, there is no peace, says my God.

Further, there is no peace, says my God, it may be that many would flatter
you, and say there is peace, and these ministers do but trouble people, trouble
consciences, and what needs so much stir, what needs so much a do, no question
the prophet did aim at these false prophets, as there were many that we read
of in Isaiah and Jeremiah that cried peace, peace, when there was no peace.
There was many false Prophets that lived in those times, that said the prophet
Isaiah preaches to you things that are too hard, God is merciful, and have we
not al infirmities? and therefore it is but trusting in Gods mercy; and do we
not do as others do? and we hope it shall be with us as with others at the
last, and it is but repenting at last: now in opposition to al these, says the
prophet Isaiah, there is no peace, says my God, let all the false prophets
plead what they will, let them say what they please, yet my God says, to every
wicked and ungodly man and Woman, there is no peace to their Souls.

Further, It may be there are some that their own Hearts would say, peace,
peace, as many men and Women, that when they hear out of the word those things
that are very dreadful, and do come very near to their Consciences, their
Consciences tell them this word of God nearly concerns them, yet they will be
ready to bless themselves in their own thoughts and say, notwithstanding it
shall be peace to them, just as we read in 29. of Deuteronomy. 19, and 20. verses,
says the Lord, It shall come to pass that if any man when he hears the words
of this curse, shall bless himself in his Heart and say, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination of mine own Heart; the Lord will not spare
him, but then the anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall Smoke against that
man, and all the curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. How dreadful does God
speak, and to whom? To that Soul, that shall hear out of Gods word, that there
is no peace, no Rest unto them in that condition, in the way that he is now in,
yet it may be, says the Lord, when you shall hear pronounced this day in my
word against them, you shall have many in your auditory shall say, I shall have
peace though I walk in the imagination of my own Heart. Now we do not find such
a dreadful expression in all the Book of God against any, as we do against
those that shall say, they shall have peace, though they walk in the
imagination of their own Heart. Now hear, says the prophet, may be some of you
will say in your own Hearts, I shall have Rest, I shall have Peace, but says
the Prophet, there is no Peace to the wicked, says my God, though your own
Hearts say, you shall have Peace, and what need we trouble our selves with the
Ministers words, but my God says, there is no peace to the wicked: methinks,
here we have a place, that speaks of wicked men directly in opposition to that
which the Church speaks of her self, in Lamen. 3.24. The Lord is my portion,
says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. Now let us observe, at this time
when the Church speaks this, and says, the Lord is her portion, she was in a
very afflicted estate and condition, and it may be that her enemies would say,
that the Lord had forsaken her, and neglected her, I but, against all the
enemies in the world, her faith prevails, and says, Let all the devils in hell
say what they will, let all the world say what they will, yet my soul shall say,
the Lord is my portion, that is, that faith that Gods spirit has wrought in my
soul shall enable me to say that the Lord is my portion. So on the contrary,
when wicked men are in prosperity, and feel not the hand of God upon them,
perhaps friends may flatter them, false prophets will flatter them; may be their
own hearts will flatter themselves, but now to answer al, says the prophet,
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, my God says it.

Further, there is no peace, says my God, no rest to any out of Christ, this
is to note, from whence it comes that wicked men can have no peace, why they
can have no rest, it is from God, it is God that will not give it, God is
against them. There are many wicked men and women, whose consciences are begun
to be enlightened, and they many times have trouble of spirit, and when they
awake in the night, they are troubled, and when they go about their business in
the day, they are troubled, and when they come home, they are troubled, and so
troubled as they scarce know what it is that troubles them. Now perhaps you
have not known what it is that troubles you, but this text in Isa. 57, and the
last verse, tells you what it is that troubles you, it is the Lord that is out
with you, its the anger, the displeasure of the almighty that is upon you in
those ways that you have walked in, and therefore it is that the prophet
brings the name of God, to show whence it is that wicked men can have no peace.

Further, It is observable, that he adds, it is My God; he does not say there
is no peace, that God says, though that had been enough, but my God, that is
thus, as if the Prophet should say through the mercy of God, the Lord has
revealed this mercy to me, and my Soul has some interest in this God, and
since I knew God in Jesus Christ, my soul has found peace and Rest in him, and
he is my God, and has revealed himself to me, he whose mind my soul is in some
measure acquainted with, my God says, there is no Peace to the wicked. And
though however others may think, it is a strange thing to tell ungodly men, that
they are in a condition wherein they can have no peace, when they hear of the
dreadful wrath of God against all ungodlyness to be revealed out of the word,
yet those who are acquainted with the ways of God, those who know the holiness
and justice of God, those who understand the mind of God, those who are
acquainted with the secrets of the mind of God, those men know, that there is a
reality in what is declared against such and such wicked men, they can say,
that to such there is no Peace, they can wonder how it is possible that such
men can go on quietly in their way, they wonder how they can eat their meat in
quiet, they wonder how they can sleep in quiet, they that know what a breach
sin has made between God and the Soul, and know what a wonderful work it is to
make up the breach between God and the Soul that sin has made, those men can
understand this, and so wonder at their security. That is the meaning of the
prophets words in Isaiah, There is no peace to the wicked (says my God) as he
instanceth in those words in the relation he has to God, says my God, because
he knew the way of God, he knew a wicked man could have no peace, others that
know not the way of God, they think wicked men may have peace; as now, come to
some men, and speak of the natural man's Estate, and how we are all Children of
wrath, and of sin, and of the severity of Gods justice, and holiness; now a
carnal heart, who knows not God, he thinks strange of this, and thinks, people
are troubled more than needs; but now come to another that understands what the
way of God is, and knows what the way of God is in making peace between God and
them, come to one to whom God has made himself known in Christ, such a one
will presently subscribe to all that is revealed of the wrath of God, and of the
holiness of God, and of the righteous judgment of God: thus the prophet does,
My God, that God, that has revealed himself to me, he says, there is no peace
to the wicked.

Further, there is yet a further note, there is no peace to the wicked, says
my God, there is this note from it, That it is a sad thing, when such as are
wise, Godly and gracious, that are acquainted with the ways of God, shall think
others conditions to be naught, when such men shall be suspicious of it, much
more if they were able to say certainly what their estates are, but when such
as are wise, and holy, and walk close with God, when they shall say to you,
there is no peace, you had need look to it; is there any godly friend of yours,
whom in your conscience you believe is truly godly, that walks close with God,
and faithfully with him, and enjoyes communion with him? if such a friend shall
but think your condition to be naught it is a sad thing: thus it is, when the
prophet says, there is no peace to such and such wicked men, says my God,
that is, through Gods mercy, I have an interest in him, and in his name
pronounce this, that there is no peace to such and such wicked men.

CHAP. XXV.
Six Reasons of the former Doctrine. 1. The soul out of Christ is departed from
God. 2. Every man by nature is an enemy to God. 3. Every man by nature is bound
over to the justice of God to answer to what he can charge him with. 4. In a
man out of Christ there is every thing to disquiet him. 5. Every one out of
Christ is condemned. 6. Such every moment may be Plunged into a Gulf of Wrath.

WELL, Because this text has taken up some time in the opening of it, and has
much in it, I will name no other than this; for this indeed is sufficient to
prove, that al out of Christ can have no peace nor rest unto their souls.
Would you know why, and how it comes to pass, that None that are out of Christ
can have Rest unto their souls? I shall not spend much time in opening what I
have to say, but those that are to be delivered for the opening of this point
are exceeding dreadful, they speak dreadfully to those that are out of Christ:
but now because you have already heard so much, of the willingness of Jesus
Christ to be reconciled to you, and his invitation of you to come to him, and I
have so much afterward to deliver to you, about the true rest that a believing
soul has in Jesus Christ, therefore I may take the more liberty, to show unto
you the restless condition that every soul is in that is out of Jesus Christ. I
will do it very briefly in these particulars,

First, Certainly, a soul out of Christ, can have no rest, because it is
departed from God, know this, and Oh! that the Lord would make you to know it,
that every man and woman naturally is departed from God, is gone from God, from
the womb we have departed from him, and there is a great distance between God
and every one of our souls naturally, all the union we come to have with God, it
is in his son, it is in Christ, therefore, til we come to be in Christ, there is
a great chasma, a gulf, a depth, a vast distance between God and al our souls,
and this is one of the first things that the Lord is pleased to show, and to
convince a soul that he is about to save, of the great distance that there is
between God and the soul natturally, now it is impossible for a soul to have
rest that is departed from God, for God is the proper Center of an immortal
soul, as Moses says in Psalm 90. Thou art our habitation; the soul can have no
rest but in God, for God is the proper place of an immortal soul, the true good
of an immortal soul it is the enjoyment of an infinite good: now if the soul be
separated from that which is the true good, and proper place of it, it is
impossible it should have any rest. In the 12. Psalm, the latter end, it is
said of the wicked, The wicked walk round about, the words are termed in the
old Latin, in a circuit, up and down, but now a godly man, walks in a strait
line, he goes to the center, in a strait line to God as the center, and there
it finds rest; but when it is in its natural condition it walks in a circle,
up and down, seeking for rest and finding none, as it is said of the unclean
spirit in the Gospel, that walks up and down seeking rest, but finds none; so
it is with men in the world, they would fain have rest, and seek somewhat that
is good, but finds none, for they are departed from God that is the only rest
of an immortal soul.

Secondly, not only so, but every man by nature is an enemy to God, and
therefore cannot look upon God, the infinite, eternal, first being of al things
without terror if he knows him; no man or woman that knows what God is, that
is able to look upon him without terror in his natural estate, and therefore it
is not possible they can have any rest so long as they continue enemies to God,
and that certainly, is the state of man by nature, the scripture is as clear
in this, as in any one point of divinity, that we are al by nature enemies to
God, and can thou be at quiet when thou art an enemy to God? think with thy
self, it may be, thou have slept quietly, lived merrily, and eat and drank with
a great deal of peace, as you think; but this is your condition, that you are
naturally an enemy to the infinite, eternal first-being of al things.

Object. You will say, If we do not know it, we may have rest.

Answ. Just such a rest as a man that were asleep upon the top of a mast, true,
he does not know his danger when he is a sleep, but yet, will you say, that the
man can have true rest when he is there; so though men do not know what their
natural condition is, and though their security have a kind of false rest, but
will you call that rest? will you say, such a man is gone to his rest, that is
gone to sleep upon the top of a mast? such a rest have thou had all the days of
thy life before conversion.

Thirdly, Every man by nature is guilty, is bound over to the infinite justice
of God, to answer for all that the Lord has to charge him with, to answer it
before the Lord, and to satisfy the strict Law of Gods divine justice for all
that the Lord has to charge him with, and is this man in a condition to rest?
can this man have rest, if he do but understand this? If a man be found guilty,
and be bound over to the Sessions or Assizes, truly, that man will have little
rest, til he have got himself free; for a soul to be bound over by the
infinite, eternal God, to be bound over to eternal justice for whatever the
Lord has to charge him withal, is this a condition to rest in? this is the
condition of al out of Christ, of a soul before it comes to Christ.

Fourthly, Not only is a man guilty before the Lord, but whatsoever there is in
one to disquiet him in the world, it is the condition of such a one that is out
of Christ. What will disquiet one? to be in debt, will not that disquiet one? to
be in danger of debt, to be arrested as soon as he comes out of his doors,
can such a man sleep quietly, or eat his meat quietly, and drink quietly? Let
me tell you, that all the while you are out of Christ, you are in debt unto the
infinite and eternal God, and bound to give satisfaction fot what the Lord has
to charge you withal, yea, and for ought you know, the next creature that you
have to deal withal, may be as a Sergeant, sent from the eternal God, to lay
hold upon you, to arrest you, and to cast you into prison, until you have paid
the uttermost farthing. I remember I have read of Augustus Caesar, Plutarch
reports of him, that he knowing of a Chief man in Rome, that was much in debt
he sent to buy the pillow that that man lay upon; certainly there is much in
that pillow, thought he, that a man in so much debt could rest upon: only
noting thus much, that it is a mighty trouble, and a restless condition that
such a one is in, that is in debt; if that be so, then certainly, every man and
woman out of Christ is in a restless condition, for they owe to God the debt of
punishment, because they have not paid to God the debt of obedience, and God
must have his debt paid, either in themselves or in their surety, and thy
surety is only in Christ, and Christ undertakes to pay for only those that come
to him, whom he has invited to come to him, and if Christ do not undertake to
pay the debt for you, you must pay it your selves, or be cast into prison; and
that is the reason of the damned lying in hell for ever, because they lie to pay
the debt of obedience that they owe to God, and therefore the scripture calls
our sins, our debts, if you examine the several expressions of the evangelists,
one says trespasses, the other debts, whereby it is apparent, that Christ did
never intend to bind his people to use those very words, but only show a
platform and a pattern of prayer, that we are to pray to that effect, this is
an argument that no man can possibly answer, for one Evangelist has the Lords
prayer in one kind of words, and the other Evangelist has the Lords prayer in
other kind of words, one says, forgive us our trespasses, and the other says,
forgive us our debts; now it is true, they come to al one in effect, I but then
say I from this, that it is not Christ's intention to tie us punctually to the
words that he spoke, but to make the prayer of Christ a pattern of prayer to
us, so much for that point.

Fifthly, for this condition, the restless condition that al men are in that
are out of Christ, it is this they; are not only debtors and guilty, but every
one out of Christ is condemned, not only bound over, a prisoner may be bound
over, I but he may hope to escape when he comes to trial, but this is certain,
every man and woman out of Christ is a condemned creature, the sentence is past
already upon them. I will give you a clear scripture for it, in John, 3.18. He
that believes not in Christ is condemned already, not only he shall be
condemned at the great day of judgment, but he is now condemned, he is
condemned already. I might give you diverse other Scriptures, that in Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit, this does plainly imply, that then there is
condemnation to them that are not in Christ, that do not walk after the spirit,
but after the flesh. Now can any man be at peace when he is a condemned
creature? would you think, that a man that were condemned at your Assizes, the
Judge having past the sentence of death upon him, if you should come to such a
man and find him asleep, would you not say, alas! can you rest now? Do you
think the night is a night of Rest that is before the execution of a condemned
man? Now let me say to you, that those that are come to Christ, they know that
their condition was so before they did come to him, this is a certain truth,
that til you come in unto Jesus Christ and be a believer in him, you are under
the sentence of condemnation, he that believes not, is condemned, you that walk
after the flesh are under Condemnation.

You will say, God forbid, we hope we are not condemned. Now the 8. of the Romans
the first verse, will show you to your faces in what condition you are in,
There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ. Who are they that are in
Christ and delivered from condemnation? They are those that walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. Shall it be cast upon this now? I do challenge
every Soul to put it upon the trial, to see whether they dare venture their
Souls and eternal estate upon this Scripture, look to it, it is the word of
God, it is that word of God that must stand for ever, when thou and I am
fallen, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. Now then, thy eternal estate lies upon
this, thy soul lies upon it, that if thou be a man or Woman that does walk
after the flesh, that is, look what pleasure the flesh desires, what lusts of
the flesh are delightful to thee, thy Heart walks after them, thou live
accordingly, and it is thy great care to make provision for the flesh, the care
of thy life to make provision for the flesh, and when thou have made provision
for the flesh, thou give liberty to thy spirit to satisfy it self in the
lusts of the flesh, thou art the man and woman that yet art not in Jesus
Christ, and therefore art certainly under condemnation; and is this a time to
Rest now in? Is there Rest for such a Soul that is in this condition? All those
therefore, whose consciences tell them, that hitherto they have walked after
the flesh and not after the spirit, not after those truths that they find in
the word; perhaps they can go to the word, and say, it is true what the
Minister says, if we could do what he says, and in the mean time cast off the
thoughts of those truths that are according to the word, and cast off what God
speaks in his word, for what he speaks in his word should be as real to thee,
as if he spoke it from Heaven, and therefore thou art out of Christ, and I speak
in the name of God of all these things, that I might the more effectually draw
men's hearts to come unto Christ for Rest. For I do not mean to leave you thus,
to tell you, that you have no Rest out of Christ, but I intend to tell you, how
you may have Rest in Christ. Only first I would convince you that out of Chirst
there is no Rest for the Soul, and if you have had Rest all this while out of
Christ, it has been a cursed, a vile, a wretched Rest, it has been no other
but such a Rest as this, of a man that is condemned to die, Nay, Let me tell you
all out of Christ are not condemned to die a temporal, but an eternal Death.

But you will say, they have Rest enough, it does not trouble them. I answer,
What Rest? just as if a condemned man shall go to bed, and fall asleep, and dream
that he is at home in his House, with his Wife and Children about him, at home
with his friends, at his work, at his meat, and O poor man, how he rejoices
that he is at home, and has got his Wife and Children, and all is safe and
well, this man pleases himself in his dream all this while, and at length (poor
man) he awakes, and he sees he is in the prison, he sees the shackles about his
heels, and the watch at the door, and for ought he knows, he may die the next
day. Certainly, this sets forth as lively the condition of natural Men in the
world as can be, they are al condemned, but they are in a dream, and they think
they are out of al danger, al will be safe, that there shall no misery befall
them; O but, when the Lord shall come to awake them out of this dream, they will
see themselves in prison, under the sentence of condemnation, and then they will
wonder that they have been so quiet all this while.

Sixthly: Yea, Let me say further, if thou be out of Christ thou are not
only under the sentence of Condemnation, but for ought thou know, every
moment thou may be plunged into the Gulf of the wrath of the infinite God,
it is true, God has spared thee along time, God has continued thy Life in his
Patience, perhaps, twenty, forty, fifty years; well, but how do thou know,
but that may fall out in one night, or day, or moment, that never fell out in all
thy life, though thou have been spared a long time, yet thou know not but
before morning, thou may be among the damned in Hell, and is this a
condition to rest in? For a man and Woman to be in such a condition, as when he
comes to examine, how does things stand between God and my Soul? How stand I to
God? What reference have I to God? Or what reference has God to me? How do I
know but I may be swallowed up in the Gulf of the eternal wrath of the infinite
God, and there lie under it for ever? What do I know to the contrary? And if
this prove to be my portion, it had been better ten thousand times I had never
been borne, and is this a condition to rest in? Certainly if God has revealed
any truth in his word, these are the truths of God. The condition of one out of
Christ is like one that has suffered Shipwreck, and perhaps he gets one of the
Bords that are broken off from the ship, and is floating up and down the Sea
upon it, and yet in such danger, that every wave coming, he is in danger to be
drowned, do you think it is possible for any one to sleep there? Its true, You
are not drowned yet, but you see your selves in danger by every wave that comes
to be swallowed up, and to be sunk to the bottom. It may be it has been the
case of some of you, that have suffered Shipwreck, that you have been dilivered
in a boat, I believe when you have been there you could hardly sleep quietly,
if you should nestle down in your boat, and say, well, here I will take my rest,
would not every one think you a mad man? Just thus, for all the world, it is
with men in their natural estate, they take up their rest, whereas they know
not but there will come presently some dreadful wave of the wrath of God, and
swallow them up, and so they are undone for ever, certainly, there is no peace
to the wicked, says my God, if this be so.

There are diverse other particulars that might set forth for the opening of the
condition of al men that are out of Jesus Christ, no rest can come to them, and
al to make Jesus Christ precious to you, that you might seek the happy
condition that is to be had in Christ. Oh! that any thing that has been spoken
might be settled upon your hearts, that you might go with that poor wretched
sinner, that you read of in the Acts of the Apostles Chap. 16.30. and say, Men
and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? The Lord has shown me my restless
condition, I see the rest I have had, has been a restless condition. And Oh
that it might make you but to inquire after Christ, but to put your souls into
an inquiring condition after Jesus Christ, that you may hearken unto what shall
be delivered unto you about the blessed rest that Christ does here promise in
this invitation, when he says, Come unto me, You that are laden, and I will
give you rest, be not afraid to apply your selves to those things that have
been delivered, whenas these things are spoken out of such a text as does
sufficiently hold forth to you the true rest that is in Christ, for this
promise of rest, it is made to them that do labor and are heavy lade. Now if
these truths of God that have been delivered to you, do ly as a load upon your
spirits, if you go away with your hearts burdened with it, be not discouraged,
for you that are burdened with such truths as these are, come to Christ and he
will deliver you from this burden, and you shall have in this that quiet that
shall remain everlastingly; all the quiet that you can have with putting off
these truths that have been delivered cannot hold long, but there is a storm a
coming, that will try every man and woman's quiet, of what nature it is; whether
true quiet, or false; whether true rest, or false; do not therefore cast off
what has been delivered, but apply it to your souls, that so you may be the
more prepared to hear further of the blessed rest that Christ does here
promise unto you.

CHAP. XXVI.
Contains. I. A further consideration of the restless condition of men out of
Christ, from Prove. 23.34. II. Five Reasons thereof. 1. They are under the curse
of God. 2. Al creatures are their enemies 3. All the ways of Gods providence
are against them. 4. Al their best Services are rejected. 5. They have no
refuge for comfort. III. Two conclussions from the premises. 1. Most men live
and perish in blindness. 2. There is insufficiency in all things out of Christ,
to give rest; with the Reasons thereof

BUt I shall now go on a little further in this similitude that I have been
speaking of; the holy Ghost has another like this, in Prove. 23.34. He compares
wicked men that are secure, unto a man that sleeps upon the top of a mast, he
speaks there of drunkards, and of the Whoremaster, but it is true also of al
unconverted ones, though the holy Ghost instanceth in those two only, the words
are thus, Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or
as he that lies upon the top of a Mast. So that here you have both the
similitudes, you have the first that I spoke of, as if a man had only a plank
in the midst of the Sea, and he lies down and seeks for rest there, or the
other upon the top of a mast, and he lies down and sleeps there: this is the
restless condition of of ungodly men, I will Name briefly some few Reasons and
so proceed. Certainly, there is no Rest unto them that are ou^ Christ.

1. For he is under the curse, he is under the curse of the law, and the curse
of God, under the curse of the law of God, whatever befalls him in this world,
whatever affliction, it is a part of the curse, and for ought he knows every
sorrow, is but as the beginning of eternal sorrow to him, there is the venom of
the wrath of God in every affliction to every unconverted man, he his in danger
to have the execution of al temporal curses upon him, there is nothing but the
patience of God to keep him from all this, and what rest then can he have? The
saints of God, they have Gods covenant, and Gods promise, other men have
nothing but Gods patience to keep them. A mallefactor in prison is not executed
many times, Why? Because the Judge may out of favor reprieve him for a while, I
but, is this a condition to rest in? A man that is wise is never at rest with a
repriev, but will have his pardon before he can rest, there is no man has any
ground in their natural estate for their rest and quiet, but merely their
reprieval: but the saints they see what a sad thing this is, and therefore
nothing will give them rest til they have their pardon.

2. There is no rest out of Christ, because al creatures are their enemies,
thou sleep in the midst of an army of enemies, to sleep in the midst of an
army of enemies it would be a strange thing, al ungodly men have no other rest
but as in the midst of the armies of their enemies, for all the armies in the
world, and all the creatures in the world, are their deadly enemies.

3. Yea, all the ways of Gods providence is against thee, thy prosperity works
toward thy misery, toward thy ruin, and so whatsoever passage of providence
there is though thou may rejoice much in it, yet it works toward thy ruin.
Prove. 4.32.

4. There is nothing that thou can do can be accepted, al thy services, al
thy performances out of Christ are cast off, al thy prayers til thou come to
Christ, til God do reveal the mysteries of the Gospel to thee, al thy duties,
prayers, exercises of religion, are al rejected, and yet thou must perform them
upon pain of damnation, and yet not accepted, what a restless condition is
this? for one to be in such a condition, I am bound to pray, to hear the word,
and perform duties upon pain of damnation, and yet al my prayers, and duties,
are cast as dung again into my face, this is the condition of al those that are
in their natural estate: I speak this, that you may al see, what infinite need
you have of Christ. Much might be said of the sinful condition of al out of
Christ, for we must know, than in sin there is a jarring against God, against
the infinite glorious God, there is nothing but confusion, nothing but
distemper in sin, and therefore a sinful condition can be no condition to rest
in.

5. In what affliction soever any one is in, that is out of Christ, he has no
where to go for comefort, for there can be no stay nor comfort to a soul out of
Christ, he is like a man in the midst of a wilderness, that has nothing to
protect him, no hedge no bush, if the storm comes never so dreadfully, he has
no where to go for protection, he is like a mariner in the sea, that has lolt
his anchor when a storm comes, and he is driven to the shore, and has no
anchor to pitch him upon. This and much more might be said to show the restless
condition of al men out of Christ.

Oh! then, the blindness, security, and hardness of heart that there is almost
in all the world, if this (...) the truth of God; and indeed this is the
condition of al out of Christ, we may from hence conclude, that most in the
world do live, and die and perrish in blindness, and in woeful disperate
hardness of Heart, for where almost is the Man and Woman that is convinced of
this Restless condition? That ever were in this Restless condition? This I dare
undertake to aver, concerning every one, that you were once in such a condition
as I have now spoke of, how you have got out of it, that you must look to, and
what argument you have that you can be able to rest your Souls upon for your
deliverance out of this condition, do you examine, but this condition every one
is in naturally; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacab, was in this condition once, and
therefore every one must look unto it now while this Rest is opening unto you,
and here indeed is the Reason of the tumultuousness of spirit that is in most
people. What is the Reason that people hurry up and down in seeking after the
things of this world? That they are in a Restless condition? Their Souls have
not union with God in Jesus Christ, and therefore they are hurried up and down
here in this world to seek after comfort this way, and that way: but the truth
is, as with the unclean spirit in the Gospel, they seek for Rest but find none:
as I told you before, the Dove sought up and down for Rest, but she found
none, til she came to the Arc; and so the Reason of the disturbance of the
Spirits of Men and Women, is from hence, that they are not acquainted with the
true Rest that there is in Christ, but we let this pass.

Only one thing more in this point, before we shall come unto the next, and that
is, to show the insufficiency that there is in all things in the world to give
Rest unto the Soul til we come to Christ: Al men out of Christ are in a
Restless condition: There is an insufficiency in all things in the world to give
Rest til we come to Christ.

And for that I shall give two or three Reasons.

I. First, Because the Rest of an immortal Soul must needs be in the reference
it has to God; Now all the Transactions between God and us, are only in the
hand of Christ, it is not committed unto any creature, to transact any thing
between God and us for any good, but through Christ; now then, if al our Rest
must needs be in our reference unto God, and all the Transactions between God
and us must be in the hand of Christ the Mediator, then certainly, there is an
insufficiency in all things in the world to give Rest unto our souls.

II. Secondly, There is an insufficiency in all things in the world to give
Rest unto the Soul, because the misery that we are in is so deep, and the
happiness that our Souls are capable of is so high, that it is impossible that
any creature can reach the one or the other, either to deliver from the one, or
to raise up unto the other, only Jesus Christ in whom we have Rest can do it,
because that there was never any thing that came to that depth of humiliation,
nor has that height of Glory (put both together) Christ has subjected himself
to the lowest degree of humiliation that ever creature could subject it self
unto, and Christ is in the highest degree of Glory that it is possible for any
creature to be in, above al creatures: his subjection unto sorrow and trouble
was such as no creature can subject unto, and his glory is higher than any
creature is capable of, therefore he, and only he, is able to deliver from the
depth of misery in which the Children of men are, and raise them to the true
happiness and Glory that their Natures are capable of.

III. Thirdly, There is an insufficiency in all creatures to give Rest unto the
Soul, because all ceatures here in this world that we have to do withal, except
the Angels in Heaven, are under the curse, and the Angels are only ministering
spirits to attend upon Christ, and to be sent upon Christ's errand, they do
nothing but in order to Christ; now all other creatures are under the curse,
and being under the curse through man's sin, it is impossible that those
creatures that are under the curse should give Rest unto our Souls, and I do
not know any argument in the world of greater strength to take off the Hearts
of men from resting in creature comforts than this, to understand clearly, that
al creatures here in this world, are under the curse through our sins, the
whole world that is under the curse by our sins cannot make us happy, and
therefore there is an insufficiency in all things in the world to give Rest unto
our Souls. Do but consider then what are the things that most people Rest in
Particularly, and then we shall see the vanity of men in seeking for Rest out of
Christ.

CHAP. XXVII.
The insufficiency of every thing besides Christ to give Rest to the Soul is
further enlarged, with several Choice Considerations,

FIrst, There are some that are so vile, as the chiefest Rest and comfort of
their Souls is in the pleasure of sin, in the delight that they do take in
satisfying of their sinful lusts, that is the comfort and Rest of their Souls,
if they be troubled at home, Wife, Children, or Servants do but trouble them,
what do they do to ease themselves, they go abroad among company, and there
drink, and play, and swear, and perhaps be unclean. And others, when they are
crossed, how do they ease themselves by venting their passion, and the truth
is, it is a most holy truth I am speaking of, Oh! That ever it should enter
into the Heart of a creature, to make it to be the greatest quiet, ease, and
Rest of his Soul, to satisfy himself in sinning against the blessed God, and
yet, I appeal unto you, do not your consciences tell you, some of you, that this
is your condition? And do you not know Men, that the greatest comfort, ease,
quiet and Rest of heart that they have in this world, is in the satisfying of
their sinful lusts? How far is this from seeking out Rest in Christ, in the Son
of God, in the great Mediator of the Covenant; yet this is the condition of
most people, take away the satisfaction of their Souls in their sinful lusts,
and they have nothing to quiet their Hearts with, but when they are there, now
they are safe, now they are quiet. Do but consider of this one thing that now I
am speaking of, That to have Rest, and quiet, in any way of sin, it is no
other, but just as if a man had a burning Fever, and he calls for a pot of
Water, gets it to his mouth, and drinks it up every drop; now in the very time
he is pouring this down his Throat, he has some Rest, some ease, he finds some
ease from the fit of the fever while he is drinking down the pot of Water; but
do you think this will be Rest to him? Do but stay a quarter of an hour, or may
be an hour or two, then you will find him in his scalding burning fit, then he
burns ten times more than he did before, and it is like to cost him his life,
but he finds trouble and disquiet, and that gives him ease, and therefore he
drinks it down and this indangers his Life afterward. So it is with men, that
seek after ease and Rest unto their Souls in any way of sin, thy pleasure in
thy sinful ways, take all the pleasure of thy Life from thy youth to the day
of thy death, and put it altogether, yet in respect of eternity, it is but just
like the ease that a poor man in a Fever has, while the water is going down
his Throat, all thy pleasure is no more, and thou art like to be scalding and
burning in Gods wrath to al eternity for that one draught of thine, for the
ease and Rest that thou had in the way of sin; I am sure when Christ had the
burden of our sins upon him, he found it no Rest, and therefore it cannot be
ease to thy Spirit.

Secondly, There are others, though not so vile, yet they Rest not in the act
of sin, but in the creature, if they can have good trading, quick voyages, and
have as their neighbors have, then they are ready as the rich man in the Gospel
to say, Soul, take thine ease, eat and drink, for thou have goods laid up for
many years; and this is the rest that most people in the world do seek after;
they think, that if they might have as such and such have, then they had rest
enough, but be it known unto you, that this is an argument that thou do not
understand nor savor the things of God, if thou think that all the creatures
in the world, yea, if God should give thee the possession of all the creatures
in heaven and earth, if thou should think that they would give thee rest, I
say, thou do not savor at all the things of God; but those that understand
what God is, yea, those that have but one spark of true saving grace, this
spark of grace does so enlarge the soul, that all the creatures in heaven and
earth cannot give rest, cannot give quiet, but still it has a higher good to
seek after than all the creatures in all the world. There is a notable text of
Scripture which we have in the book of Job, in the 26. of Job, and 7. verse He
Stretches forth the north over the empty place, and hangs the earth upon
nothing. Will thou seek thy rest in that which hangs upon nothing? the whole
earth has nothing to rest upon, and therefore nothing in the earth can be rest
unto thy soul. In Micah 2.10. as it is said there in that place, so I may say
of creatures, Arise ye and depart, for here is not your rest. The whole world
is as a wheel, in a continual motion, and therefore in James 3.6. Where the
text speaks of the course of nature, or the wheel of nature, the whole world
is as a wheel running up and down, and therefore there can be no rest in the
enjoyment of the creature.

Well, but there are some yet would fain have rest there, having got good
estates, some of you have got good voyages, and God has prospered you in your
young days, and having got great estates, now you would have rest, that is, to
live idly, and to live uselesly, and to keep at home, and let al things go
which way they will, it is good to be quiet in ones old days, when God has
delivered you from many dangers at sea, now you think the only way is to live
quietly at home, and to meddle with nothing, and this is the rest of your
souls, this is the rest that many men have after their younger time is past, and
how then to live and do nothing, this is their rest, now: Oh! that God would
but speak to the hearts of these men.

1. Do but consider this, That by living thus idly and unusefully thou come
to have al thy parts and thy spirits to corrupt; just as a standing water, as
waters in a pond do corrupt, and putrify by their standing, so men that live
uselesly and are not active for God, and for the public good, according to
the opportunities that God puts into their hands, their hearts do putrify and
grow corrupt, there is a corruption that comes upon al their parts, the beauty,
the excellency, the quickness, the liveliness of their parts are taken away,
and they begin to putrify more and more, because they are not employed for
God, what ever we have that we employ not for God, and are not active in for
God, it putrifies, and however many men think it a great happiness, because
they have estates, and they may live and do nothing, there is not a greater
misery to a gracious heart, than to be useless for God, and for God to lay them
aside as such as are useless, not to use them in his service, it is the
greatest affliction to a Godly heart in the world; if God should take away
their estates, it would not be such a great affliction, as to lay them aside
and do nothing for God, and therefore let no man think, because he has got a
great estate, that therefore he may ly still, and do nothing, Oh! what will this
man do when he shall be called to account for all his time, for all his
opportunity for all his estate? certainly this will not be sufficient, that he
can say, he did no hurt, no, but thou should have been active for God, God
is active for thee in saving thy soul, all the Atributes of God is working for
thee, and all the passages of his providence is working for thee if thou be
saved, and therefore this is a wretched condition, for men to think no higher
rest but merely freedom from outward trouble, and if there be any whose
conscience tells them, this is the truth, this is my condition, and God speaks
to my heart this day, this is the rest that I have sought after, know, that
thou art not acquainted with the ways of God, for certainly the rest of an
immortal soul is a high thing, Jesus Christ came into the world from the bosom
of his father, and laid down his life to purchase rest for the soul, and do
thou think that Christ did this only to purchase this, that thou may be
freed from some outward trouble in this world? and that we might sit in the
^himny corner and do nothing? Oh! there is another rest for the Children of God
than this.

Object. I but some go further, some will say, We trust in the mercy of God for
rest for our souls.

Answ. Now for that, though this be better than all the other, yet a man and
woman may mistake in this, thou trustest in Gods mercy for rest to thy soul,
what has God revealed to thy soul concerning the mediator of the covenant?
this may seem difficult to some, and that is this, that all the mercy of God in
heaven cannot be sufficient for the rest of any soul, but through a Mediator in
Christ; the soul must be brought to this mercy by the hand of Christ the
mediator; thou must first come to Christ the mediator, before thou can have
any rest, even in the mercy of God it self. You must know, and if you know any
thing of the mystery of the Gospel you must know this, that though God be an
infinite current of mercy, yet all the current of Gods mercy is stopped by man's
sin, so as it can only be opened by the blood of Jesus Christ, and therefore
thou must know God in Christ, and you must know how you come unto God in and
through Christ, before you can rest upon the mercy of God, this is that which
does undo many souls, those that are of the better sort, they think to rely
upon Gods mercy, think to rest in that, and that is a sure rest to their
souls, but they little understand how all the current of the mercy of God is
stopped, and there is no coming to it but by the hand of a mediator between God
and man.

Others they will say, they do many good things, they do many good actions, they
serve God, and they rest in this, they do not commit the gross sins of the
world, and they do perform duties, they pray in their families, and in their
closets, and this is that they rest in, but the rest of an immortal soul must
have a better foundation than this, than all the duties, than all the sorrows for
their sins, than all that God himself works in them, it must be somewhat without
them, that must be rest to their souls, and nothing wrought in us, no not the
grace of God in us can be rest to our souls, it must be the perfect
righteousness of a mediator, though it be wrought in us by faith can be rest to
our souls, yet nothing in us: So that you may mistake and perform duties in a
formal manner, but suppose you performed them in a gracious manner, yet you
must not rest in them, you must go higher than all the best duties that ever you
performed. Woe to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, if they had no other rest but what
their duties brought them, you must look higher than whatever you are, or can
be enabled to do for your rest.

You will say, what is there that can be higher than what we are enabled to do
by God? There is a righteousness in Jesus Christ by which you must come, there
is an insufficiency in all the creatures in the world to give rest, and yet the
truth is, the greatest part of the world make al their rest in these things:
much might be spoken concerning the danger of this, and much of the signs when
our souls have true rest in Christ, but we shall meet with that in the other
point, in handling the Rest that we have in Christ, I will therefore pass over
this, about the insufficiency of the Rest in all other things, only with this
one thing. Know this, That that Heart that is touched with Jesus Christ, as the
Iron is with the Lodestone, can never be quiet either in creature comforts, or
in hope of mercy, or in any Duty or performance, it can never be quiet til it
gets union with Jesus Christ. Just as it is with a Needle that is touched with
a Lodestone, shake it which way you will, it will never be at Rest til it come
to the North, and when it gets North, then it stands there: so it is with a
heart that is touched with Jesus Christ, there is the touch of the spirit of
Jesus Christ upon the Heart of a believer, and when the Heart is but touched
with Jesus Christ, it shakes, is full of fears and doubts, and offer it this
creature comfort, and the other creature comfort, it will not do it, the Heart
is not at rest. But now, when there is the manifestation of Christ unto the
Soul, let them come to a Sermon where some blessed promise to the Gospel is
opened to them, and Jesus Christ presented to them, and they find this to be
the Rest of their Souls, their Hearts come presently and close with this, and
they are able to lay the weight of their eternities upon the promise of the
Gospel, upon the free Grace of God in Christ, they are able to lay the weight
of their eternal estates here; however others think, that the promise of the
Gospel is but a notion, yet here they are able to lay the weight of their
eternal estates, and they can say with Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Here I see Rest
for my Soul, my Heart was full of Terrors, fears and doubts, and I sought for
Rest and ease in this, and the other creature comfort, and could not find it.
But now Christ is made known to me, and here is the Rest of my Soul. It is
true, Godly people may be troubled for a while, but it is as the trouble of the
shaking of a Needle in the compass, and other men they are troubled too, there
are some people troubled in conscience for their sins, they come to a Sermon,
and hear the evil of sin opened, and God meets with their Particular sin, some
secret sin that they live in, they are troubled, and they shake too, I but they
are like a falls Needle not rightly touched, that shakes as the other does, but
it will stand at any point, do but put it this way or that way, and it will stand
here and there: would mariners give any thing for such a Needle, that would
stand at this point and the other point? So it is with wicked men when they are
troubled, the Devil, the world, and their corruptions come and quiet their
consciences out of Christ, and so indeed this hinders them from coming to Jesus
Christ, because they find quiet some where else. The Saints they are troubled,
but their trouble and shaking in the world is like the trouble of a ship that
is in the Haven at shore, that lies at Anchor; a ship that lies at Anchor,
though the waves toss it up and down, yet it is tossed up and down at Anchor: So
here is the difference for all the world, between all the troubles of the Saints,
and the trouble of ungodly men. Now when you have a ship at Sea, and have no
Anchor, and the storm drives it any way, when there comes a mighty Tempest and
hurries it up and down, and you do not know but you may light upon a Rock, and
be split, you are troubled; But the Saints they are at Anchor, and you count
your selves at Rest though you are tossed by the Waves, when you are at Anchor.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Rest that a Believer has by Christ from the Guilt of Sin, laid out in
ten Particulars. 1. Christ takes upon himself all the sin of them that come to
him, and stands charged with them before his Father. 2. He Satisfies for Sin.
3. The wrath of God is appeased. 4. He is continually at the right hand of his
Father to intercede for Sinners that come to him. 5. Their Souls are sprinkled
with the Blood of Christ. 6. The Soul at the first coming to Christ, is made
perfectly righteous before God. 7. Christ not only undertakes for all the Sins
past, but also for Sins to come. 8. Guilt shall never return, when it is once
taken off. 9. The Soul at its first coming to Christ is clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ. 10. Such are sure that the day of judgment shall be the
Solemnity of their absolution.

NOw we are but beginning the great point of all, the Rest of the Soul in
Christ what it is, and in this I shall take the Method that I followed in the
opening of the Burdens of Laden Sinners, that were heavy Laden. I spoke of five
loades that were upon sinners that Christ calls to him, that they might come to
him for Rest; now answerable to those five shall we speak of the Rest that is to
be had in Christ.

The first Load was the sense of the guilt of sin, that was the first Load that
was upon sinners that Christ calls to come unto him that they might have Rest.

Now concerning the Rest that the soul has by Christ in the deliverance of it
from the woeful trouble of conscience in respect of the guilt of sin, I shall not
show here what those troubles are, for that was done in the former point, about
those that were weary and heavy Laden. Now if there be any that find their
souls Laden under the burden of the guilt of their sins, and that apprehend
nothing but the wrath of God that is following and pursuing of them, that if
you should speak to them and say, Christian, what see you? Oh, I see an angry
God above, and I see within me a guilty conscience, and round about me I see
nothing but the wrath of God ready to seize upon me, and underneath I see
nothing but the bottomless Gulf ready to receive me; now to such Christ says,
Come unto me, and I will give you ease and Rest from al these fears, from al
these troubles, and I will give you ease from all those throws of your
conscience, from al those grievous achings of your Soul, Come to me.

Now, What ease is it to a believer, to be freed from the throbs of Conscience,
and the trouble of Heart that arises from the guilt of sin? Now this will be
the first thing, this will be ease to every believer that comes to Christ, to
consider.

I.
First, That the Lord Jesus Christ takes all the sins of those that come to
him, and is willing to stand charged with them before the Lord, is willing that
they should al be set upon his Score, and laid to his charge; and therefore the
Scripture tells us, that Christ was made sin, in 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him
to be Sin for us. Upon which Luther takes the boldness to say, that Christ was
the greatest sinner in the world, not that he had sin that he committed
himself, but that he had all the sins of all believers upon him, there is a
transaction of all the sins of those that come to Christ upon Jesus Christ, and
this is presently upon thy coming to Christ, I say at the first instant of thy
coming to Christ, al thy sins are transacted upon Christ, and he stands charged
with them to God. As it is with a poor Woman, that is in great debt, that is
afraid of Sergeants attending upon her, she is a widow, and she marries a Rich
man, Oh! What ease has she, Why? For now all her debt is charged upon her
Husband; Yet this may cause trouble too, if he do not know it before, but if
she tell him before, and he says, well, this shall not hinder the match, I am
content to pay all; but yet here is trouble still, til the day of marriage, but
when that is come, Oh! What ease is this to her! Now all the debt is charged
upon her Husband, and she knows her Husband is able to pay and discharge all.
So says Christ, I know all your fears, and sorrows, and all your guilt, and
what it is my father has to charge upon you, I know it al, and it is not that
that hinders me from being willing to be matched with you, Nay, the truth is,
it is that that makes me willing, and it is that that makes me call you, Come to
me, Come to me, and the first moment you come to me, there shall be a discharge
of al; you shall not stand charged, but I will stand charged with all. Here now
is ease and Rest, here is other manner of ease and Rest, than to Eat and
Drink, and enjoy the pleasures and contentment that this world affords.

II.
Yea, Secondly, Christ is Rest from the guilt of Sin, by actual Satisfaction,
the Lord Christ does satisfy the justice of his Father, and this is applied to
every believer at the first moment that he comes to Christ, there is a full
satisfaction made, so that a believer now has made satisfaction. When we come
to Christ, our sins are not so pardoned, as if God had no Satisfaction, but the
Lord though he pardons us, and it is free Grace to us, yet notwithstanding our
surety gives satisfaction, the Lord Christ tenders up his Blood and merit unto
his Father, as a full satisfaction for all ou^ debts, for all our sins, the truth
is, he has paid it already, and upon your coming to him it is accounted yours,
for Jesus Christ has satisfied the justice of God the Father, that thy Soul
does so much fear. What do thou fear in regard of thy sins? Oh! My sins make
me liable to the justice of God; says Christ, I have given satisfaction unto
the justice of my Father to the very full, and it was for thy sins in
Particular, Oh! The Rest and ease that comes to the Soul by this, when the Soul
can see, that all his sins are done away, if we had but strong Faith upon our
first coming to Jesus Christ, we might actually see all our sins charged upon
Jesus Christ.

III.
Thirdly, Upon this the wrath of God is come now to be appeased and satisfied,
the Lord did look with an angry countenance upon thee before, but now upon thy
coming to Jesus Christ, the Lord imbraceth thy Soul, and wellcomes thee, and
looks upon thee as a friend, as a Child, and this does ease the Soul from the
trouble it has by the guilt of sin.

IV.
Fourthly, Besides all this, Christ taking our sins upon him, satisfying divine
justice and divine wrath, Jesus Christ is continually at the right hand of the
Father to be thy advocate, that if the Devil or any shall accuse thee for any
thing thou have done before, Nay in case thou fear any of thy sins should
come up in the presence of of God to accuse thee, Jesus Christ stands at the
right hand of his Father to be thine advocate, what is the office of an
advocate? But if there be any accusation brought against such a man, the
advocate stands to answer to the accusation; Jesus Christ, he stands at the
right hand of his father thus to do. In John, 2. and the first verse, My little
Children, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not, and if any man sin we
have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous. A comfort it is to
have one stand to plead at the right hand of the father, to be thine advocate,
Christ is as real an advocate at the right hand of God for all believers, as
ever any had any advocate in this world. I find often in scripture this, if you
read in the 4. chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, you shall find there, that
the holy Ghost speaks of a rest of God, the rest of the saints of God, Gods
people; and mark what is the first incouragment he gives, and what ground he
makes of the rest they have; in two or three places he speaks of the rest of
Gods people, now the foundation of it is, For we have not an high Priest that
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things
tempted like as we are, yet without sin, let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of
need, for we have a high Priest, that is the ground of the rest of the saints
of God.

V.
Fifthly, Come to me, says Christ, and I will give you rest from all the trouble
that you have by the guilt of sin; thus, I will sprinkle your consciences by my
blood, that you shall be able to give an answer to al temptations that can come
to you, not only, I will stand before my father, but you shall have your
consciences sprinkled with my blood, that you shall be able to give an answer to
what accusation shall be made by Satan, to disturb your rest, to disquiet your
souls.

In Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a pure heart in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water. Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience; whereas
before you came to me, you had an evil conscience, that was ready to fly in
your face, and that did fear you, vex you, and trouble you, I appeal unto you
that understand what God is, and what it is for the creature to have to do with
God, have not your consciences kept you from sleeping a nights, an evil
conscience that has layen grating within you, you have layen upon your beds
and could not sleep, when your wife was asleep by you; now to such is this
said, Let us draw near upon this ground, here is the ground, Let us draw near
with a pure heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, that is, the blood of Christ comes now to be sprinkled upon
our souls and consciences, and that is it that takes away the worm of our
conscience, perhaps other things may trouble conscience for a while, but now
the blood of Christ can wash you from that, now when you come to Christ, the
conscience comes then to be able to answer what shall be laid to its Charge.
Perhaps those who are believers and are come to Christ, the devil will be ready
to object and labor to disturb them, usually after they first come to Christ,
there is as great a disturbance in the heart of a sinner as before. But mark
that text you have in the first of Peter the 3. and the 21. The like figure
whereunto even baptism does also now save us, not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Through Christ's Resurrection a believer comes to
have a good conscience, having been sprinkled by his blood before and through
this resurection he is able to answer the conscience, that is whatsoever
accusation the Devil shall lay against the soul, the soul that is sprinkled with
the blood of Christ is able to answer it, and this is the comfort that such
have, that we find our conscience satisfied in the blood of Jesus Christ,
perhaps at the first coming thou do not feel it, but at the first coming
thou beginnest to be able to do it.

VI.
Sixthly, the rest that is to be had against the trouble of the guilt of sin is
this, That upon the first coming of the soul to Christ, it is made as perfectly
just before God, as ever Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as all the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs; thou come off as clearly from the guilt of thy
sin, as ever Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did: Its true, thou have not at thy
first coming to Christ thy sanctification made perfect, but this I dare avouch,
that at thy first coming to Jesus Christ thou have thy Justification made as
perfect, as ever the Justification of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob was, and what a
mighty ease and rest is this? what! I a vile creature, so defiled, I that have
had such a dreadfulness upon my Spirit, now to be able to see my self stand as
clear before the Throne of God, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did, and as the
Apostles and Prophets did, Oh! this is a comfort! We ought to labor to come to
be equal with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in sanctification, as we are equal with
them in Justification, this is the ease that the soul finds that comes to
Christ.

VII.
Seventhly, The rest that is to be had in Christ in point of Justification, in
freedom from the trouble that arises from the guilt of sin, it is, that
Christ undertakes not only for that thou have done, but for whatever thou shall
commit al thy life, O! that none but those that are believers might hear me,
did I say so. But this is a certain truth.

You will say, though I by coming to him might stand Justified before my father,
yet I am a poor creature, I shall sin again and again, and bring guilt upon my
conscience. Yet come to Christ, here is free Grace in Christ, and know, that
Christ lays in pardon for thee against whatsoever guilt thou shall again
contract unto thy Soul. There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared,
with thee there is forgiveness: Christ lays in for the Guilt of sin, that thou
shall afterward contract to thy Soul, so as thou shall never be condemned.
Perhaps thou shall deserve condemnation a hundred times, over and over again,
but Christ will take care that thou shall never enter into condemnation, thou
shall never be in the state of Condemnation, Oh the Rest that here is.

VIII.
Eighthly, When the Soul comes to Christ, there is no return of any guilt, if
Christ does undertake for them that come to him, though Christ does undertake
for what is past, and what is to come, yet as it is with a malefactor though
perhaps he has his pardon and be received into Favor, yet he may think there
is some alteration again, but now the guilt that was upon thee shall never
return upon thee again. Though a man has a pardon, if he do not carry himself
well, the former Guilt returns again; but when once the Soul is pardoned, the
former Guilt never returns again, the Lord will blot out all their sins, and
remember them no more. As when you cast a thing out of your Ship into the
bottom of the Sea, you never look for it again, so it is with God, all your
sins shall be cast into the bottom of the Sea, and shall be so far from you, as
the Guilt of them shall never come more to you when once you are come to Christ.

IX.
Ninthly, There is not only deliverance from guiltiness, our justification is
not only privative, but it is a clothing of the Soul with the Righteousness of
Christ, we have a perfect Righteousness, that is the great Mediator of the new
covenant, here is a righteousness that I am not only pardoned, but I have a
perfect Righteousness to stand before the great God withal.

X.
Yea, Tenthly, and Lastly, The Rest we have in Christ is this, that we are sure
upon our coming to him, that the great work of the day of judgment shall be the
solemnity of our absolution, the solemnity of thy pardon. One of the great
works that God intends to do at the great day of judgment, it is certainly
this, to make thy pardon to be solemnized by men and Angels, thou have now thy
pardon, but the great work of God at that day shall be the solemnity of the
absolution and pardon of the Saints, then shall their sins be put away anew, as
the Scripture speaks, and in the time of refreshment then shall your sins be
done away, they are done away before, but then they shall be done away before
men and Angels, thou shall not fear at the day of Judgment, that God shall come
and upbraid thee with thy sins, all the while thou wentest under the guilt of
sin, what was more terrible to thy Soul than the thoughts of the day of
Judgment, Oh how can I stand before the Holy God at the great day, and have all
these sins charged upon me? No, come to me says Christ, and you shall never
need to fear that great day of judgment any more, for the great work of that
day shall be, to make your pardon to be solemnized, so that you need not to fear
any longer the day of Judgment, but to long for that day, and if the great day
of judgment be not terrible, yet the Particular day of Judgment may be
terrible, the Lord has a Particular day of Judgment for every Soul, in which
God does cast every man one way or other, but then there shall be a great day of
Judgment wherein all the world shall solemnly be judged. Now then lay al these
together, Christ undertakes, Christ satisfies the justice of his Father, Christ
satisfies the wrath of his Father, Christ is an advocate at the Right hand of
his Father Christ sprinkles thy Conscience with his own blood, and thou
stand as perfect in the point of justification as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and the Guilt of thy sins shall never return again. And Christ undertakes for
thee, that thou shall not come into Condemnation. And thou have a perfect
Righteousness, besides thy freedom from Death, Christ clothes thee with his
righteousness, and so God the Father looks upon thee, and Christ does assure
thee, that the great work of the day of judgment shall be to solemnize thy
pardon. Thus says Christ, come to me, all you that lie under the sense of the
Guilt of your sins, come to me, and you shall have rest, here I make all this
good to you, and all this rest is in thy coming to Jesus Christ, all the rest
in the world is worth nothing to this, O therefore let us be willing to endure
any trouble, it is no great matter what trouble we endure in this World, so we
may come to Christ, and this is but one branch, this is but the easing of the
Soul from the first Burden, and yet even this to the Soul of a believer will
God make good, if God give thee but a heart to make al these things real to thy
Soul thou may depart in peace and go away, and bless God, and even say with
the Psalmist, in Psalm, 116. And now my Soul return unto thy Rest, The words
are in the original Rests, and now my Soul return unto thy rests. Oh, here are
rests, ten several rests for a Laden Soul that is under the guilt of sin, do
not think it much, that we that are the Ministers of the Gospel should speak to
you about the Restless cond^on that you are in by reason of sin, be willing
that we should trouble you in a sinful way, being we have so much rest to bring
you to. Do not think the Minister troubles you, do not complain of the word
that troubles men's consciences. I appeal to you, if there be any thing in Gods
word to trouble men's Souls, is there not again as much in Gods word to ease
men's Souls, and give Rest unto them? Now this is Gods rest that is purchased by
the blood of Christ, our desire is, that you might not cry Peace Peace unto
your Souls, when there is no peace, and now when you hear but the beginning of
the excellency that there is for the Soul in Christ. Now you should even upon
this cry to God, Lord, O that I might be partaker of this rest, and still to
desire to hear further and further of this blessed Rest, that is to be had in
Jesus Christ. And thus much for the Rest that is to be had in Jesus Christ from
the Burden of the guilt of sin.

CHAP. XXIX.
The deliverance from the Law by Christ set out. 1. Privatively in five
Particulars. 2. Positively in five Points more.

THe next burden that was upon Laden sinners that Christ calls unto him, it was
the burden of the Law, you that are under the burden of the Law, come to me,
and I will give you Rest. I showed in many Particulars, wherein the burden of
the Law consisted, when I opened the former Point of the Load of sinners, but
now I am to come to show, how Christ does deliver sinners from the burden of
the law, for so certainly he does, we are redeemed from the Law by Christ, this
is a great Point, and the right understanding of this will help us exceeding
much in the understanding of many truths in religion. Wherefore, first, I shall
show you, how far Christ has not delivered us from the Law, that is, where it
is, where it is not burdensome, Christ has not delivered us from that, but only
from the Law so far as it is a Burden. Now you will say, in what respect may
the Law be said to be a Burden? Certainly in those respects Christ cannot be
said to give us Rest, in what respect the Law is good and not burdensome to the
Saints. The Law certainly is good as the Apostle says, in Romans 7. Even at that
time when his Soul was mightily troubled with his Corruption, and he even cried
out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin? As
it is in the latter end of the Chapter. But yet in the 12. verse, He
professes, that, The Law is holy, and the Commandment Holy, and Just, and
good. Now then that that is Holy, and Just, and Good, certainly Christ did
never come to deliver us from that, to redeem us from that, it can never be
said to be a burden to those that are holy; that that is Holy, and Just, and
good, cannot be a burden unto those that are Holy, so far as it is Holy, and
Just, and good.

First, Therefore, we are to know, that the Law (I speak of the morral Law, not
of the ceremonial law now, But of the morral Law, For the Apostle spoke of that
here in this place) the Law it is indeed the very glass of Gods holiness, I
say, it is a glass of the holiness of God, in the morral Law we may see the
luster and the glory of the holiness of God himself, and therefore we are not
to be delivered from it, as it is the glass of Gods holiness, wherein we may
see the purity of Gods Nature, the Law of God shows God to be a holy God,
different from all the Heathens, who have not a holy and Righteous Law as our
God has.

Secondly, The Law, it is an extract of the very Image that God made man in at
the first, an extract of Gods Image, as it were a copy of the Image of God.
What was the Image that God made man in at the first? But in the imperssion of
his Law in their Hearts, the very writing of the Law of God in their hearts,
which is that we call the moral law, in that consisted the very Image of God in
man's soul at his first creation, when he was in his innocence, and therefore we
cannot be said to be delivered from that as it is a copy and extract of Gods
Image in the heart of man, it is rather renewed by Christ than abolished by
Christ.

Thirdly, The Law, it is a glass wherein we are to see our own faces, wherein
we are to see how far we are declined from the image in which we first were
made, and so far Christ has not delivered us from it neither, for he would
have us still to look into the law, as into a glass, to see how far we are come
short of that that God did require of us, and that God did enable us to do,
that is a third consideration of the Law.

Fourthly, the Law is a revelation of the will of God, it reveals what is the
holy and righteous will of God toward his creature, and in that consideration
we are not delivered from it neither, we are to look into that to see what the
will of God is concerning us.

Lastly, which follows from thence, the law is still an authoritative rule for
our conversation, to order our conversation; that the scripture is as clear in,
as in any one truth that is in the book of God, it is indeed a point, that were
it not for a strange kind of wantonness that has possessed the spirits of some,
it were never needful to spend one quarter, or minuite of an hour upon it.
That place in James 2.8. and so on, If you fulfill the royal law according to
the scripture, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well; Ye do well
in that. Now that, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, is the sum of the
second table of the ten commandments, and it is called the royal law, the law
of the great King, But if you have respect to persons you commit sin, that is,
you offend against this law, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors. The
law convinces you as transgressors, for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offend in one point is guilty of al. For he that said, thou shall not
commit adultery, said also thou shall not kill: now where are these
comandements, but in the ten commandments? Do not commit adultery, do not kill:
now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art a transgressor of the
law, of those ten commandments.

It is true, as we shall hear afterward, they come to us in, another way than
formerly, they came to the Jews, but still it is apparent, notwithstanding any
thing revealed in the Gospel, though there may be a great deal of grace now
mixed with every commandment that comes to us, and so the manner of bringing
it to us may be a great deal more sweet, and comfortable, than formerly it was,
yet still this abides as an everlasting rule, That those are transgressors of
the law, and to be convinced of sin even by the law, that do not in their
conversation submit unto the rules thereof; and what indeed is the very
definition of sin by St. John but this, sin is, (...), the transgression of the
law, so that in these five respects, as the Law is the glass of Gods holiness,
As it is the very copy and extract of the image of God in which God made man
at the first, As it is the glass in which we are to look to see our deformity,
As it is the revelation of the will of God, and as it is the authoritative rule
for our conversation, so Christ does not deliver us from it, but it stands in
force in all these five respects, and there are no believers, no gracious godly
souls, that do account the Law a burden in these respects, but bless God for
the Law, and they account it their inheritance, and the joy of their souls,
they bless God that ever they knew it, and their hearts lie under the power of
it, and they are willing to order their lives by it.

Quest. But then what are we delivered from in the Law by Christ?

First, From the rigor of it, Christ delivers us from the load of the rigor of
it, from this rigor, that it requires perfect obedience, so far we are
delivered from the rigor of the Law; and yet this may be said to be rigorous in
regard of our weakness, for we had once power, but now the Lord does take off
the rigor in regard of our weakness And so rigorous, in regard of the violent
and rigorous way that it does take to force on men unto obedience, we shall
hear how we are delivered from that.

Secondly, believers are delivered from the bondage of the Law.

Quest. You will say, How is the Law a bondage unto those that are Godly, being
the law of God?

Ans. It is a bondage not in it self, but in regard of our inabil^ty, for it
requires of us now, considering what estate we are in, such things as we cannot
do, and that is a bondage, to be put upon more than we are able to do, as the
Israelites were by their taskmasters: but yet still God is righteous in this,
because it is not more than God did at first enable us unto in our first
Creation, but in regard of that estate that now we are in, it is a bondage, in
that it puts upon us, what we cannot do, and that upon pain of eternal death
too.

Thirdly, we are delivered from the binding over power (as I may so say) the
power of binding over the soul to the justice of God upon every breach of the
Law. Now the binding-over power, the power of binding them over to answer to
Gods justice upon the breach of it, that believers are delivered from in
Christ; as a man that is bound over to the assize and sessions to answer,
afterward when he comes to take out his bond, he thinks himself at much ease
and at quiet, when the bond is taken out by which he was bound to answer; so
Christ comes and takes out the bond by which believers were bound to answer to
Gods justice for all their sins.

Fourthly, They are delivered from the condemning power of the law, that the
law has not now power to bring a believer, that sins through frailty, unto
condemnation: this is clear from scripture, as I might show several texts as
we go along, You are not under the law (says the Apostle) And there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ.

Lastly, we are delivered from the Law as the covenant for life, the law at
first was given as the covenant that God made with mankind for life, for God
deals with the rational creature according to the nature of it, and because it
is capable of a covenant with God, therefore God deals with it in the way of a
covenant, and as soon as man was made, the Lord entered into a covenant with
mankind, now the covenant was no other than the law, Do and live, that was the
covenant that God did enter into with mankind, and made our first parents Adam,
the head of that Covenant, Do and live, upon thy doing shall thy life depend
(says God) thy present and thy eternal life. Now we are delivered from the law
by Christ, that is, that now it does remain no more unto believers, to be the
covenant of life unto them, they being once in Christ, but they are brought
under another Covenant, a better Covenant. So that in these five respects we
may be said to be delivered from the Law by Christ, from the rigor of it, from
the bondage of it, from the binding-over power that is in it, from the
condemning power, and from it as the Covenant of life. Now here is enough, one
would think, if so be that the spirits of Men were not very wild and wanton,
for the quieting of the soul in the deliverance of it from the law.

CHAP. XXX.
The Rest that believers have from the Burden of the Law by coming to Christ,
laid out in Ten particulars. 1. They do not stand or fall for life by the Law.
2. The Lawgiver is the Redeemer. 3. The least spark of Grace is accepted. 4.
Their will shall be accepted as the deed. 5. Obedience is required in a sweet and
gentle way. 6. The Grace of God in Christ does melt the heart. 7. Their sins
make them an object of Gods pity. 8. They have Christ to undertake for them as
a surety. 9. They are delivered, and yet satisfaction is made to the law. 10.
They have assurance that they shall never forfeit the covenant of Grace they are
under by Christ.

NOW then, from al these, we shall lay down several propositions, wherein you
may see what is the ease and rest that believers have in Christ, in being
delivered thus from the law. Take the ease that comes by Christ from hence, in
these several particulars, O! thou believer, that art under the load of the
law, and come to Christ.

First, Know, That thou do not stand and fall for thy eternal estate by the
law, that is the first Ease and Rest, the law indeed may threaten thee, and
dreadful things may be revealed by it against thee, but be of good comfort in
this, thy eternal estate shall not be cast by it, it is full of severity, but
thou art so far free, that whereas before thou did depend and rely upon that
for thy eternal condition, now thou art out of the power, out of the reach of
it, so far that it has not to do with thee, to cast thy soul for thy eternal
estate; we would not be at the dispose of any man that we look upon as full of
severity and rigor in matters of great consequence, but we do desire rather to
be, in such cases, at the dispose of men, who are full of pity and compassion,
know, O! thou believer, who art in Christ, that thou art not at the dispose of
the Law, that is full of severity, for thy everlasting condition, but thou art
at the dispose of the Gospel, of the covenant of grace, that is filled as full
with mercy and compassion, as an infinite wisdom could devise, it has that
fullness of compassion, more then possibly all the wisdom of the angels in
heaven, and men upon earth could ever have devised or thought on, beyond their
imagination: Now for one to be at the dispose of a man in matters of the
greatest concernment, that has as much mercy in him, as ever man had in this
world, yea, as much mercy in him as were in all the men in the world, If all the
mercy that were in all the men in the world were put into one, the heart of one
man, and you were to be at his dispose in a matter of the greatest concernment,
you would think your selves well, whereas before you lay at the mercy of a man
that is very rigorous, and full of severity, now you come to ly at the mercy of
a man that has all the bowels and tender compassions of all the men in the
world, would you not think this a good change? this is the change and the rest
that thou have when thou come to Christ, whereas thy soul, thy eternal estate,
lay at the dispose of the Law that is full of rigor, and severity, now thy
eternal estate does depend upon a Covenant, that is as full of grace and mercy
as thy soul could desire, thy soul cannot desire a covenant to be fuller of
grace and mercy, then that covenant that thy everlasting estate depends upon,
and must be cast by, and is not here rest now for a believer if he does
understand this aright? that is the first thing, wherein the rest of a believer
consists by Christ, as being freed from the Law.

2 ly, now he that is the lawgiver, is thy redeemer, thou come now to receiv
the law from the hand of a mediator and here indeed is the principle ease and
rest of a gracious heart, to the mind of a Saint, a believer, that now he comes
to receive the Law from the hand of a mediator. There is many that speak of
deliverance from the Law as it came by Moses, but if we understand things
aright, we have no such cause to think that necessary, to be delivered from the
Law as it came by Moses in one sense, that is thus, Moses was a tipe of Christ
as a Mediator, for so he is called a Mediator, in Gal. 3.19. It was ordained by
Angels in the hand of a mediator. God made use of the ministry of the Angels in
delivering the law, and he gave it in the hand of a mediator, not to the people
immediately, for they were not able to bear it, but in the hand of Moses,
because he was to bring the Law from God unto them, and it was not immediately
given unto them, but in his hand as in the hand of a Mediator. Now Moses is
called a Mediator here, as a tipe of Christ, as he was a tipe of Christ; as he
was a tipe of Christ in diverse respects, so in this, and he tipified Christ in
this particular, that the Law to believers, comes not unto them merely from God
as a righteous and just God, as their Judge, but comes unto them in the hand of
Christ as their Mediator, and there is a great deal of comfort in the Law to
receive it thus, to receive it from the hand of Christ who is their Mediator,
and (as I showed before) who is their advocate; for so he is called in
scripture: that now they should receive the Law by his hand, that is at the
right hand of the Father, to be their advocate, to plead for them when they
shall through infirmity break the law; this is a mighty rest to the soul,
therefore believers are to look upon the Law coming from God, but coming from
God in the hand of a Mediator, to look upon their mediator as indeed their
Lawgiver, not only handing the Law to them as Moses did, but the truth is, the
Lawgiver himself, Christ the Mediator hands the Law to them, yea, is their
Lawgiver, and receives the Law for them: now this must needs be a great ease,
a great Rest to the Soul, if it understands this aright.

Thirdly, In Christ now thy condition is such, that though there be never so
many imperfections, never so many weaknesses, Yea, strong Corruptions, yet if
there be but the least Spiritual good, the least work of Gods Grace in thee,
the Lord has a special Eye to that little good that there is in thee, and all
thy Corruptions, all thy imperfections shall not hinder the acceptance of the
little spark of good that is in thy Soul, this is our freedom by Christ: For
in the opening of the Law, there I showed, that whatever good man does do being
under the Law, let it be what it will, yet except it be perfect, it is al
rejected. All that are in their natural condition, and under the first
Covenant, whatever they do, if there be any imperfection mingled with it, it is
not at al accepted, but here is the Rest that believers have, that the case is
altered with them. Now though there be much corruption remaining in them, if
the Lord sees but one spark of grace, though never so weak, though it be but as
the smoking flax, as the bruised Reed, yet they are accepted of God, having but
the least spark of any good at al in them: this is a mighty ease to the Souls
of those that labor under the bondage of the Law, That before seeing so much
Corruption in their Hearts they had little Hopes of acceptance of any thing
that was in them, now the Lord has regard to any thing that is good, be it
never so small, Yea, And he will find it out too. Perhaps thy Grace may be so
small, that it may be buried in the he^^ of Corruption, that thou shall not be
able to find it out. The condition of some Christians is, as a Maid that shall
go in the morning to the hearth, and there raking up and down in the ashes, to
see if she can find some spark of fire, and she finds none, and is ready to
think there is none there, but perhaps there may some spark lie in a corner,
though she finds it not: So it is here, corruption in the Heart is like the
Ashes, and Grace is like some spark that lies in a Corner, and when poor Souls
go to examine their Hearts, they see a great deal of Ashes, a great deal of
Corruption, and are ready to conclude, the fire is out, no spark there, I but,
though rhou can not find a spark there, yet being in Christ, God will find it
when thou can not thy self, if there be any that lies in any corner, as we
hope there is some sparks in many, though there is so much Corruption in the
Hearts of many godly people, that we wonder where their Grace lies, so much
passion, frowardness, and the like, well, were it indeed that these were under
the Covenant of works, under the Law, that corruption that does appear in them
would cause all to be cast off, whatever might lie secretly in their Hearts,
God would cast it off, but now, if they be such as are under the Covenant of
Grace, and the Lord has brought them to Christ, this is the Rest and ease for
their Souls, that all the Corruption that is in them shall not hinder the
acceptance of the least spark of the Grace of God that the Lord has wrought
in them.

Fourthly, As the Lord will find out every spark of good that is in them, so
even their desires and endeavors after the will of God, though they are not
able to attain to what they would, it shall be accepted as the deed. The other
was, suppose you do not do the will of God, yet if there be any habit, any
disposition, any principle of Grace, though nothing be done, though they cannot
perceive any beginning of it, yet that shall, be accepted; but this is further;
let them but strive to do Gods will, let them Labor after perfection, and the
Lord accepts the will for the deed. Hence in Scripture those that are godly are
called perfect, As many as are perfect, and Be ye perfect as your Heavenly
Father is perfect.

Quest. You will say, Can we be perfect in this World.

Answ. No, But this is the Grace of God in the Gospel, that those that come to
Christ, the Lord accepts the will for the deed, here is blessed ease and Rest
for the Soul in Christ, were thou under the Law, this could not be, and though
men say they do, and they Hope God will accept of their desires and endeavors.
It is true, if thou art come to Christ, Christ will accept thee; but know this,
that it is the privilege of a believer, it is not the privilege of every one;
there is a generation of men that are under the Law, whose desires shall not be
accepted, as I showed in opening of the burden of the Law, But the man that
does these things shall live by them, So runs the Tenure of the Law, but here
is ease for thy Soul, if thou do understand how the Law runs, thy Heart
cannot but sink within thee, but this is that that gives ease to the Soul, I am
now come under another condition, I being in Christ, Christ gives Rest and ease
unto the Souls of those that come to him, that their desires and endeavors shall
he accepted of God as performances, now this is a blessed estate.

Fifthly, The Rest of the Soul in Christ, as it has reference to deliverance
from the burden of the Law, consists in this, That now all the Duties that God
requires at thy hand, are required in a sweet and a gentle way, the services
that God requires, are required of thee in a gentle, and a loving way, God
indeed comes and requires the same things that the Law requires of thee, I but,
he comes to draw thy Soul with the Cords of Love, We beseech you (says the
Apostle) by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1. That you give up your selves a
living sacrifice Holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
Service. We beseech you by the mercies of God. Now the bondslaves that are
under the Law, they have not Duties required of them by such cords and bonds of
Love, but if thou do these things thou shall live, if not thou shall die, do
and live, sin and die, so the Law requires duties at your hands that are under
the bondage of the Law: but now believers in Christ their duties are required
by the mercies of God, We as Ambassadors beseech (says the Apostle) And if
there be any Love any Consolation. Such kind of arguments are used to them, and
were it that we preached only to believers, these kind of arguments were only
necessary, and it becomes those that are drawn by the Gospel, to be drawn by
such arguments, and it is a good argument that your Souls are drawn by the
power of the Gospel, and are come to Christ, if you find the Lord does draw
your Hearts that way, and that those Duties of obedience that formerly you were
put upon in a rigorous way, merely by the terror of your consciences, your
consciences flashing Hell fire in your Faces if you did not perform them, if
now you find, that the Grace of God in the Gospel draws your Hearts more
powerfully. It is true, every way you should give to God obedience, upon any
terms, but now, when you find, that God draws your Souls this way, it is an
argument that you come to have Rest in Christ. We read in the History of the
Ceremonial Law, a type of these things that I am now speaking of, that the Book
of the Law was laid under the mercy seat, you shall find in the story, that the
Book of the Law was laid under the mercy seat between the Cherubins under the
mercy seat, there the Book of the Law was laid, that was the place that God
appointed for it; to show, that even thus does the Law of God come now upon the
Hearts of believers, it comes upon them as it were under the mercy seat, in the
mercy seat believers look upon the Book of the Law, lying at the mercy seat,
that is, every Commandment comes unto them in a gracious, alluring way,
together with abundance of mercy, to draw their Hearts unto the obedience of it.

Sixthly, Coming to Christ, you have rest from the Law in this, that the Grace
of God in Christ does much melt the Heart, and when it has melted the Heart,
to milk out the flagons of it, then this melting of Heart is accepted
exceedingly by God, is very precious in the Eyes of God; now this comes from
the Grace of God that we have in Christ, and it is a mighty Rest of Soul to
know this. As I told you before, It is not enough for any of you to say, it is
true, we are all sinners, but God knows I mourn for my sins, I am troubled for
my sins, that is not enough for thee, friend, but art thou one that art
delivered from thy natural condition? From being under the Covenant of works?
Art thou one that is come to Christ, and brought to Christ? Art thou one that
is in the state of believers, being a member of Christ? Then thy repentance and
mourning is acccepted.

As now it is in many Cases between Men and Men; some men are in such a
Capacity, that if they do such a thing, it is accepted, but if another man,
that is not in the same Capacity do the same thing, he will not be accepted; so
it is here, those men that are in this Capacity in Christ, and have together
with the sorrows for their sins, the sorrows of Christ presented to the
Father. Can thou when thou art sorrowing for thy sins, present the sorrows of
Jesus Christ by Faith unto the Father? Then thou art accepted; but know this,
that no sorrow for sin is accepted, but such as is joined with the presentation
of the sorrows of Christ unto the Father. Now what an ease is this to the Soul!
That now the Heart has a means to melt it, for the Heart was hardened before,
the sorrow for sin is such, that the Heart remains hardened, it is no other
sorrow but this, as it is with Marble-stones, the Marble-stone is hard, but yet
in wet wether it will give and be very moist, but still it is as hard as it was,
it is a stone still: So it is with many that are troubled for their sins, being
only the trouble that comes from the Law, they are troubled but yet there
remains much hardness in their Heart, much peevishness and frowardness against
God and against men. You shall find in many people who have trouble of
conscience, yet there is much peevishness and frowardness in them, against God
and against man, now when you see this in the Hearts of people manifested in
their expressions, ways, and conversations, remember the stones that you see
upon pavements in wet wether, they give, and may be water trickles down from
them, and yet they remain hard still.

But now when the Gospel comes, it does not only cause some sorrow, but the
Heart melts, and this is accepted as very precious before God; and that is the
Reason that we have in Scripture so many expressions of Gods high esteem of
broken Hearts and contrite Spirits, and how God looks at them. He that dwells on
high, yet looks to him that is of an Humble and contrite Spirit, and that
trembles at his word, and let me speak this one word, for the ease of them that
are troubled, and are come to Christ; those tears that come from thy melted
Heart, through the Grace of the Gospel, they are of all things most precious in
the Eyes of God, next to the blood of Christ, next to the drops of Christ's
blood, thy mourning, Lamenting Spirit, is one of the most precious things in
the Eyes of God, God treasures up every one of them, and this is the Rest of
the Soul, the Soul may have abundance of Rest therefore in Christ, when thou
come to know that thy mourning for thy offenses is accepted of God.

Seventhly, The ease that the Soul has from the burden of the Law is this,
That whereas before, through the severity of the Law, sin did make thy Soul an
object of Gods wrath, take sin as it was in it self, and coming from thee, God
having no respect in Christ toward thee, sin made thy Soul an object of Gods
wrath, Yea, and of hatred too, for so the Scripture tells us plainly, that the
Lord hates the workers of iniquity; now being come to Christ according to this
invitation, Come to me ye that are Laden, now your sins being looked upon in
Christ, do rather make you an object of pity and compassion to God, not from
any virtue, not from any thing in its own Nature, but in regard of your
condition: as thus, let a tender Mother look upon the Child that is sick, that
is wounded; it is true, the Mother cannot Love the distemper, or love the
wound, the Mother would not have the sickness, or the wound upon the Child, but
does not the sickness or wound that is upon the Child, make the Child to be an
object of pity and Compassion, Make the bowels of a tender Father and Mother,
to yern so much the more to the Child? So here, the Lord now looks upon thy
sin, being in Christ, as thy sickness, as thy wound, and therefore does pity
thee, as under thy affliction rather then under thy sin. For the truth is, all
those that are the Saints of God and are come to Christ, they look upon their
own sins as their affliction, as the greatest affliction they have in the
world, as I showed when I spoke of the load and Burden of Corruption that
remains in their Hearts, Now God therefore looks up on thy sin as thine
affliction, and as for any other thing that is thy affliction, as it is the
breach of the Law or the like, Christ undertakes for that, and so thou art
delivered from the wrath that it does deserve, and those evil effects that
should come of it through the revenging justice of God, Christ has undertaken
it, but yet it remains thy affliction, though thou art delivered from
guiltiness, and condemnation, yet one that has a gracious Heart Reasons thus.
Though I be delivered from my sin, from the Guilt of it, from the condemning
power that the Law has through my sin, yet it is my affliction, my trouble,
and so I look upon it, now peace and Rest be to that Soul from what the Law can
require, so that, as we go along, we may not only see the benefit we have by
Christ, but who they are that are thus delivered, those who though they know
they are delivered from the Burden of it, yet they do account their sins the
afflictions of their Soul, whereas others, that are, merely Legal, they
apprehend their Souls as guilty and under condemnation, but if they were
delivered from it they would look upon their sins as their wounds and
afflictions. The Saints, they see that they are now made the objects of Gods
pity and compassion toward them; and hence is the Reason, that Christ is
willing if it be possible, to find many excuses that may be made for his poor
Servants, thou shall not need to find out any excuse, if there be any thing
that may alleviate and lessen thy sin, Christ will find it our, and lessen it
for thee. You know what Christ says to his Disciples when they were sleeping,
and could not watch one hour, though he rebukes them, yet he says, though the
flesh is weak, yet the Spirit is willing. Mark how Christ excuse them, they do
not say when Christ comes and says, cannot you watch with me one hour? Alas it
is true Master, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak, they do not say
thus, but Christ says so to them, and the truth is, this is the way, to leave
their excuse to Christ, their way is to aggravate their sins as much as may be,
and it is the temper of those that are come to Christ, it is not their care to
lessen their sins, but they do what they can to aggravate their sins, and lay
it upon their Hearts for the humbling of their Souls, but Christ undertakes to
excuse them. And therefore you that have so many excuses for your sin, just as
your Grandfather Adam had, he put it off to the Woman, and the Woman unto the
Serpent, and one to another, so you, it is true, my Nature is passionate, and I
am froward by Nature, and a hundred such excuses men have, whereas all thy care
should be to humble thy Soul for thy sins, and if there be any thing to
alleviate thy sin, and lessen it, Christ will do that, and the more thou
excusest thy self, the greater will be thy sin, and it is better for thee, for
another to excuse it, than thy self. As when a Child or servant shall offend,
and one that is a near friend or neighbor shall come and excuse them, this is a
great deal better than if they did it themselves. Now those that are under the
Law, they have no excuse to be made for them, but those that are come to Christ
they have Christ to make all the excuses for them.

Oh! take heed of abusing the rich grace of God in Christ, this I know, that
this is such a pure quality, that it has not such a malignant quality in it
that it will be abused, and where you see any such quality, know that they have
it not aright, they have something else instead of the thing, as sometimes you
shall see two things as like one another as can be, suppose drinks made with
some kind of composition, they shall look just like one another, but one shall
have some venom in it, enough to kill one, and the other shall be wholesome and
able to recover one, yet both shall have the same ^ur, and the same taste, so it
is with the free grace ^d in Christ, you may have the same word spoken, ^e
thing expressed to one and to another, the very same thing preached for the
outside of it, for the word, for the expression in a sermon, the same doctrine
raised for the expression, and yet they shall be so carried that one shall have a
malignancy in it, and the other shall have a sovereign power in it: now when
the soul has the true rest in Christ, that rest has not such a malignant
power to make the heart worse by it. But of that I shall speak more afterward.

Eighthly, When thou art come to Christ, thy soul may have rest in him, for in
Christ there is an undertaking by a surety through the grace of the gospel in
him, thou have revealed to thee, that there is an undertaking by surety, this
is a deliverance from the Law, whereas the Law requires perfect obedience at
our hands in our own persons, their Law requires of the soul that it shall pay
the debt in its own person, the soul that sins shall die, Now the grace of the
Gospel comes and tells thee of a surety, and such a surety as God himself
professes he is well pleased to accept of, and is as contented with him, as he
is to have the debt paid by the creature, by the debtor himself, and this is a
great ease; Would it not be a great ease to any of you, that when a creditor
shall come upon you for a debt, layhold upon you, or put you in prison, and
afterward the debt should be paid by another and laid upon him, and the
creditor shall accept of him, and the creditor shall say well, will this man be
your surety and pay the debt, if so, then says the creditor I am satisfied, I
am contented, what ease is this unto the debtor. Thus it is with the soul that
comes to Christ, when he has been laden under the Law, and the Law comes to
the soul for the payment of the debt, now coming to Christ imediately, Christ
is entertained as the surety by God the father, and so there is the transaction
of the debt upon him, the ease from the Law in this relation.

Ninthly, (...) all this, there is this ease from the Law that the sinn^ (...)
Christ is delivered from all this rigor, bondage, and other things that I spoke
of in the Law, and yet so delivered from the Law by satisfaction to the Law,
and this is further ease to the soul, I am delivered from the Law, But how? by
satisfaction to the Law, there is satisfaction to the Law, that is such
satitfaction as the Lawgiver himself does accept of, which is only in Christ,
not all that I can do, can possibly do it, if I could conceive that God were so
merciful, as to accept of any thing I can do, yet it could not be satisfaction
to the Law, but now our deliverance from the Law is in a way that is
satisfaction unto the Law, and here now is ease, that the soul is freed so, as
the Law is satisfied too.

Tenthly, Whereas the law required constant obedience, and if there were
obedience to the end, to the last act, and the last act were sin, all the other
would be forgotten so as the soul would yet perish notwithstanding, and the Law
could not assure any man of continuance to the end the law could never do it,
could not assure any so long as they were under the power of it, though they
had ability to obey, and they went on according to their ability, went on
diverse years, yet they could never have assurance but that they might fall at
last and so perish. Well, but now coming to Christ there is not only
satisfaction for what is past, but an assurance of holding out unto the end, an
assurance that this covenant that thou art now come under in Christ, that there
shall never be any forfiture of it? and that is a mighty ease and rest, the
ground and foundation of diverse of these things were opened before, when I
showed how in Christ we were freed from the guilt of our sins, but now these
are things that do flow from thence, and the presenting of these further,
showing the consequences of what then was said, may be further rest unto the
soul. For though I did all the other things as the principle of them, yet every
poor soul is not able to draw forth every of these particulars, now that is the
help of those that are weak, to see the several steps of Gods grace in Christ,
not only to see it in the lump, but see how it streams in the particulars of
it, to have these presented before their souls, it is a mighty help to their
faith and comfort, and this last that I have spoke of, it is not less then the
rest, but indeed it is the completing of all the former, that the soul that
comes to Christ, has this rest in Christ, that it is brought into a covenant,
and with assurance that there shall never be any forfiture of that covenant, for
it is a part of the covenant, that God should give Grace unto the soul, so as
is shall never come to forfeit, to loose the blessing of the covenant, they may
for the present loose some comfort of the Covenant, but to be put from the
blessing of the Covenant, it shall never be. It is a part of the purchase of the
blood of Christ, that all that come to him shall never be cast off from him
again, it cost the blood of Christ, and this is a privilege that believers have
more then ever Adam had, Adam was under a covenant of works, and he was able
to keep the Covenant, I but Adam never had this promise from God, that he
should never forfeit it, that he should never so break the Covenant as to be
undone, Adam never had that promise. But now, all believers that are come to
Christ, they have this engagement upon a sure ground, for it is upon a dear
purchase Christ has laid down his blood for thee, for this thing as well as
any other thing, that thy Soul may come into an everlasting Covenant never to
be forfeited. And now, if all these Particulars be put together, and these
things be made clear to the Soul by the Eye of Faith, if there be an Eye of
Faith to behold the reality of all these things that I have persented to you, I
appeal to you, is there not Rest to those that come to Christ? Is it not worth
a great deal of pains to come to Christ? Is there not that that will recompense
all at last, whatever trouble there is at first, the work of humiliation and
the like? yet when you come to Christ, there is that that will recompense al
your former trouble. As I said before in the concluding of the other
Particular, so may I say of this, as it is in Psalm. 116. And now my Soul
return unto thy Rest: So may all believers say upon good ground; if these
things be true that we have now heard, Then my Soul return unto thy Rest, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee indeed. Oh therefore, be in Love with
the Gospel, study it much, look unto the depth of it, and prize Jesus Christ,
that has purchased such a Rest unto your Soul. And you who are about coming to
Christ, be Restless in your Spirits til you come to have this Rest, and it were
a lamentable thing that any thing in the world should meet with you in the way
and quiet your Hearts, that any thing should quiet your Souls but Christ. And
you that are believers improve this now, this is a special thing to be spoke of
in this point, how believers should improve this, and what it is that they
should learn by this, and how helpful this will be to them, and something for
the satisfaction of those that doubt that they are not believers; but we cannot
do all things at once, this shall suffice for the present, the mere presenting
to your Souls what Rest there is in Christ from the load of the Burden of the
Law, from the load that many feel to be upon their Souls through the burden of
the Law.

CHAP. XXXI.
Contains diverse Consequences from the Rest believers have from the Burden of
the Law. And Lessons they are taught from thence.

TO proceed now, There are diverse things that follow from hence, from the rest
that we have in Christ from the Burden and load of the Law.

I shall speak very briefly of them, and so pass to what remains, in the next
burden, and rest to that.

From hence follows exceeding help unto believers against diverse temptations
that do exceedingly trouble the peace and Rest of their souls, if they be
delivered from the Law in those several respects as at large has been opened
to you.

1. Then first from the Meditation of this their delivery they may have Rest
and ease from this temptation, that because of some imperfections, weaknesses,
and distempers of Heart, and sins that they are guilty of, therefore they have
no interest at al in Christ, they have no interest to believe in Christ,
because of that. The strength of this temptation cannot stand with the right
knowledge of Christ, as delivered from the Law, if Christ delivers from the Law,
then an interest in Christ may stand, though we be not able to keep the Law.
Yea, And further, we know this, that it is usual with believers upon the breach
of the Law in any thing, to call their estates into question, all into
question. Certainly, if we know that we are to deal with God, not by the
Covenant of works, not to be cast by the Law, we would never be so ready to call
all into question, upon any breach of the Law that our conscience tells us we
have been guilty of.

2. Further, This would marvelously help against this temptation likewise. That
God accepts not of what we do, because it is not perfect, because it is not
complete: when believers look upon their duties that they do perform, and see
so many imperfections in them, they dare not tender them up to God, God is an
infinite, Holy, just God, and they are ashamed of what they have done, so as
they dare not tender them up to God, now the right knowledge of our deliverance
from the Law, would help us against this temptation likewise. Remember O thou
believer, that thou have to deal with God in a Covenant of Grace, thou have to
deal with him in Christ through a better Covenant then the Covenant of the Law.

3. Further, This would help against this temptation also, that many times is
in the Hearts of the Saints; That because they hear of diverse that have seemed
to have more then they have, that have had more ability then they have had,
have been able to do more for God than they have done, yet for all this have
fallen away, and so, it may be, have perished for ever. Now says many a poor
Christian, if such Eminent men, of such excellent abilities, that were able to
do such great things, if they that go thus far, fall away, what shall become of
such a poor creature as I am? Now by the understanding of our deliverance that
we have from the Law by Christ, we come to have help against this temptation;
for let a man have never such abilities, and be able to do never so much work,
yet this man may fall away, when one that is a thousand times weaker in regard
of abilities, that has the least dram of true Faith which brings him into the
Covenant of Grace will stand, such a one shall stand when the other falls. If
indeed thy standing did depend upon what strength thou have in thy self, then
thou had cause to lear, that seeing such as did stand, fell away, what shall
become of thee? But we are to know, that we are to deal with God, in a way of
the Covenant of Grace, our standing or falling does not depend upon any thing
in our selves, but upon Christ that has undertaken for all those that are his
members. Thou have to deal with God in the Covenant of Grace, and being once
brought into the Covenant, that will uphold thee though thou art weak, when
thousands of others that have a great deal of Natural abillity and common
gifts of Gods Spirit, yet being not brought under this Covenant may vanish,
Yea, Had they the strength of an Angel yet if not brought under this Covenant
of Grace made with believers in Christ, they would fall and come to nothing.
Whenas the weakest believer that has to do with God through Christ, and not
through the Law, such a one shall stand and not fall. Now the being delivered
from the Law in Christ, will mightily help believers against these temptations
and diverse others, I know nothing that does help believers more then this, in
being delivered from the Law, in that sense as has been showed before.

Likewise from hence there are a great many Lessons to be learned as.

The First Lesson.
First, From this deliverance we are taught, to entertain the hearing of the
Threats of the Law, I speak to believers, though others may make an ill use in
hearing the deliverance from the Law, yet they must not miss their Portion. I
say believers are hereby taught how to receive the Threats of the Law, you hear
dreadful threats of the Law out of Gods word against sin. Now how should
thou entertain these threats? The way is this, when thou hear such threats
know, that God by this would have thee to consider, what his mercy is, in
delivering of thee from what thou have deserved. God would have thee to
consider what the evil of sin is in it self, and to consider what Christ has
done, God would have thee to be driven to Christ by this means, to see thy
need of Christ, to bless his name for Christ, and to prize Christ, who has
delivered thee from these threatenings. A believer, when he hears the threats
of the Law, is like a man that stands upon the shore, when there is a grievous
tempest and storm, he sees the waves rise high, hears the winds blow, and the
waves roar but he stands safe upon the haven, indeed he was in the storm and
tempest, but God has brought him to the haven, and there he stands and
blesses God, It may be he sees other ships a great way off ready to be split
upon the rocks, or swallowed up, but he is safe on the shore, so it should be
with all believers, when they hear the threatenings of the law, they should
entertain them with blessing of the name of God, there was a time that my soul
was under these as well as any, but now the Lord has delivered me, and brought
me under another Covenant, brought me to his son, to Christ, and he has
undertaken to satisfy the Law for my soul, and so the believer stands upon the
shore, and praises God, and this makes him love Christ so much the more, prize
Christ so much the more, and bless the name of God that ever he heard the voice
of the Gospel sounding in his ears: and therefore it is not tedious and
grievous to him to hear the dreadful threatenings of the Law, he knows how to
make a holy use of them, his heart is drawn nearer to God by it as well as by
the promises of the Gospel. It is an ill sign, when men and women cannot
endure to hear the threatenings of the Law, a dangerous sign that they are
under those threatenings, if they were not under them it would not be
troublesome to them to hear them, but they that are delivered from them, they
know how to make use of them. Many men and women will say, when they hear of the
terrors of the Law, what does this but harden us? the hearing of the terrors of
the Law does more harden us; but if thou were acquainted with the Gospel, thou
would be softened by hearing of the terrors of the Law, because thou
would prize Christ more. And therefore believers must not look upon them as
things that no way concern them, though they be not under them to be cast by
them, yet they do concern them nearly, and therefore God would have those
things revealed, even to believers, because of many gracious uses that
believers are to make of those things.

The 2. Lesson.
Secondly, from what has been delivered both from the burden of the law and
the rest in being delivered from it, this Lesson may be learned, Here we may
see how believers are in the course of their lives, to mix humility with
confidence, they may learn how to be humble, and yet how to be confident, how
to rejoice and yet how to tremble; there is no such way to learn the mixture
of humility, with faith and confidence, and the mixture of joy and trembling as
this is, know the Law and the bondage under it, and then the rest that is to be
had in Christ, this will teach thee to be sensible of thy own wretchedness, and
what a condition thou art in naturally, and yet how to be confident in the
grace of God in Christ. This will teach thee how to fear in regard of what thou
art in thy self and yet to rejoice in regard of what thou art in Jesus Christ,
in the rest thy soul has Got in Jesus Christ. Many people do not know how to
mingle these two together, if so be they be humbled for their sins, then they
are dejected, in their spirits, they cannot tell how, to exercise humiliation
for their sins, and faith and confidence in Gods grace together, they think the
humiliation for sin will hinder Gods grace, and therefore they cannot endure to
hear of such things as tend to beat them down, to humble them for their sins,
but they say, they must believe altogether in Gods grace, aad the other will
bring them to despair. Certainly, thou art not acquainted with the mystery of
Godliness, if thou do not understand how these two may stand together, to be
deeply humbled for thy sins, and yet at the same instant of time, the soul to
be raised with the Mercy of God in Christ both together.

It is true, vices are opposite one to another, but graces are never opposite
one to another, those that understand the Mystery of Godlyness they know how to
mingle these two together, at one and the same time. You know that the
scripture says, that Godliness is a mystery, Great is the mystery of
Godlyness, and indeed Godliness consists in the skill that a Christian comes to
have, to know at the same time, how to be humbled, and yet to be confident, yet
to be believing, and one the other side, to rejoice, and yeat to fear, many
cannot rejoice, but they grow loose and wanton with their joy; and others
cannot fear; but their hears grow lumpish and dead if they do fear; now the
heart that understands what it is to be under the Law naturally and what rest
Christ has brought unto us in delivering us from the Law, can tell how to
rejoice in trembling, and to believe in humiliation, and there is no such way
to make such a mixture of both as to understand what it is to be naturally
under the Law, and what the rest is that we have in Christ, I confess these
things will not perhaps come so full upon the hearts of those that do not in some
measure remember what we have said hertofore, both from the burden of the Law,
and the rest that we have in Christ, those will not be able to make so much use
of this that I am speaking of, I could wish these things would have come
altogether, but we cannot do al things at once.

The Third Lesson.
Thirdly, A further thing that is to be learned from the deliverance we have in
Christ from the Law, it is this; here appears plainly, that the way of Life
and salvation is above nature, it is supernatural, for that that I have opened
in the rest we have in Christ from the law, teaches you, that believers are
not to stand or fall for their eternal estates by any work of the Law, if they
perform any work of the Law, this, does not bring them to eternal life, if
they break the Law this does not cast them down unto death, therefore the way
of life and salvation is supernatural, for nature can teach a man no further
then this, that he must serve God, and if he do the God will bless him, and love
him, and if he sin against God, God will afflict him and chastise him, nature
can tell of no way how a man should be saved but only by serving of God, and by
doing the works of the Law, nature teaches a man nothing else but this
together with the other, that if he does that, that God forbids, he must expect
the wrath of God, and to ly under Gods wrath, and beyond this nature cannot go.
Now then for to hear of such a thing as this is, that my soul shall not depend
upon what I neglect, nor my eternal life shall not depend upon what I do, that
is a high mystery that is infinitely above nature. I do not say what the
neglect of Gods will does deserve of eternal perishing, yea, even in believers;
but now they are under the Covenant in Christ, they have the rest in Christ,
that their souls shall not be cast one way or other by what they do or what they
leav undon, though if they neglect his will the Lord may make them to know it
here while they live in this world. And if upon this any shall say, then what
need we regard what we do, if any shall say so, we need go no further with this
man but say unto him, Thou have no part nor portion in this thing, thou have no
part in the deliverance from the Law by Christ, shall we sin because grace
abounds? God forbid, the Lord forbid that there should enter any such thought;
into any of our Hearts, They that are godly have the Spirit of God in them, and
will not Reason after such a manner, however this is certain, that in Christ
we do not depend for life and Death upon the works of the Law, and therefore
the way of the Gospel is a high way, a supernatural way, it is a way beyond
that that most people imagine: most people upon Earth look no higher for a way
of Salvation, but merely through the works of the Law, and they will certainly
miscary, by what you have heard. You see that the way of Salvation is a higher
thing than Nature.

The Fourth Lesson.
Fourthly, We may learn from hence, that if Christ have given Rest to believers
by delivering them, from the rigor and severity of the Law, that now they are
not to be cast by it for their everlasting estates, then they need to be so
much the more faithful with God, to do what possibly they can to serve the Lord
in an evangelical way. Thou were in such a condition, that thou were under such
a Law, as if thou did fail in any one point thou were cast for ever: but now
thou art under such a Law as God accepts of thee in Christ, had thou not need
be more faithful, and industrious in thy endeavors, in that thou have received
so much mercy to be under such a Covenant? The truth is, the other might
discourage thee to think, that let me do what I can, my Soul is cast for my
everlasting estate, but now if thou be brought under the Covenant of the
Gospel, and the Lord Christ has made thee to know that thy Rest is in him, how
careful should thou be to walk with him in all well pleasing? to give up the
strength of thy Soul to walk in his ways. I will appeal to thee, suppose thou
were in the condition again, that the Lord looked upon thee with a strict Eye,
and required such absolute obedience, that if thou failest in any thing,
nothing that ever before thou did should be accepted, poor soul, if the Lord
should say to thee, what if thou should be delivered from this Law, and be
brought under the Law of Christ? First, that thou shall not depend for thy
everlasting estate upon the Law. And Secondly, that whatsoever thou do shall
be accepted, though with much imperfection, how would thou prize this? and
even Covenant with God, and say, Oh! Lord, bring my soul under this Covenant
and I hope I shall for ever endeavor to walk in all well peasing before thee,
this shall not by any means in the world quench my endeavors, and make me more
sluggish but more strengthen my heart. As suppose now one should be in such
slavery under the Turk that let him do what he can, he shall be beaten, and a
Prince shall come and ransom him, and take him into his own house, and expect
no more obedience from him then the obedience of a Child, adopting him for his
Child, and all the obedience that he will expect shall be a childlike obedience,
and he will be his father. Now were it not a vild and unnatural thing for such a
one to be careless of giving contentment to this Prince, that will accept of him
as a Child, when he has delivered him from such a slavery and bondage that he
was under before? Thus it was with believers, thou were under a dreadful
bondage, under the Law, and thou art brought to Christ. and he makes thee to be
a child of God, and be procures that thy obedience shall be accepted that is
filial, and Child-like, shall thou be more negligent now, then before? now thou
servest God upon better terms then ever before and will thou be more sluggish.

The Fifth Lesson.
Fifthly, from our being delivered from the Law, we are to Learn this, That we
are not to judge our coming into Christ, nor to judge our faith by the Law, by
our coming to Christ we are delivered from the Law, therefore (I say) we are
not to make up any judgment of our coming to Christ, nor to judge our faith by
the rules of the Law. Though the propounding of this it may be, is a little
obscure at first, yet you will find it of mavelous use to help believers in
their way, some believers very ordinarily, especially weak ones, judge of their
coming to Christ, or their faith, by the Law, they make the law a rule of their
faith, which certainly should not be, for if by faith we are delivered from the
Law, then it must needs follow, that the Law cannot be a rule of our faith. You
will say, what is that, to make the Law a rule of our faith.

That is thus, Believers think that because their faith is weak, and full of
doubts, full of imperfections and doubtings therefore they have none at al. Now
what is this but to make faith it self a legal thing, for indeed, if faith were
legal, then it could not be accepted where there were any mixture of
imperfection, a legal faith could never be accepted with any mixture of
doubting, and with any imperfection, But an evangelical faith can be accepted.
This I may meet with perhaps afterward, but for the present it follows more
fully and immediately from what has been delivered from our rest from the Law,
and I desire to suggest it now to believers, as a mavelous help to them, that
they do not make their faith legal, as thus. Come to many believers that are
full of doubts and fears and why do they not believe? It is true, say they,
there is rest to be had in Christ, and much to be had in this, I but this is to
believers, and I am afraid I am not a believer. And why art thou afraid thou
art not a believer? because of such and such sins, and because I cannot do as I
would. Now what is this but to make faith legal? now faith that delivers us
from the Law, of al graces, that must be evangelical, our mourning for sin is
to be looked upon as evangelical, and yet some believers look upon their
mourning for sin as legal, they think God will not accept of their mourning Why?
Because they cannot mourn as much as they would.

That is true if thou were under the Law, then no mourning at al would be
accepted as under the Law, but now thou must look upon it as evangelical, and
thy obedience as evangelical. It is an il thing, that believers look upon their
mourning for sin, and obedience, and the like, as under the Law, and not as
evangelical, this is a great hindrance to them, but now, much more is it to
look upon their faith as legal: As thus, because their faith does not come up
so fully to the perfection that they do desire yea to that perfection that the
Law requires in any thing that we tender up to God, For though the Law does not
mention any thing of our believing in Christ, yet thus much the Law requires,
that what we do should be tendered up to God, and what we tender up to God,
With perfection; Now believers looking upon what they tender up to God as
imperfect, this makes them to make their faith Legal.

The Sixth Lesson.
Sixthly, another Lesson that believers are to learn from the Rest that they
have in Christ from the burden of the Law is this, that if they find any way or
means to be delivered from the terrors that come by the Law, certainly then
they need not be troubled with all the terror that possibly can come from any
creature, from any men. If thy faith can deliver thee from the terror of the
Law, and give rest to thy soul, notwithstanding all the terrible things in the
Law threatened against thy sin, then thy faith may deliver thee much more from
the terror of men, for take all the rage and power of all the men in the world,
and devils in hell, they are not so terrible as the threats of the Law. Now if
God has given thee such a grace into thy heart, as thou by that come to know
a way to deliver thee from the terror of the threatening of the Law, and to give
Rest unto thy soul from that, then thou needst not be afraid of al terrors from
wicked men, do but set that grace of thine a work, set it in exercise upon such
promises as have given thee Rest from the Law, and this will free thee from the
terrors of wicked men in the world. Truly, if believers did understand the
reality of this point, there is nothing in the world could be terrible to them
but they would have ^est in their souls in the midst of all the terrors in the
world, for they might reason thus, through the grace of faith that God has
given to me, my soul has rest, when I hear the terrors of the Law dreadfully
in my ears, yet I have that within me that gives me rest from them, and I am
sure that all the terrors of all the men in the world, and devils in hell, cannot
be more terrible than the threats of the Law, therefore as thou have made use
of thy faith to believe in Christ to get Rest from those terrors, in the like
manner put forth thy faith when thou hear the terrors of wicked men, to
deliver thy soul from them, let there be never so much rumors in the world yet
thou may say my soul return unto thy Rest.

The seventh Lesson.
Seventhly, Another Lesson that believers are to learn from their deliverance
from the law which is of marvelous use to them in their life and conversation
is this, That certainly it is the most unbecoming thing in the world, to see a
believer to be rigorous toward his brethren, Christ has delivered thee from
rigor, then will thou be rigorous? Christ has given thee Rest, wilt not thou
do what thou can to give thy brother rest too? If Christ has delivered thee
from great troubles, burdens, and bondage that thou were under, why should
thou not endeavor with all thy might to deliver thy brother from burdens,
troubles, any thing that might grieve thy brother? Oh! what an unworthy thing
is it, that a Christian, that has received so much rest from Christ, yet
should be a troublesome man or woman to his brother or sister? Christ does
therefore give Rest to thee, that thou may be of a quiet disposition toward
others, that thou may be pitiful toward others; To see one that professes
to have deliverance from the Law, and to have Rest in Christ, to be rigorous to
those under him, rigorous to his servants, rigorous to his Children it is
miserable; remember what rigor Christ has delivered thee from, and remember to
be quiet spirited to thy brother.

Hence it follows in the next words to my text, Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, I will give rest to your
souls that so you may be of a meek and quiet disposition toward your
brethren, but of that when we come to those words that follow; we shall then
speak of the weakness and quietness of spirit that should be in Christians,

Now these things are necessarily the consequences that do follow upon the rest
that we have in Christ from the Law, many other things might be raised, but
because they are but consequences of what has been delivered, I resolved not
to be large upon them.

CHAP. 33.
Of the rest from Legal Performances, and the several ways how this rest comes
from Christ, viz. duties are delightful to the soul, because Christ renders God
unto the soul in a gracious way. 2. They are not performed as satisfactory, but
as testimonies of love and thankfulness. 3 Christ himself offers up the duties
to God. 4. They are performed from the Law in the heart. 5. They have the
Promises joined with them.

NOw to make some entrance into the next thing, which has great affinity to
the other, aad that is the rest that is in Christ from the trouble of spirit
that there is in many, in regard of Legal performances, that you know I opened
at large, the great burden that there is in the spirits of many people, who
have convinced Consciences, and there Consciences pull and hale them to duty,
and they dare not but perform duty, but when they do their duty, their very
duties are a burden to them, for they do them, in a legal way. There are many I
know that are acquainted with this, it is impossible to speak of such a subject
but that there are diverse that know what I mean, though others know not, to be
under so much power of Conscience, as not to dare to omit a duty, though the
duty be burdensome to them. There be many that are not under so much command of
Conscience, but though conscience require them to do such a duty, they dare
omit the duty, and they are not troubled at it; but but there are others who
have not felt the Grace of the Gospel to set their souls at liberty, they are
under so much command of conscience, that they dare not but do what Conscience
requires, and yet the Lord knows, the duties that they have performed have been
girevous burdens them, they have gone under the command of their Consciences as
under a grievous burden.

Now to these Christ speaks, come to me and I will give you rest, in the
believing in Christ, in the exercising of faith in Christ there is deliverance
from this burden, and many poor souls that for many years have gone on under
this burden, whom the Lord has opened to them the grace of Christ, their
hearts have been at liberty, so as they have been as conscientious in
performing of duty as before, but now their duty is made the joy and delight of
their souls, they have gone to them with rejoicing, and made the Commandments
of God to be their inheritance, and the joy of their hearts, and their duties
are as sweet to them as the honey and the honey comb. Now this is the argument
that we are upon, that in Christ there is rest from this burden, Christ gives
ability unto believers, those that are his members to perform duties with
freedom of spirit, and indeed evangelical duties are duties performed with
freedom, that is the difference between legal performances and evangelical; one
is done as a burden, and the other is done with freedom of spirit. Now I shall
show unto you, how Christ gives this freedom Where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty, you know the scripture I suppose, now this freedom of spirit
in the performance of duty comes by Christ these ways.

First, when the soul is come to Christ it has rest, because Christ renders
God unto the soul in a gracious way Christ takes off the terror that was before
of God, takes off that from the heart. The reason why duties are performed as a
burden to those that are legal is this, because they tender them up to God, but
so as they look upon God as a terrible judge, they must do what God requires, I,
but when they come into his presence, they come into his presence as a judge,
being very terrible, Now when the soul comes to Christ, Christ renders God very
amiable, and lo^ely unto the soul of a Christian, renders God the father as his
father, or her father. For so Christ says, I go to my father and your father,
to look upon God, not only as a father, but our father, as being the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, So believers in the performance of duties, look upon God
as a father in a double relation. He is my father, he has begotten me a new to
himself, and so he is my father, he is my father, he has adopted me to be his
child, but he is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ too, and Christ is mine
two, so that I have an interest in the fatherhood, as I may so speak, as the
father of Christ, I go to my father and your father.

So when believers come to tender up any service to God as a duty, they come to
God as their father, and as to the father of their redeemer too, now this
brings a mighty deal of ease unto the heart of a believer in the performance
of duty a great deal of difference there is, between a fathers calling the
child to him, and a rigid severe master or judge calling of one to him. When
the child hears that his father calls him, he runs, and loves to be in the
presence of his father, but when one says to a servant, your master calls you;
he knows not whether he be called to be beaten with stripes or no.

This is the difference between legal performances, and evangelical, those that
are in Christ, when Christ calls them to duty, you must go into the presence of
your father and of the father of your blessed redeemer, you must go to duty in
him. Come, go to prayer says Conscience to one, they cannot but go indeed, but
when they go to prayer their heart is struck with fear, terror, and
discouragement in prayer: but Conscience says to one that is a believer, come,
you must go to prayer, what is that? but come, you must go before your father
and enjoy communion with your father, the father of your redeemer calls you to
have communion with him, and how does your heart spring to come into the
presence of such a father! So that Christ renders them lovely to his father,
and so delivers them from the burden that they are under in legal performances.

Secondly, In Christ, believers when they performed ^uties, they do not tender
them up unto God as satisfactory for any thing that is past, but merely to be
testimonies of their love and thankfulness for what they have received, now
duties are a great deal more easily done this way then another. It is true,
they will gather arguments from their former neglect to stir them up to do the
more, I but, now they are not called upon to their duties to make God amends,
and satisfy for what is past for that would be a burden, for such as perform
duties in a legal way, and are not acquainted with the doctrine of the Gospel,
they know not how to satisfy God, but only by doing so much the more, by how
much the more they have neglected heretofore. I have neglected God all the time
of my youth, and now conscience begins to be awakned and tells me I must serve
God, and perform duties, and I had need be more diligent now, that I may make
up and satisfy for what I have neglected before. Now when we perform duties in
this way, they are very burdensome, As suppose a man has run in debt, and he is
set up in a trade, I but whatsoever he gets it must be to satisfy what debts he
is run out in before, this must make him go on in much heaviness, he thinks
that whatsoever he gets, must go to satisfy what he has run into before. But
now take another man that has run into arrerages, and has a friend, a
kinsman, that coms and lays down all the debts that he owed, and gives him a
stock and says now you are a Freeman once again, go on, and whatever you get
shall be for your self, this man goes on, a great dealemore livelier then the
other: just thus it is between the consciences of those that perform duties in
a legal way, and the consciences of that perform duties in an evangelical way.
One that is legal, conscience tells him of such arrerages that he has run into
with God, and whatever he can do for time to come is too little to satisfy for
what he has neglected before, now conscience puts him upon it, do he must,
serve he must, obey he must, I but he does it with no heart at al I work, and I
obey, and I do, but whether this will make up the arrerages for what is past, I
do not know. Now a believer performs obedience, but it is upon other terms,
Christ comes and lays down a price, and discharges him of al former arrerages,
and puts a stock of grace into the heart, and says unto him, now live, and
employ this your stock in the service of God, and trade with it, get more
comfort, and more grace with it, and you shall have the benefit and the good of
every holy duty that you perform, the good and benefit shall come to your
souls. Now such a soul goes unto duties in a cheerful way, and they are no
burdens at al to it, because he performs them not for satisfaction of any
arrerages behind, but now he trades for himself, and every day he gets, and
gets, and gets for himself, that is another way how Christ gives rest unto the
soul in regard of performance of duties, that they are not burdensome unto the
soul as heretofore they have been.

Thirdly, another way of delivering believers in the performance of duties as a
burden is this. When in the duty that such a one performs Christ goes along
with them unto the father, and he himself tenders them up unto God the father,
and thus they come to be easy unto the hearts of believers; whereas those that
perform duties in a legal way, they go alone unto Gods presence, without any to
go with them. And again when they are there, they must tender up al they do
themselves to God, and the truth is, they can have little heart to this,
knowing, what God is and how they have offended God and provoked him. As thus,
suppose a malefactor, that has wronged the king, he must go into his presence
and petition, but he has no body to go with him, and no body to join with him
to tender up his petition, but he must go himself, now he goes with no heart in
the world, with no encouragement, indeed, he must go, there is no other way to
save his life, he must die else, but going so alone, and having none to help
him, he goes very heavily. But now suppose another that is to go into the
presence of a King, and the Kings dear and only Son, Shall take him by the hand
and say, come, I will go with thee, and what have thou here? a petition, come
give it me, and I will present it to my father, and I will get it granted, O! how
merrily and cheerfully does he go into the presence of the King. Just so it is
between a legal performer of duties, and an evangelical performer of duties,
those that perform duties in a legal way, and go into the presence of God in a
legal way, they go alone, they have no body to go with them to help them, and
this must needs make them to go very heavily: But a believer needs never go
into Gods presence alone, it may be you are at prayer alone in your closets,
but you are not in Gods presence alone, Christ takes you by the hand, and
carries you into the presence of your father, and those poor petitions, and
broken prayers that you present, Christ takes them in his hand, and presents
them to the father, and this the soul may see by faith, and O! how comfortable
is this* when duties are performed in such a manner as this, I go to a duty,
but Christ stands by me, takes all that I have to tender up to the father, and
he tenders it up for me.

Fourthly, Another way is this, That now al duties that are performed by a
believer, they are performed from the Law that is written in his heart, he is
made a Law unto himself, there is the spirit of Christ put into him, that now
he does not perform duty because he must do it, but because it is suitable
unto the divine nature that is put into him, for so the scripture says, we are
partakers of the divine nature, there is the very spirit of Christ put into a
believer, and the Law of Christ written in his heart, so that there is no duty
that God requires of him, but the Law of that duty is written in his heart, to
do it and according to his measure, he can say as Christ did, It is written in
my heart to do thy will O! Lord, what does the Lord require such and such duties
to be performed and does my conscience tell me in the name of God, that such
duties are to be done? Lord, this is even written in my heart and therefore
Lord, I come, the Lord would have me do this, and it is no other but what is
written in my heart to do. Conscience tells me I must do it, and it is no
sooner told me by my conscience, but my heart tells me I am ready to do it. Now
what a rest is this in performing of duty, when there is a disposition in the
heart of a man or woman to do the duty that God requires of them, they are a
Law unto themselves, there is no duty that God requires from them, but if there
were neither heaven nor hell, yet they would do it naturally, it is as natural
to them to do the will of God as for a fish to drink in water. It is said of
wicked ones, that they drink in iniquity as the fish does water, sin is natural
unto the wicked, and grace is likewise natural, though not altogether so
natural, for there is nothing in the heart but makes sin natural. But it is
true, when one is a believer, there is something in the heart opposite to good,
I but there is a principle in the heart that makes it natural for the soul to
drink in the Commandments of God, as a fish drinks in water, and therefore
believers, so soon as ever they have any touch of Christ, how readily do their
hearts come off to duty. As for instance, in Zacheus, you know how Christ came
to look upon him, there was a touch of Christ upon his heart, and presently he
comes off, and though before he was a covetous man, and there was covetousness
in his heart, and he had got much by forged cavillation yet presently he says,
Behold the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing
from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. Now what duty is
harder then restitution? when a man has got much by wrong to restore it again,
as often you have heard, you can have no comfort, al your sorrows will do no
good, til you have made restitution and the ground is plain, because til you
make restitution you continue in the wrong, you have done wrong to such a man,
such a time in his estate, well, you do him wrong to day, and to morrow and the
next day til you restore, I say you continue in your sin til you restore, if
you be able to restore. Now you cannot say a man repents of his sin, if he
continue in his sin, and you continue in your sin, though God does not require
you to go and make your self known to them, yet though your persons be not
known to them, the wrong must be made known to them, Just so is the difference
between one that is only under the terror of the Law, and one that has got
rest in Christ, the difference is as in a Ship, a Ship that has one part of it
sticking in the mud and sands, and the water beating it up and down, and ready
to burst it in pieces, but now if the tide come and fetch it off, And it is got
upon the stream, then you may by the touch of a little finger thrust it this
way and that way with ease, when it is once upon the water: So it is with a
heart before it comes to Christ, when it has only conviction of conscience,
though it have some illumination, that is as the water that beats the heart up
and down, and it cannot be at quiet, but is ready to be burst in pieces, I but
it sticks in the mud still, and therefore duties are very hard, and Conscience
does but only tire the heart, and beat it, and trouble it, I but now when it
is come to Christ, it ls like the Ship a float upon the water, and now upon any
touch of Christ it is ready to be put upon this duty, and the other duty, and
the motion of the soul now is without any danger or trouble, it moves up and
down with ease, when the heart is got off from it self, and the world, and the
creature it moves in the ways of God with abundance of ease, set such a one
upon the hardest duties you will, and he goes on with a great deal of ease, and
quiet and Rest of spirit, he does not think the Commandments of God hard, does
not look upon the commandments of God now as hard commandments, whereas one
that is legal in performing of duty, though he do the duty, he looks upon the
command of God as a hard commandment You have an excellent scripture for that
in the first of John 5. and the 3. Speaking of believers that when once they
come unto Christ, the commandments of God are not grievous unto them. This is
the Love of God that we keep his commandments and his commandments are not
grievous. But one that is in Christ, a believer, upon any commandment, though
it be never so grievous and hard to flesh and blood before they come to Christ,
as in the commandment of Restitution, I will mention that, I might mention
others as to pray in your families, to be constant in prayer morning and
evening, and to keep your heart constant in prayer to God, 'its perhaps
grievous to those that perform duties in a legal way, but when once the heart
comes to God, then the commandment of God is not grievous. I do not say, but
corruption may now and then prevail and then they are burdensome, but when the
heart has got grace, the commandments of God are not burdensome at al, but
they are easy to the soul, for so Christ says in a few words after my text,
My yoke is easy and my burden is Light. Many people complain of the way of
God, Oh! the way of God is so hard, and duty so strict, to live so exactly, who
is able to do this? I confess in the way you are in it is tedious and hard, but
if you had the spirit of Christ, and were come to Christ, those duties that you
account now hard, would be easy, you would never have more comfort, more ease
and quiet, then when you are performing of duty. You will think this a riddle,
to say, that the soul should never have more ease, rest, quiet, and comfort
then when a man walks more strictly and exactly, and keeps to the rule. Now
says a carnal heart, this is a miserable bondage, that ministers call for
strictness, what a bondage and weariness is this, as they in Malachy say, now
you think this so, Why? because you are but legal all this while, and if you did
perform duties still in that way, they would be a burden to you, but you
mistake in this, you think there is no way to keep Gods Commandments, but in a
Legal way, I but know this, there is an evangelical way to keep Gods
Commandments, Gods Law, and that makes every duty to be easy and light un^o
the Soul^ You think there is no such quiet and content of heart, as to be at
liberty, and to satisfy the flesh, and have your minds fully pleased, but were
you acquainted with the mystery of Godliness, you would find, that those things
that now are so easy, and give you so much quiet and comfort, would be the
most troublesome things in the world and the strictness of Gods ways that you
think so burdensome, you would find to be the most easy and comfortable things
in the world. And therefore let not the Devil steal you away from the
strictness of Gods ways by this delusion, certainly, he does but delude you,
O! that ye had but the spirit of the Lord Jesus in you; and that you were come
to Christ, you would find then ease in the most strict and difficult duties in
the world, you would find your souls to be at ease in the performance of them.

Fifthly, Duties are not burdensome unto those that are come to Christ, because
that in Christ al duties have joined together with them the promises; when
duties are performed in an evangelical way, when the soul is come to Christ
then it looks upon evey duty that God requires, as having some promise annexed
unto the duty, to enable the soul to do what God would have it do, and by this
it has now Rest in performance of it. Does God require such and such things of
me, then the soul does not only look upon the commandment, but how a promise
goes along with the commandment. As how, I might ^ance in diverse scriptures,
how promises go along with commandments, I will give you but the comparing of
one scripture for the present. Compare the 10. of Deuter. with the 30. of
Deuter. In Duter. 10.12. there you shall find it thus. And now O Israel, what
does the Lord thy God, require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk
in all his ways, and to Love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul, to keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and
his statutes which I command thee this day for thy good. Then at the 16. verse,
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart and be no more stifnecked. Here
you see what God requires, they are great things that God requires, that we
should fear the Lord, and walk in his ways, and love him, and serve him with all our heart, and keep his commandments and statutes, and circumcise our
hearts, and the like, these are hard duties, being performed in a legal way.
But now, when the soul is in Christ, see what a promise the soul finds together
with these commandments, In the 30. of Deu. and the 6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul that thou may live. Here God requires
them to circumcise their hearts, that they might love him, and fear him, and
keep his commandments but that is the Law, were there no more it would be a
very heavy burden, for a poor soul to have this ly upon it, that I must love
the Lord with all my heart and with all my might, the Lord knows what
distractions I have in my soul, and in my heart, God requires me to cercumcise
my heart, I am not able to do it. but now mark how the Gospel runs, in the Deu.
30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed,
to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul that thou may
live^ The Lord will do it, the Lord commands me to do it, and yet withal the
Lord says that he will do it. I might instance in a great many other
particulars, that the Lord requires first what we should do, and if we be left
here, now it is hard indeed, but then if we can find a promise where God
promises that he will do it for us, this will be easier to us. And indeed this is
the diffierence between the Law and the Gospel, the Law commands us what to do,
and gives no strength, but the Gospel never commands us to do any duty, but
there is a promise that engages the Lord to help the soul in the performance
of that duty. And now, is not here rest for the soul? when the soul shall look
upon the large extent of the duty that the Law of God requires of it: The Law
requires of me to love the Lord with all my heart, and with all my soul, and with all my might, and to keep his commandments and statutes, and to circumcise my
heart, Lord! what shall I do in this? Now then when the soul can look upon
Christ, and the covenant of grace, and consider, that that runs thus that the
Lord will circumcise my heart, that I may love the lord with all my heart, and
with all my soul and that I may keep his commandments and his statutes, that
God does as well engage himself to enable me to do the duty, as he does require
me to do the duty, now here is rest unto the soul.

I will conclude this particular with this one similitude, as it is with the
body, Physicians observe, that together with every vein where the blood runs,
there runs likewise an artery together with the vein, now the artery is the
vehiculum of the spirits that are in the body of a man, that puts liveliness
and quickness into the body: So for all the world thus it is in regard of the
commandments of the Law and the Promises of the Gospel. I compare the
Commandments of the Law unto the veins, they are these duties required of
thee in the whole course of thy life, but if thou have veins of blood, and have
no arteries, no spirit, thou will be but dull, though the blood be full in the
veins, yet there will be little strength. But now there is the spirit that goes
along in the arteries that gives life to the veins. So now, they that are
under the Law they know many duties that they ought to do, I but except they
have the promises of the Gospel, to go along with them, they have little life,
little activity to do the duty. Therefore Christians, when you hear any duty
out of Gods word that you ought to perform, consider, here is the duty, here
is the vein, I but where is the artery, there is a promise in the word that
goes along with the duty to enable me to perform the duty. Now if I take both
together I may go on in the way of Godliness with a great deal of ease and
quiet, and no duty needs to be troublesome to me. The want of the knowledge of
this one thing makes the lives of many people to be very disconsolate, and
makes them go on deadly and dully in the performance of duty, whereas if they
would make use of this one thing, when they are put upon any duty to search and
find out in the word the promise wherein God inables us to do the duty, and
plead the promise, and say, Lord, thou requirest the performance of this duty,
but thou have promised to enable me to do it, I say, if thou would do thus,
thou would find that thy duties would not be burdensome to thee, but thou
would say, well, I see my soul has rest in Christ in the performance of al
those services that heretofore have been very grievous and burdensome to me.

Object, I But you will say, We have many promises in the Gospel to enable us,
but the promises are conditional, and I may forfeit the promise by not
performing the condition.

Answ. To that I answer, We have in the Gospel, absolute promises, as well as
conditional promises: there is some promises that depend upon no condition at
al but only believing, as that promise where the Lord says, I will take away
the heart of stone and give a heart of flesh, what condition is there? does God
say, that if you first repent, and perform such and such duties that I require
of you, then I will take away your heart of stone? No that is an absolute
promise. And so likewise that promise* I will put my fear into your heart, that
you shall not depart from me: God does not make this promise with condition. You
will say, Why then has not al their stony hearts been taken from them because
the promise is absolute? I answer, it is absolute from any precedent condition,
but yet God would have us come to the promise, and close with the promises and
cast our souls upon it, he does not promise to do such and such things upon
condition, that if you will do such and such things before, then I will do this
and that for you: no, but only this, do you cast your soul upon the promise and
depend upon it: and when thy soul is at a loss in regard of conditional
promises, when thy heart misgives thee, and tells thee, that thou have not
performed the condition of such and such promises, and that therefore they do
not belong to thee and thou can not for the present have comfort in the
conditional promises, then make use of absolute promises, and cast thy soul
upon them, and they will bring in the conditional promises; and know this, that
al conditional promises depend upon absolute promises in the Gospel: and as
when thou can not make use of conditional promises thou may go to absolute
promises; so when thou make use of absolute promises, thou shall be enabled
to do what is required of thee in conditional promises. And here is the
difference between the Law and the Gospel; the Law requires, and does not give
strength to enable to do what it requires, but the Gospel requires, and gives
strength to perform what it requires.

Sixthly, There is rest unto those that come to Christ in this, because when
they perform duties in Christ, they do not perform them that they might have
life or that they might have pardon, that they might get life by them or that
they might obtain pardon by their duties, but they perform them now as the
fruit of their life, and as a fruit of their pardon, and this is a great deal
of rest and ease to the heart, in the performance of duties. There are many
poor troubled souls, whose consciences pull them on to duty, but why do they
perform them? because conscience accuses them for their sins, and they know
what need they have of Gods mercy, they stand guilty before God, and therefore
they perform duties that they might get a pardon, and they know that they were
made for eternity, and therefore they make conscience of duties that they might
get eternal life by them, as I when I opened showed the burden that there was
in legal performances. But now when the soul comes to Christ it has rest in
this, for the very first thing that is done in Christ is that al thy sins are
discharged, the pardon is granted, and thou art put into an estate safe for thy
eternal life, and all the hazard of eternal life is now over. Now then, that
that is required of thee, is only as the fruit of the pardon of thy sin, and as
a fruit of thy safe condition that thou art put into for thine eternal life,
and here is a great deal of difference, between performing of duties that I
might have pardon, that I might get eternal life by it, and performing of
duties as a fruit of my pardon, and as a fruit of the assurance of my well being
to al eternity. As for instance, a man that is in danger of his life, stands
before the judge, and there is no way for pardon for him, but he has his book
given to him, as you know the way is to have the benefit of the Clergy (as we
use to call it) now when he knows if he reads he shall have his life, but life
lies upon it, and the judge is strict, and sets one by him, that the ordinary
shall not prompt him, and he will have him read out: and his life lies upon it. I
suppose you have heard of some that were able scholars, and able to read well
enough at other times, yet at such a time were not able to read one word for a
world. But suppose this man now have his pardon, and you then put him to read,
then he can read with delight, he has freedom enough now to read, his eyes
that were bound before are loosned. Now suppose he were to read a Psalm of
mercy before he had his pardon, and when he had his pardon there is a Psalm of
thankfulness for his life given him to read, he could read it then with
delight, just thus it is with those that perform duties in a legal way, they
stand before God as their judge, and look upon what they perform as that which
their souls depends upon, that if I do not do such and such things that is
commanded me, my soul lies upon it, alas this straitens the heart, and it is
put into a condition of fear. But now when the soul is come to Christ, and the
Lord has granted pardon to it and has quieted it by the blood of his son, now
says God, read, perform duties, and let all the duties you perform be in way
of blessing my name, and praising of me, for giving of you your lives. And
indeed, this is the principal ground of all that God requires of such as are
come to Christ, merely that thou should go out before the Lord in way of
thankfulness for pardoning thy sins, and accepting of thee in his Son. And so
likewise if so be a man were amongst his enemies, and should be set to do some
work and business, and is set so to it, that if he do not do it, he is a dead
man, they will have his life if he do not do it, alas, he goes about it with a
great deal of dread and fear. But now, if this man should come home to his
fathers house, and his father sets him about a work, and he does it so, that
though he would not do the work, yet he should not loose his life, he should go
about it with a great deal more freedom of spirit. Thus it is with believers
when they come to Christ, they come to their fathers house, and their father
sets them about works, but so as he will not lay their lives upon it, their
soul does not ly upon their duties, thy eternal estate does not lie upon
duties; as heretofore you have heard in being freed from the Law, so now make
use of it in deliverance from legal performances. That the Lord though he will
be strict to mark what is done in every duty, he will not be strict to take
advantage of thee. It is true, it is said that the Lord spared not his own
son, but he will spare thee. In Malachy 3.17. The Lord will spare them as a man
spares his own son hat serves him. And so in the Romans it is said God did
not spare his own son, and yet in Malachy that he will spare thee as a man
spares his only son that serves him. What should be the meaning of this? That
God should not spare his only begotten son the Lord Jesus Christ, he will not
spare him, but thee? This is the reason, he did not spare him that he might
Spare thee, here is the reason why God will so spare thee in the performance of
thy duties, because he would not spare his son, he was so exact to him that he
might not be so exact to thee.

Indeed when Christ came to perform duties, the life of all the world, lay upon
that, that if Christ had failed in one thing, the life of all the world lay upon
it, yet so they lay upon him, that they were not grievous to him, because he
was most able to perform it: But thou must make use of Christ's performances in
way of obedience so as to give thee rest and ease in performance of thy duties,
think thus, I come now to perform duties, and thanks be to God, my life, my
eternal estate, lies not upon it, but Christ what he performed my soul, and all the world lay uyon what he did, and the weight that Christ was willing to take
upon him in his obedience, is that which makes any obedience so easy and
comfortable to me. I remember we read in the Law, that in peace offerings, a
female was accepted: in other cases ordinarily God required the male, but in
peace offerings, the female; now peace offerings was for thanksgiving, and
indeed the whole life of a Christian is nothing else but a peace offering, his
whole conversation, all the duties that God requires of any christian it is
nothing else but a peace offering, to offer an offering of thanksgiving for
the mercy he has received from Christ, in this peace offering the Lord accepts
of a female, though it be but weak, And this is the sixth thing wherein the
rest of the soul in the performance of holy duties, when it is once come to
Christ does consist.

Seventhly, As the soul does not perform duties that it might get life
thereby, it is not in that way now, so the performance of duties when the soul
is come to Christ, is a part of eternal life it self, and therefore there is
rest in it, it is so far from getting eternal life by it, as it is rather
eternal life, it self, then so much as any way to eternal life, for this may be
said, though I perform duty, it is true, God has taught me so much, that now
under the Gospel we must not think to get eternal life by our duty, by our
works, this is popery, yet it is the way to eternal life the way that tends to
it, it is, via ad Regnum, the way to the kingdom, though not the cause of
Reigning. Nay, I will show you a further thing then so, the ways of obedience
and holiness in a Christians course, they are rather eternal life it self, then
the way to it, they have more excellency in them then being the way to life. It
is true, it were a great deal of ease and rest to ones spirit, to consider of
holy duties but as the way to heaven, if a man were going a journey, and knew
the end of his journey should be very glorious to him, if it were to receive a
crown, a kingdom, though it were a boisterous day, and stormy weather, and the
way were very foul, he would not be troubled at it, but he would account it
very comfortable, to know that he is in the right way, for he thinks this will
lead me to my journeys end, and when I come there, that will make amends for all.
And the truth is, there were ease and rest enough in the ways of God, if God
did reveal no more unto a soul then this, these are the ways that lead thee
to life and salvation, that lead thee to a kingdom, to glory; especially
considering that before we were out of the way, we were wandering in the ways
of death and destruction, and God by his Almighty hand has brought us into the
right way.

When a man is going a Journey of great consequence, and he is gone out of the
way, and God by his providence has brought him into his right way, O! what
ease is in his spirit: Before, when he was out of the way, what distraction and
disquietness of heart, but now when he comes into the way, Oh! what ease and
quiet is in his spirit, so I say, this were ease and rest enough of spirit to
know, that whereas before the soul was wandering in the path of death, now it
is in the path of life. But I tell you further then so, that when thou art
performing of holy duties, and exercising of the grace of God; in the
performance of those duties, thou art not only in the way of eternal life, but
thou art in eternal life it self, not only in the way to the kingdom, but in
the kingdom, not only in the way to heaven, but in heaven, it is eternal life,
This is eternal life to know thee the true God, and thy son whom thou have sent
into the world. And that place in the Epistle of St. John he speaks of a
murderer, one that did hate his brother, in the first of John 3.15. Whosoever
hates his brother, is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him. Then it appears, that one that loves his brother, and is
Godly and gracious, has eternal life abiding in him, for that must needs
follow, if this be the evil condition of a wicked man, that hates his brother,
that he has not eternal life abiding in him, then by the rule of contraries,
it must needs be a truth, that he that has holiness and loves his brother, he
has eternal life, abiding in him, and therefore such a one he has eternal
life already to come down to him, and he is in heaven already. So the
scripture makes grace but the beginning of glory, it is no other but the very
beginning of heaven in the soul. And therefore in that golden chain in Romans
8.30. Whom God has predestined them he also has called and whom he has
called them he has justified, and whom he has justified them he has also
glorified. Mark but where is the link of sanctification, It is not, whom he
has predestined he has called, and whom he has called he has sanctified,
and whom he has sanctified he has glorified. One would have thought the chain
should have gone along in that link, but there is no mention of sanctification,
Why? because sanctification is nothing else but glorification begun, and
glorification is nothing else but the perfecting of sanctification. Now I
beseech you observe this as a most special thing that belongs to a Christian,
the best duties that we perform are nothing else but the life of heaven to us,
nay the truth is, it is the life of God. And therefore it is said of ungodly
men before they come to Christ, they are strangers to the life of God,
therefore when thou art come to Christ, thou have the life of God in thee, and
the life of heaven in thee, and the beginning of Glory, Glory and eternal life
thou do live whilst thou art in performance of holy duties. What is the
happiness of heaven, but for the Saints and Angels to be exercised in
magnifying the riches of God, and of Christ? now thou beginnest it here, and
therefore if thou know what this is, thou art not, I say, to look upon any
duty that thou performest merely as a duty but thou art to look upon it as a
privilege, yea as part of thy wages. That is a certain truth, that Gods work,
it is wages, and the improving of that principle would help us very much in our
Christian course, if thou did live and account every duty that thou
performest to God to be wages, Oh! with what sweetness would thou go on in
the performance of those duties that God requires of thee, thou art receiving
thy wages when thou art performing of duties. In Romans 6. and the last. The
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ. At the 22. verse it is thus. But now being freed from sin and become
servants unto God, you have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. You have your fruit unto holiness, it is the
fruit unto holiness which is the gift of God, and holiness it is nothing else
but the gift of God, and the beginning of eternal life, the fullness of eternal
life, that indeed is the end of it, but the fruit that you have for the present
it is holiness, and that holiness that is the gift of God, it is the beginning
of eternal life here in this world. Then indeed is a christian well improved in
Evangelical obedience, when he does account duties to be mercies, and when
mercies are turned into duties, as when we turn Gods mercies into duties, that
is an argument we receive Gods mercies from a Covenant of grace, and there will
be linkes of Gods mercies toward us, so when we account our duties to be
mercies, that is an argument there is evangelical obedience in the heart, and
there will be a constancy in the heart in performing of them. Those that
perform duties in an Evangelical way, they look upon them as a golden chain
about their necks for ornament, and not as a chain about their necks as bonds
and Fetters to tie them to them. Here is the difference between one that
performs duties in a legal way, and one that performs duties in an
Evangelical way; One that performs duties in a Legal way, he looks upon
duties as bonds about his neck, he is bound to them as with a chain; but the
other that performs duties in an Evangelical way, his duties are as ornaments,
as chains of Gold about his neck. And the ground of this similitude, I have in
Prove. 3.22. My son keep sound wisdom and discretion, so shall they be life unto
thy soul, and grace unto thy neck. The ways of wisdom, that is the ways of
Godlyness, they are life to the Godly, and they are a grace to the neck, that
is, they carry Gods commandments about with them, not as a prisoner carries his
chains, but as one that carries a chain about his neck, and he glories in it.
That place is very observable likewise for this, that you have in Deuter. 33.
comparing ver. 2. with the words that follow after. Verse the second, The Law
of God is called a fiery Law. From his right hand went a fiery Law for them.
But mark verse 4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob. From hence this note plainly results, that let there be
never so much seeming severity in any Law of God, in any commandment that
requires duty, yet even this commandment of God is accounted an inheritance
unto the souls of the Saints of God, to be as the joy of their hearts, they
account their riches to be in Gods commandments, not only to be in heaven, but
the very commandment they account their riches, and their happiness. Many men
and women take upon them the commandments of God, and the duties of obedience,
as necessary burdens, they must do them, I but the Saints, those that come to
Christ, they take the commandment of God upon them, as that wherein their
riches, their glory, the joy of their heart does consist, and therefore how
often do you hear of David saying, that the commandments of God were sweeter
to him then honey and the honey comb. That they were more delightful to him then
gold and riches. And so in the Proverbs Better then Rubies and precious stones.
He does not say, the glory of heaven is better then al these, but the way of
Wisdom, and the commandments of God are better then al these, So that here is
the life of a Christian, he performs duties not only as a way to heaven, but
as an enjoying of heaven while he is serving of God; and this is the seventh
particular, wherein the rest of the soul in Christ does appear, in the
performance of holy duties.

Eighthly, When a Christian is brought to Christ, Christ gives him rest in the
performance of holy duties because that Christ does elevate and raise his
spirit to be some way proportionable to whatsoever God requires of him, there is
an elevation of spirit, a strengthening of the spirit in Christ to come to some
kind of proportionableness to what the Law of God requires of them. It is true,
set a poor weak man, a sick man about any hard work, and Oh! how tedious is
it unto him, for a sick man, to go and carry such a burden, or to do such a
hard work, it is very irksome unto him, but now when this man comes to be
healthy and strong, to have his veins full of blood, and his arteries full of
spirits, now he goes along in his work and accounts it no burden at al, because
he has got strength in him. So the commandments of God they are hard to those
that perform them in a natural way, from a natural conscience, notwithstanding
all the strength that can come in by a natural conscience, the commandments of
God are very hard unto them; but when once the spirit of Christ comes, there is
strength. As it is said where the spirit of Christ is there is Liberty, so
where the spirit of Christ is there is streng^h, As the holy Ghost speaks in
Isa. 11.2. The spirit of the Lord shall Rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. The spirit of counsel and Might shall Rest upon Christ,
and so in the measure of it, the spirit does rest upon every member of Christ,
the spirit of Life, of Might and of counsel. And therefore the Apostle St. Paul.
says in the 2. of Tim. the 1. and the 7. For God has not given us the spirit
of fear, but of power, of Love, and of a sound mind. This spirit of power is
in those that are come to Christ, there is a power of godlyness in them. They
are said in Coll. 1.11. To be strengthened with all might according to his
glorious power. The Apostle at least prays for that, to intimate thereby to
us, that there is that to be had in Christ, there is a strengthening with all
might, according to his glorious power, unto al patience, and long-suffering
with joyfulness, giving thanks to the father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Though they be weak, yet
they have a union with one that is strong, wherein they may come to be
strengthened with all might, not only according to Gods power, but according to
his glorious power, unto al patience and long-suffering, with joyfulness. The
duties of patience long-suffering, are as hard duties as any, hut in Christ
there is the glorious power of Christ let out to strengthen them to the duties
of patience and al long suffering with joyfulness.

CHAP. XXXV.
Two other ways whereby the former point is cleared, with some consequences
from the same and the use of the whole. The First way is, that whilst the soul
is performing duty, the strength of it is continually renewed. Secondly, The
soul has the love of God shed abroad into the heart. The first Consequence is
happiness of a Christian here. Secondly, Hence comes the perseverance of
believers. The use of al is to exercise much faith in Christ.

Ninthly, The Rest that the soul has in Christ, that is to go on in duties
with freedom of spirit, without making them burdensome to it is this; when the
soul comes to Christ, it has not only strength to do the duty, but whilst it
is performing of duty it has this strength renewed, and it receives in
sweetness, and good, and strength from Christ, while it is in action, while it
is in the performance of duty, and his duty is very easy, sweet, and
comfortable unto him. As thus, if a man be doing a work that is hard, suppose
he lays on upon a knotty piece of timber, and there is nothing comes of his
work, and it does not go on before him, and he spends his strength and gets
nothing for the present by his work, he quickly grows weary. But now if a man
be doing a work that the more strength he spends, the more he gets, the more
his strength is enlarged, the more renewed, and never gets more strength, then
when he is spending of strength, and that when he is at work he receives in
sweetness by it, surely this man will go on in the work, he may work singing,
when all the while he is working, he spends not so much strength as he gets, and
he does not only work to receive wages, but there is commings in, sweetness
coming in the very time of his work, this man works with a great deal of
ease. Thus it is in Evangelical obedience; when a soul comes to perform duties
in this way, now his strength is renewed day by day, the more service thou do
for Christ, the more strength comes in. As now a man that is benumbed with
cold, perhaps you that are mariners, when you come to handle your cables, or
any thing in the ship, you can scarce feel any strength by reason of cold, but
when you are at work, and you begin to be warm, your strength comes in. So it
is with a Christian, when he begins to perform duties, it may be he is dull,
dead, and the like, but let him go on in the duties, and then strength will come
in. I appeal to many of you that have performed duties, you have gone to do a
duty, and you have been dull, and unfit for it, and you have been ready to let
it alone thereupon, well but conscience puts you upon it, and you must do it,
now when you were in the duty, has not Christ come in and has not the
strength of Christ come in to enable you to do the duty that you never could
imagine it, which for ever might be an encouragement to you to go on in the
duty, and to avoid that temptation, never to neglect the duty from any
unfitness to the duty, for when you are at the duty, then comes in strength
from Christ to perform the duty, for you cannot expect strength to come in
before you come to the duty, but up and be doing, and then strength will come
in. Yea, and the more duty you do, the more strength will come in; and hence it
is, that a Godly man, though he may be weary in duty, yet he can never be weary
in doing of duty, he may see a difference between himself and carnal men. Take
a Godly man, though he may be weary in duty, yet he can never be weary of duty,
whereas it is otherwise with those that perform duties in the strength of a
natural conscience, those that perform duties in the strength of a natural
conscience, are weary in working, As some tools you know will wear in the
using, but others the more you use them the more brighter and better they will
grow: So it is with those that perform duties in the strength of a natural
conscience, they will wear away, and that is the reason that they leave them
off, but one that performs duties in an Evangelical way, the more he does the
more he shall be able to do, and therefore Christians, let that be an
encouragement to you, the more you do, the more you shall be enabled to do, he
that had five talents and used those five talents he had more talents given
him, and he that had but one, and sat down sullen and used it not, it was
taken from him; and as strength comes in so thou shall suck in a great deal of
sweetness into thy heart. In the keeping of thy commandments (says David)
there is great reward not only for the keeping of them, but in the keeping of
thy commandments. Now when a man is working, if so be he had his wages coming
in every hour when he is a working, it would encourage him, but if he thinks
he must stay for his wages that is more grievous, the work that is done with
present sweetness coming in, that work is an easy work, and that is the reason
of that expression In Hosea, 10. verse. 11. Ephraim is as a heifer that is
taught, and loves to tread out the corn, but I passed upon her fair neck, I
will make Ephraim to ride, Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods. The
text seems to be hard at the first reading, but there is much in it, suitable
to what I am speaking of Ephraim is as a heifer that is taught and loves to
tread out the corn, but says God, I will make Ephraim to ride, Judah shall
plow, and Jacob shall break his clods. I will make Ephraim not only to tread out
the corn, but to plow. The meaning was this, you know that was the law, you
must not muzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. whereas we
thresh the corn, they had their oxen to tread out the corn, and it was the
law, that all the while he was treading out the corn, his mouth must not be
muzled, but he might feed all the while he was treading out the corn, now this
was easier then when the beast was sent to plow, and had no corn to eat the
while. Now says God, Ephraim loves only easy work, if he may have the work
that is sweet for the present, Ephraim is content with that work, but Ephraim
does not love the work that is difficult at first and sweet afterward, So this
shows that one that is of a lazy disposition, he loves the work that has
sweetness at the present. Now truly, there is no other work that the Gospel
requires at our hands, the Gospel does not require so much plowing, as the work
of treading out the corn All the work that the Gospel requires of believers, is
such as the heifer had while he was treading out the corn, that is, all the
while thou art working, thou may be eating, thou may have the blessed
sheaues of the Gospel to feed upon, for there does come a constant sweetness
into the hearts of the faithful in doing the work of the Lord, go on in doing
the work of the Lord, and thou shall find rest and sweetness in thy soul
coming in upon thee.

And that is the reason that Scholars can study so hard, many hours together,
which would be tedious unto others, I put it to you that are employed in other
things* that think the work of a scholar so easy a work, get up in a morning,
and shut your selves into your closet, and read, meditate, and write for two or
three hours together, and then come forth and go to it again, and spend half a
day, or a whole day together in studying, meditating, and writing, and see if
you do not find it more tedious and tiresome to the flesh, then any other work.
But now Scholars though it is tiresome to the flesh, they can go on and make
it easy to them, why? because they find sweetness in their work, it is not with
them as with ^ther men, other men work that they may have wages afterward, but
all the while they are about their work, they have truths come in, and heavenly
notions comes in to them, while they are about it, and so makes the work easy
unto them, this is happiness of a Christian that the while he is in his work,
the sun of righteousness shines upon him, and there is sweetness coming in
unto him, and herein is rest and ease in the performance of duty.

Tenthly and lastly, When the soul comes to Christ, it finds abundance of rest
in holy duties, because now it has the love of God shed abroad in its heart,
and that makes every thing delightful to it, the love of God is shed abroad in
the heart, you know Jacob, because he loved Rachel, though he was abroad in
frosty nights, he accounted it nothing, because he loved Rachel: Oh! when the
love of God is shed abroad in the heart of a Christian, then there is nothing
that he does but is delightful to him it makes every thing easy. For that is a
certain rule, that love is ashamed to mention any difficulty, you never hear
love to complain of any thing to be heard, and those that complain of holy
duties to be heard, certainly they want the love of God. Now you have heard in
these ten particulars, wherein the ease and rest of spirit in performance of
holy duties does appear, there is much more to be said in the latter end of
the Chapter, when it is said that Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light,
which if God give opportunity we shall come unto.

APPLIC. I.
Now from all this, first, here you may see the happiness of a Christian, you do
not think that a Cristian is happy here, but he shall not have only heaven
hereafter, but his way to happiness is heaven here, Oh how good is the way of
the Gospel, that gives us rest in our way to heaven, such rest that all the
malice in the world and of (...), cannot disturb the peace and rest of a
Christian.

II. Hence we see the reason, why true believers do persevere, you hear
oftentimes speaking of the doctrine of perseverance, and you are ready to
think, I but is it certain the soul that once comes to have true Grace shall
certainly persevere? yes, certainly, one that is once come to Christ, will not
go from him again, why? because there is so much rest in holy duties. It is
true, those that are drawn to holy duties they will not abide, as it is said,
The son abides in the house but a servant abides not always in the house. So,
such as perform duties in a legal way, they will be gone, they will not abide,
but now one that is come into Christ and has a son-like disposition, he
continues. As we say in philosophy, no violent thing or motion is perpetual,
and indeed, those that perform duties in a legal way, a hundred to one, but
they will prove Apostates at last, but one that performs duties in an
Evangelical way, will continue and hold out unto the end.

III The maine use of al is to stir up the hearts of those that are Godly to
know what the Gospel means, to exercise much faith in Christ that they might
have much comfort in performance of duties. Do not content thy self that thou
do duty, but think with thy self, Oh I have heard of such a way, that
Christians in performance of duty find a great deal of rest and ease, why
should not I get that way. Thou hear of it, Oh! that thy soul might be
unquiet til thou come to understand the way, then your duties would be more
sound, more spiritual, more supernatural, more acceptable then they are. The
Lord loves a cheerful giver and so he loves a cheerful server, you love to
hear your servants sing at their work, but if you set your child or servant
about a work, and he goes heavily and dully about is, grumbling and pineing,
and think you to be a hard master, then he does but a little work, so they that
perform duties in a legal way, the truth is, they perform little duty, and that
is not acceptable, but when a soul comes to find rest in duty, it makes it more
spiritual more plentiful, and more acceptable, and those duties are very
pleasing unto the Lord.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Shows the Rest, from the remainder of Corruption to be Sanctification, and
that to be a great Rest, Laid open in six particulars. 1. It is the right
temper of the heart. 2. In it the soul does in great part attain its end. 3. In
it the Soul lives the life of God. 4. It raises the soul above the region of
al troubles. 5. It turns every thing to good. 6. It is the beginning of Glory.

YOu may remember when we handled the point of the load that was upon sinners,
we showed, that the remainder of corruption was a great burden, it was so great
a load, that it made the Apostle cry out, Oh! wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death. How that was a load has been already
opened.

That which we have now to do is to show what rest is to be had in Christ
against this fourth burden. Come to me (says Christ) al you who are sensible
of the corruption of your heart, and find the remainder of sin that is in your
heart to be a burden, come to me, and I will give you rest against that. We are
not now to speak of the rest in deliverance from the trouble of soul in the
sense of the guilt of sin, that was before spoke of, but now we are to speak of
the rest, in giving power against the remainder of corruption that there is in
the heart. This rest is the rest of Sanctification that here we are to speak
of, I will give you rest. And in this point there are a great many of useful and
sweet things, that might require very large handling, but I shall endeavor as
much as I can to contract al within a few things for this rest of
Sanctification.

There are in it these five things to be followed, that ye may see clearly the
method that I shall proceed in, and so go along with me.

First, I shall show you, that Sanctification is a great rest to the soul, or
deliverance from corruption, is a great rest to the heart of a believer, there
is much rest in Sanctification.

Secondly, That this rest it is in Christ, al our Sanctification and helping
against corruption is in Christ.

Thirdly, How Christ comes to be this rest unto the Soul.

Fourthly, Some consequences that will follow from this consideration of Christ's
being the rest of Sanctification unto the heart.

Fifthly, Conclude with exhortation to come unto Christ for this rest.

Sanctification the Rest from Corruption.
I. Sanctification is great rest unto the soul of a believer, the truth is,
there is nothing troubles the heart of a strong believer, but only the want of
his Sanctification, nothing in the world I say troubles the heart of a strong
believer but that. It is time, a weak believer is troubled for want of the
apprehension of the pardon of his sin, a weak believer has trouble of spirit
still in the sense of the guilt of sin, but a strong believer gets over that. A
weak believer has trouble by the Law still, because through the weakness of his
faith, he is not able to make use of the Covenant of grace that God has
brought him into, so as to deliver himself from trouble that way, a strong
believer gets over that. A weak believer performs duties, but there is a great
deal of legality in his performance of them, that many times they are
troublesome to him, but a strong believer gets over that burden, but now the
remaining corruption that is in the heart, none in this world gets over this.
Indeed in great part the strong believer has got power there also, a great
deal more then the weak one has done, but the chief burden that lies upon a
strong believer in this world is the remainder of corruption that is yet in
him. And so for the next burden of affliction, the strong believer gets well
over that too, but this is one chief burden of the strongest believers that
the world has, that yet there is much remaining corruption in them. As it was
in Paul, though a strong believer, says he. Oh wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from this body of death, as you heard it formerly opened to you, so
that sanctification is a special rest that believers have, it is a rest.

1 In this regard, because it is the right temper of the heart. As corruption
was a burden, because it was the distemper of the heart, as sickness is a
burden, so sanctification it is the right frame and temper of the soul, and so
brings ease and rest unto the soul. If your bodies be distempered with
sickness, you are a burden to your selves by it, you know not what to do, a
sick body first lies down in one place, and then in another, and will change
rooms, and change beds, and change postures, because he is a burden to
himself. Let the distemper be gone, let the body be put into a right temper,
and now he has rest, now he can sleep quietly, now he has ease in his body,
his pain is over. Now sanctification is the health of the soul, then the soul
comes to be healthy when it comes to be holy, holiness is the due temper of the
heart and therefore it is rest.

2. Sanctification is the rest of the heart, because in that the soul does in
great part attain its end, now what is it that the soul rests in, so much as in
its end; every thing rests when it comes to its end, the end is as the proper
place in which every creature rests, now by sanctification the soul does attain
its end in great part, as.

First, it attains the end that God intended in the making of it a man or
woman, now they attain in great part the end for which they are born, thou art
born to that end that thou might be holy, that thou might live here in
this world unto God, which by sanctification thou do that is the end God
aimed at, the end why thou art borne, why thou came into the world.

Secondly, It is the end of al Gods ways toward thee, a special end of all the
passages of Gods providence to thee, of all the workings of God toward thee in
this world, of all the ways of his providence to thee, that thou might be
godly, that thou might live to him to his praise.

Thirdly, It is the great end of Christ's coming into the world, Christ came
into the world, that he might purchase a peculiar people, Zealous of good
works, and that he might sanctify them unto himself.

Fourthly, It is the end of al Gods ordinances toward thee, why do thou
enjoy any ordinance, but that they might sanctify thy heart.

Fifthly, It is the end, if thou be one that is in any measure Gods already,
it is the end of thy desires, what are the desires of a gracious heart, but
that he might be holy to God, and be freed from the body of death.

Sixthly, It is the end of thy Labor, what do thou endeavor after? what do
thou labor after, if thou be Godly, but that thou may be more Godly, that
thou may be more sanctified, surely that which is the end of our coming
into the world, that is the end of al Gods ways toward thee, that which is
the end of al Gods ordinances, which is the end of thy desires, and the end of
thy Labor, that must needs be rest, in attaining that thou must needs attain
Rest.

3. Sanctification is rest unto the soul, in that the soul lives even the life
of God, the soul does not only live to God but lives in God, and therefore must
needs live in Rest. You have a notable expression for that in 1. John. 2.24.
Let that therefore abide in you, which we heard from the beginning, if that
which ye heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in
the son and in the father. You shall continue in the son and in the father. When
the truths of the Gospel working on the heart unto holiness, abides in the
heart, such a soul does abide in the son and in the father, lives in God, and
therefore must needs have rest, must needs have rest there where it lives in
God. Its true, the Saints they live in the world, but as they live in the world
so they live in God, even in God here.

4. Sanctification it must needs be rest unto the heart because that is a
principle that raises the soul, above the region of al kind of trouble and
molestation. As the Philosophers tell us, that here, in the inferior region,
there are storms, tempests, changes, and alterations, but in the region on
high, the third region, that is above storms, tempests, winds and blusterings,
there is nothing but quiet, nothing but peace there. It is true, while the
heart of a man or woman is grovelling here below in the world as al are til God
raises them by Grace, their spirits are full of trouble, vexation and
molestation. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, but he is like the
troubled sea which casts forth mire and dirt. As you heard in the opening of
that scripture. But now when God gives grace, and sanctifies the heart, the
Lord raises the heart above these regions of trouble, raises it on high, gets
it up in the highest region, there is nothing but quiet, calm peace, ease, and
rest unto the soul.

5. Sanctification is rest unto the soul, because it is such a principle, as
turns every thing to Good, and that must needs bring rest when God sanctifies
the heart, works grace in the soul, it is of that excellency, that it has a
virtue and efficacy in it to turn every thing to good. Now that were indeed a
precious stone, that could turn every thing into gold that it touches. A
great deal of labor there is about the Philosophers stone, that they say
turns other metals into gold, now grace in the heart turns every thing into
gold, as it were, ever thing into good, it has that excellency in it, that
whatsoever befalls such a man or woman, grace can turn it to the good of them.
All the works of Gods providence, al things that seem to go never so contrary
unto the good of a man or woman that has grace, if such a one do but act his
grace, or her grace, this will turn things that seem to be most contrary, to
the good of them, it will turn it unto good; Those things that others vex at,
and fret at, and, think themselves undone by, a gracious heart, one that has
grace can turn them to advantage, and get good by them, such a one that is in
such a condition, they have got such a virtue from God, God has given them
such a principle within, as whatsoever befalls them, he can by the acting of
that principle turn it to Good. What need then such a man or woman have any
trouble in this world? no trouble, will you say, do not such and such things fall
cross to them, such and such afflictions fall as cross to such men as any
others? That is true, things may fall as cross to them as any, I but, they have
a principle within them, that turns al those crosses and afflictions to good,
that we shall speak more unto in answering to the fifth burden of outward
afflictions, but only to show it now, in the rest that the soul has in
sanctification, because it turns al things to good.

Sixthly and Lastly, Sanctification is a rest to the soul, because indeed it is
the beginning of glory, it is but the beginning of heaven, and we are in
heaven, there is nothing but rest, there is peace and rest in heaven,
sanctification is glorification begun, and therefore rest unto the soul. This
now is the first particular, I will give you rest, that is, come to me, you shall
have power over your corruptions, you shall have grace and holiness, that shall
be rest unto your souls.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Shows that Sanctification is only IN Christ.

SEcondly, That this sanctification it is in Christ, all the sanctification of a
Christian it is in Christ, there are some common gifts that God gives unto
other men, there are gifts of nature, and there are gifts of common grace,
gifts of the spirit of God that are beyond the gifts of nature, and yet they
are such as are given in a common way to those that are strangers to Christ.
The heathen had many common gifts, and so others now may have many common
gifts, but sanctification is the proper gift of Christ, it is only to be had in
Christ. All the strength of nature, natural abilities, education, morality,
natural parts, can never raise the heart to the least degree of sanctification,
I mean, of the sanctification that is saving. In a large sense it may be called
a sanctification, as the scripture sometime does, a setting some kind of men
apart for such ends: but sanctification that is true holiness, that is the
image of God, and the beginning of glory, that is only in Christ, and all the
streng^h of nature, and parts, can never raise the soul unto the least degree
of it.

And that it is only in Christ, I shall give you some scriptures to show it, and
it will further appear, when we come to the third thing, in showing you how it
comes from Christ, which is the principle. That text is very full for it, which
we have in 1. Cor. 1.30. if there were no other; But of him are ye in Jesus
Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
Sanctification and Redemption. Christ is made unto us of God; wisdom, to
enlighten our blindness; and righteousness, for our justification, and
sanctification, and redemption; that is, to deliver us from al kind of evil, to
deliver us from the power of sin, and to renew the image of God in us, that is
sanctification, and redemption, that is to deliver us from al kind of evil, and
to bring us to the redemption of the sons of God, to the perfect liberty that
is appointed to sons. Christ is made to us sanctification; sanctification, that
is, not only that Christ has merited our sanctification, but in a further
degree, efficiently, so as our sanctification is from him, and it is he that
works it in us, and upholds it in us, the beginning and the progress of our
sanctification, it is from him, as well as merrited, by him. For we are to know,
that Christ has laid down his life to merit of God the father, as well
sanctification, as justification, or glorification. Christ has not only laid
down his life for to merit the pardon of our sins, to purchase that from God,
to save us from hell, but it was a special end of Christ's laying down his life,
to merit our being set at liberty from the bondage of our sins, our deliverance
from corruption the renewing of the image of God in our souls for the present,
which is that indeed may cause us to prize holiness somewhat more then we have
done. We must not look upon holiness as a duty, that we must be holy, and as a
necessary means to heaven, but we must look at holiness as the purchase of the
blood of Christ, he has purchased holiness for all those that he has laid
down his life for. And therefore (as we shall see afterward) it is impossible
for any to be holy, but those that have part in Christ, so that Christ is made
sanctification by his merit, and by the efficiency that is in him; it is he
likewise that works it in our hearts, we have it not immediately from God the
father but from God the father through Christ, through his son we come to have
sanctification, and therefore we shall see it afterward, how different our
sanctification is from the image of God that there was in Adam at first, and
the holiness that there was in Adam, Adam, he had his holiness immediately from
God as Creator, but those that are now made holy, and sanctified now, they have
not their holiness and sanctification immediately, or as from God their
Creator, but they have it from Christ, Christ, that is, the second person in
trinity, he it is that is made to us sanctification.

And then, that it is in Christ appears further, in that notable place in Romans
7. that was quoted in the former point about the load of corruption, Where
saint Paul cries out in the 24. verse, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death, that is the remaining corruption that was
in his heart. Mark the very next words that follow. I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. As if he should say, the deliverance that I must have from
this body of death, it is from God, but how? through Jesus Christ our Lord, The
Apostle does not only thank God for it, and say, al grace must come from God,
but he thanks God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus we must understand how
grace comes unto us, indeed, God is the fountain of al, but it must come from
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, as al mercies that we have for the pardon of
our sins. Now it is not from God immediately, as the first person, or as
Creator of heaven and earth, but it is from God through Jesus Christ. So all the
holiness that we have now, it is from God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And then take one scripture more, and then we shall come to the third
particular, which is the chief we aimed at, and that is in the 26. of the Acts.
the latter end of 18. verse. That they may receive remission of Sins, and
inheritance amongst them which are Sanctified by faith that is in Christ. It is
a speech of Christ unto Paul, when he sent him to preach, and tells him to what
end it should he, To open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ. Multitudes
of scriptures there are for this purpose.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Shows how our sanctification comes from Christ in six particulars. 1. It
was the end of his coming. to destroy the works of the Devil. 2. He is the
great Ordinance appointed by God to sanctify his people. 3. His death is
appointed to mortify sin. 4. By him the curse upon the heart is taken away. 5.
By his union with believers, being the head of the second Covenant. 6. In
Christ are the strongest arguments for holiness that can be.

THirdly, And especially, we are to enquire, how Christ is the rest of
sanctification, come to me and I will give you rest; I will give you power
against your corruptions, and you shall have sanctification in and by me, For
that.

1. We are to know, That a special end why Jesus Christ came into the World, it
was to dissolve the works of the Devil, that was a special End of Christ's
coming into the World. In 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil,
for the Devil sins from the beginning, for this purpose the son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil whosoever is borne of
God does not commit sin for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, etc.
It is a strange scripture whosoever commits sin is of the devil; you say you
defy the Devil, but the holy Ghost says, if you commit sin that is walk in
any way of sin. For you will say, who is there that commits not sin? Well, but
the words are thus: He that commits sin is of the Devil. Therefore it is
apparent, there is a kind of commission of sin, that is an argument they are of
the Devil, for they are the words of the Holy Ghost? And for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. It was
the end why he came into the World, yea, it is a special thing that Christ is
anointed to by God the Father, to deliver Souls from the bondage of their
corruption, and to work Holiness in them: That you have in Isa. 61. and the
beginning, that notable prophecy concerning Christ, The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, (that is upon Christ, for it is a prophecy of him) because the Lord
has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind
up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, to Spiritual
Captives that are under Spiritual bondage. And then in verse 3. That they might
be called Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord: So that that is the
first consideration of Christ's giving the rest of sanctification, that it is
the end for which Christ was born, and it is the end for which he was anointed
by God the Father, to Sanctify the hearts of those that he shall redeem. So
that Christ is our Sanctification, by attaining the end of his own coming into
the World, by fulfilling of that that God the Father has anointed him for.

Secondly, Christ is our Sanctification, as the great ordinance that God has
set up for the Sanctifying of the hearts of his people. I say, Christ is set up
as the great ordinance oppainted by God for this end, the Lord has set him up
and filled him full of holiness, that holiness might be conveyed through him
unto the souls that do belong unto him. And therefore it is said, in that known
place, As in John, 1.16. Of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Of his
fullness Jesus Christ is filled full of holiness, as a cistern filled full of
precious liquor, and grace must come through him unto the souls of all those
that are Godly, that are believers. Faith draws grace from him, grace for
grace, that is, grace answerable to grace, as print for print in a seal, there
is print for print in the wax, look what print there is in the seal, the same
print is in the wax, So look what grace is in Christ, there is answerably in
some measure the same grace in the Saints. Of his fullness we receive, and all the believers that ever were in the world have received all the grace that ever
they have had from him, out of his fullness, and from him as the great ordinance
that God has set up, for the dispensation of the graces of his spirit, for the
working of Sanctification in all those that shall be saved. Yea Christ, is such
an ordinance appointed by God the father for holiness, and sanctification, as
indeed, there is so much virtue in him, that the very looking upon Christ, has
a power to sanctify the heart, the very looking upon him. As the brazen serpent
in the wilderness, you know, was the great ordinance of God appointed for the
healing of those that were stung with serpents, and being the ordinance
appointed for their healing, those that did but look up to the brazen Serpent
received virtue presently, and were healed of their sting, of the deadly
disease that was upon them by the stinging of Serpents, now this was by virtue
of that ordinance. Now then I reason thus, if when God makes but a piece of
brass an ordinance, there shall be such a virtue in it, that the very looking
upon it shall have power to heal the body, then if God shall make his own son
Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, God and man, to be an ordinance to heal the
souls of his people, surely then those that look up to him by the eye of faith,
will receive healing of their souls, as they did receive by looking upon the
brazen serpent. The very beholding of Christ has a power to sanctify the
heart. And therefore if you would have holiness, you must often look upon
Christ, set Christ in your eye, be not only poring upon your Corruptions, and
looking downward into the blackness that there is in your spirits. Many
Christians are laboring under the burden of their corruptions, a long time,
why? because they spend their time and strength merely in poring upon their
corruptions, and looking down to their corruptions. But Oh Christian, thou must
look up, set thy eye upon Christ the great ordinance, and behold him as the
great ordinance set up by God the Father, for the conveyance of grace to the
souls of believers, and for the healing of al their souls and wounds, and then
there will come healing virtue from him. We read of the poor woman that had the
bloody issue, that spent al upon the Physician, she did but come to Christ,
and touch the hem of his garment, and then she was healed. Surely Christ has a
great deal of virtue in him, that the very touch did heal her, and therefore he
says, who has touched me? virtue went from him at the very touch of the hem
of his garment, Christ is the great ordinance and he is full of virtue and
excellency, the looking upon him, and touching of him, brings virtue to the
soul, to heal the soul of its corruption.

Thirdly, more particularly Christ brings sanctification unto the heart,
because the death of Christ is appointed by God, to have an efficacy to mortify
sin and corruption, it is from application of the death of Christ, filled with
virtue, and appointed by God for that end, that it should have efficacy upon
the heart, to mortify corruption in the heart. A man may resolve against his
corruption, he may vow and covenant against a sin, he may strive and struggle
against a sin, he may pray against a sin, he may fast to overcome his sin, he
may use all means that he thinks he can possibly use to overcome his sin, and
yet still his sin not dead in him, perhaps the means that he may use to
restrain sin, may keep down his sin, but it will never mortify his sin. The
application of the death of Christ, that is appointed by God, for Christ is
appointed himself as the great ordinance. But now more particularly I say, that
the way that is appointed by God for the mortifying of corruption, it is the
application of the death of Christ to the soul, the virtue that comes from
Christ as a dying Christ, from Christ as a crucified Christ, from Christ as a
dead Christ to mortify corruption in the heart. That is clear from that place
in Romans 6. the beginning. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? God forbid, how shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein (dead a part of his coming) know you not that so many of us as were
baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried
into Baptism by his death. And in verse. 5. For if we have been planted
together, in the likeness of his death. Again in verse. 6. Knowing this that our
old man is crucified with him that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. The old man is crucified with him, in his
being crucified, there is a virtue in Christ's death for the crucifying of
corruption, that the body of sin might be destroyed that henceforth we should
not serve sin. He does not say, that we might have some power against sin, that
sin might be restrained, or that such a particular sin may be kept down, but
that the body of sin might be destroyed. So that in the application of the
death of Christ, there is not only the overcoming of this particular sin, but
the Body of sin comes to be destroyed: all those principles of sin in the soul,
with the connection of them, and joining one to another, as the Members are
joined in the Body, they come to be destroyed, that is, though not wholly cast
out and radicated, yet the ruling power of them is taken away; as soon as ever
the soul is come to Christ, the Body of sin has a deadly stroke given to it.
There are many of you striving against this particular corruption, sometimes
one, and sometimes another, for those that are Gods Children, their hearts are
more inclined unto some sins than others, and at sometime to some particular sin
more than other. It may be one labors under the burden of passion, and another
of unbelief, and another of Pride, and another of wantonness, and diverse
particular corruptions they are laboring under. It may be at some times you
find one corruption stir, and you strive against that; and another time another
corruption stirs, and you spend your strength against that, but now here is the
way to strike at the whole Body of Corruption at once. If one shall go to cut
down a Tree, and stand chopping at one sprig, and one branch, and another
branch, the Tree may stand long enough for all that: But now, if he would get
the Tree down, he goes to the root, and a few blows gets down all there. So
this is the wisdom of a Christian, That when he comes to labor against any
corruption, he does not spend his time so much against this or that particular
corruption, but strikes at the body of corruption: and how gets he strength
against that? By applying the blood of Christ, the death of Christ by faith
against that, and by this means the body of death comes to be destroyed. And
here is the reason, that Christians in a little time grow so much, and get so
much power against their corruptions, whereas others are a long time before
they get any power at all. Those that are not acquainted with the way of
Christ, you shall have one that has been a notorious wretch, a wicked person,
a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, if it please God to bring him to the Word, and
reveal Christ to the soul, you shall have a mighty change in this man in a
week, a great change, that he does not only leave off now drunkenness, and then
lying, and then swearing, and then Sabbath-breaking, but all goes down
together; Why? Because at one application of the death of Christ, all the body
of sin comes to be destroyed, though not quite dead and withered. As a Tree
though it may be dead, yet the Leaves may be green still: So though there be
not at first the withering of them, yet there is the deadly stroke given, and
therefore the way to kill them is to renew the application of the death of
Christ. And indeed this should be the care of a Christian, not to keep from the
acting of sin so much, as to find that the death of Christ is applied to him.
And hence you never read of any such thing as mortification in any Heathen
Author in the World, the mortification of corruption is a Riddle to all Heathen
Writers in the World. The mortifying of corruption, and the mortifying of their
own hearts, this is a peculiar expression of the Gospel, and indeed it is
peculiar to Believers. Many men, through good Education are so restrained, that
they are very fair in their course; others as they come to more understanding,
the vanity of their youth being overcome, there is not that profaneness
committed by them as heretofore; I but, what is this to mortification of the
body of death that is in their hearts, this is only peculiar to a Christian,
and it is from the application of the death of Christ, the application of a
Christ dying, of a Christ crucifying, of a Christ shedding his blood for sin;
this has a virtue to mortify sin. There is a great deal of difference between
a mortified lust, and a restrained lust, a mortified sin, and a restrained sin.
The difference lies in this one thing, for I must not go out to handle the
Point, but only this one thing take it by the way: When a lust is mortified,
there is not only a ceasing from the act of it, but there is now an
unsuitableness between the heart and the sin, whereas there may be much
restraint of sin, and yet still there may remain a suitableness between the
disposition of the heart and the sin, only they dare not commit it, but when
sin is mortified, the heart is so changed, that there is an unsuitableness
wrought between the heart and corruption now, and this mortification of the
body of sin is by the death of Christ.

Fourthly, Christ is our sanctification, and he only, because it is by him that
the spiritual curse that is upon every man's heart naturally is taken away, it
is Christ only that does deliver the soul from the spiritual curse that is upon
every man's heart naturally. You know this is the condition of man by nature, he
is under the curse of the Law. Cursed is the man that abides not in all things
that is written in the Law to do it. But now, we apprehend ordinarily this
curse to be, either in outward misery or else in hell fire cursed eternally, but
we are to know, that one branch of this curse is that that is upon the souls of
men here, There is a spiritual curse that is upon the souls of men by the fall
of Adam, and that is, God giving them up unto themselves, unto the lusts of
their own heart, unto their own counsel and ways. Now I confess, as it is in
the curse of outward afflictions in this world, it is in some degree upon some,
and in a further degree upon others, but al are under it naturally, so this
spiritual death is executed in some degrees upon some, and in more degrees,
upon others, but every soul is in some measure, in some degree or other given
up to the lust of its own heart, there is a final degree of giving the soul up
to the lusts of its own heart sometime, but there is in every one a measure a
degree of this, and the reason of the prevailing of the corruption of men's
hearts may appear in some measure by this. It is strange to see, that
notwithstanding all the convictions of conscience, and telling men of the
dangerousness of their ways, that it will never be peace in the end, that they
will rue it at the last, and their consciences give them many a secret nip, yet
they go on still, notwithstanding the terror in the Law many times, nay,
notwithstanding the hand of God has bin strong upon them, and they have cried
out against their sins, and promised against them, and notwithstanding that
they find that their sins do destroy the very health of their bodies, waste
their Estates, take away their good names, and thereby loose al their friends,
yet they are not able to overcome it, As the Scripture speaks of some that
have eyes full of adultery, they cannot cease to sin. Now sometimes they plead
this as an excuse for their sin, and say, they would fain leave it but they
cannot, and they think this is a sufficient excuse for their sin, an excuse,
no, this their cannot may be from the spiritual curse that is upon their souls,
because the curse of God is in a high degree upon their hearts, giving them up
in just judgment unto the lusts of their own hearts. And this I take in some
part to be the meaning of that place, in 1. Cor. 15.56. verse. The strength of
sin is the Law. Now spiritually the meaning of it is this, that all the strength
that sin has to condemn one, to kill one, to bring death, it is by the Law,
that I take to be the special scope of those words. But there is included
likewise in that expression thus much, that the law of God gives a strength to
sin. How, you will say, does the Law of God give a strength to sin? Thus, there
is the justice of God in his Law, by virtue of the Law of God, and the justice
of God in it, man is given up unto his sin, and so his sin comes to have a
power and strength over him, the strength of sin it is the Law, the Law
requires this, the justice of God in the Law requires this. That those that do
forsake God should be forsaken of him, that those that give their hearts up to
satisfy themselves in any way of sin, that they should be given up to that
sin, So the strength of sin is the Law, the Law makes sin to be so much the
stronger that way. Now therefore, how should the soul come to be delivered from
the strength of sin? the Law must be satisfied, the Law must be taken off, the
strength of the Law must be taken away, and none can take that away but Christ,
Christ takes away the strength of the Law, but the Law is not executed upon
Christ, so as he was to be given up, but the text says, he was made sin, he
came to take our sin upon him, it was as near as might be, though he was not
capable of having the execution of the Law upon him but the scripture says, he
was ^ade sin for us, that indeed is a very great meaning of this place, though
acknowledging of sin, and suffering for sin be the chief meaning of the place,
yet it has besides very much of this in it.

Fifthly, Christ is our sanctification, by being the head of the second
Covenant, and so through our mistical union with him, there is a virtue of
holiness conveyed from him by being the head of the second Covenant, and we
being members of him as the head, we come to have the virtue of holiness to be
drawn from him. As it was in Adam, how come we to have so much sin conveyed to
us by Adam by propagation, but thus? As we may read in Romans 5. By one man sin
came into the world. Now Adam, he was the head of the first Covenant, and by
being the head of that, al mankind are looked upon as members of the first
Adam, he being the head in that notion of the Covenant, in that consideration.
Adam was not looked upon as a parent only, as the first father, but as the
head, and we are not looked upon only as the children of Adam, but as members,
so that al men were looked upon as one in Adam, and therefore the Scripture
speaks but of two men, the first Adam and the second Adam, that look as sin is
conveyed to us, being members of the First Adam, and he being the head of the
First Covenant, so grace comes to be conveyed unto the soul by our being
members of the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ being the head of the second
Covenant, here is the way of conveyance of holiness, our union with Christ, So
that now the holiness that is in Christ, comes to us by virtue of the mistical
union. As by virtue of the natural union of the members of the body with the
head, there comes animal spirits to the members of the body; so by virtue of
our mistical union with Christ our head, there is conveyed holiness and grace
to strengthen us against our corruptions. As the ointment did run from Aarons
head (...) ^to the rest of his members, so Christ that is anoyt^ ^at has the
oil, not only of gladness but holiness too, does descend down to al his members
by virtue of the union they have with him. And for that end you have a most
famous scripture in Romans 8.2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death. It is a scripture that
has very much in it. What does he mean by the Law of sin and death? The Law,
that is the mighty power that there is in sin, and so in death that comes by
sin in the hearts of unbeleevers. There is a Law of sin, the strength of sin I
speak of, sin has strength going along with it, has power with it. So a Law
of sin there is in the hearts of men, they are compelled to sin, as, I may so
speak, as a man is compelled to a thing by a law, a law of sin, though this be
no excuse to them. And let them know, that so far as they are compelled to sin,
they are compelled to death to. But how shall this Law of sin and death be
overcome? Mark the words, The Law of the spirit of life in Christ, has made
me free from the Law of sin and death. The Law of the spirit of Life, here is
two gradations, that is, the holiness that is in Christ, that is likewise a Law
as well as the corruption that is in the heart. The corruption in the heart has
a strength in it, and the holiness of Christ has a strength in it too, So that
when grace comes into the heart, the heart goes on in a way of holiness, in a
holy kind of necessity, We can do nothing against the truth, says the Apostle.
But yet there is a necessity of willingness goes along with it too, there is a
Law of Love and kindness, but by this word of Law is meant, a strong
impetuousness, a migh^y power that carries the soul on to holiness. Again,
secondly it is the Law of the spirit, and of the spirit of life, the holiness
of Christ it is a holiness that is full of life. First it is Life. And secondly
it is the spirit of Life. Now the spirit of life is a higher degree then life,
as the spirit of a thing has the quickening of the thing in it, beyond what the
whole bulk of the thing is. When the spirit of herbs or any such thing is
extracted you know those spirits have much quickening in them, beyond the things
themselves, so the spirit would express the mighty activity in the holiness
that comes from Christ, it is life, it is the spirit of life, and then it is
the Law of the spirit of life Oh my brethren, you see then here, that Godliness
is no dull thing, it is no heavy thing, no poor, weak, contemptible thing, but
it is the life, and it is the life of Christ, and it is the spirit of life, and
it is the Law of the Spirit of life, he speaks of grace when it comes to that,
as the Law of the spirit of life.

There is but two things in sin, the Law of sin and death, and in grace there
is life, and the spirit of life, and the law of the spirit of life, and all this
in Jesus Christ. It is not in our own resolutions, purposes, endeavors, but
in our union with Jesus Christ, and this it is that brings grace unto the
heart, though there be much corruption before, yet the soul being thus one with
Christ, and looking upon Christ as the head of the second Covenant, and does
draw virtue from Jesus Christ, a mighty strong virtue to help the soul against
corruption, and quicken it in the ways of God, and thus comes the rest to the
soul by Christ in sanctification,

Carnal hearts, they know no way in the world how to get grace, they hear
talking of grace, and leaving of sin, but they know not how to get it, and they
will go and pray, read, hear, and the like, I but you must know, that grace
lies in another way then you think of, for you think it must come from God, I
but it must come from God in a mistical way through Christ. Perhaps some of you
hearing the mysteries of the Gospel understand this, that as God is the
fountain of al grace, so it must be conveyed by Christ as through the cisterne,
I but you must understand also, that you must have it from God through Christ,
as he is a head unto you, and you are the members, through a mistical union
that your souls must have with Christ, so as you be made one with Christ, you
must be made one with Christ. As the member can never receive any spirit from
the head, except it be united to the body, it is not by being tied to the body.
If you take an arm of flesh and tie it to a man's shoulder it will never receive
life that way, but it must have a natural union. Just thus your common
Professors, that merely have the name of Christians, and are not spiritually
united to Christ, they are like to Arms ti^d on to the shoulder, or to wooden
legs that are fastened upon men's thighs that want legs, they have some use of
those legs to help the^ a little to go, I but those legs have not virtue and
life conveyed from the head. So your common Christians, they have some knowledge
of Christ, they are only fastened to Christ, as a wooden leg is fastened to a
man's body, they make some use of Christ, some profession of Christ and can
speak of Christ, and what they hear spoken of Christ, is somewhat serviceable
and useful to them, I but they have not life from Christ, and hence they have
not holiness from Christ, they have not the true holiness that comes from the
Law of the spirit of life that is in Christ.

Sixthly, Another thing that is to be considered of in Christ, how the rest of
sanctification comes to the soul through him, is this, In Christ there are the
greatest arguments for holiness that possibly can be imagined, and Christ comes
to be a rest of sanctification that way: when the soul comes unto Christ, and
knows Christ in the right way, the soul sees in Christ enough against sin, and
for holiness, if it never saw any thing else there is enough in Christ to help
against sin, and for the furtherance of of holiness, that that is discovered in
Christ has a mighty power to help the soul against sin, and to further it in
the way of holiness, as now to instance the mighty arguments that there are in
Christ, against sin and for holiness, as.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Containing two strong Arguments in Christ for holiness. First, In him the soul
sees the greatest breach between it and God by reason of Sin. Secondly, In him
it sees the greatest Hatred of Sin in God.

FIrst, in Christ, there the foul sees the greatest breach that can be imagined
that sin made between God and the creature, it is true, when we preach the Law
to you, and tell you of the curse of the Law that is due to sin, this acquaints
you with somewhat of the breach that sin made between God and you, and this may
terrify you, but the truth is, the breach between God and a soul by sin, is
never thoroughly seen, til you come to Christ, the soul never thoroughly sees sin
til then, when it comes to Christ, and sees Christ indeed, sees Christ so as
one that has union with him, then it understands the evil of sin after another
manner then ever it did before. And that is the reason, that faith does more
purge the heart from sin, then all the terrors of the Law possibly can do, yea,
if God should let a crevis into hell, and let you see into all the torment that
is there, they could not discover so much the evil of sin to you, as when you
come to have a real sight of Jesus Christ, how sin made such a breach between
God and us, as can be made up no other way, but the son of God must come and
take upon him man's sin, this is the greatest discovery of the evil of sin that
possibly can be.

Object. You will say, Others know this as well as believers.

It is true, they know it after a sort, but none can know this thoroughly, but
those that through faith have the real sight of Christ, and so have the real
sight of the evil of sin, in Christ.

Secondly, another strong argument of the evil of sin in Christ is this, the
infinite hatred of sin in God, that God should so infinitely hate sin, that he
would not spare his own son, this shows the evil of sin. We hear much of
hell and of the terror of the Law, now when I come to consider the fruit of
Gods hatred of Sin in his son, this shows me a great deal more the evil of
sin, And therefore, though the terror of the law may restrain men from sin, I
but when the soul comes to know the infinite wrath of God against sin, that he
would give his son to satisfy for sin, this shows the evil of sin, and this
shows the infinite holiness of God, that he would send his only son to
purchase holiness. And in this we see the infinite love of Christ to die for
sin, the infinite price of the soul to purchase it, and the infinite difficulty
in the deliverance from sin, and nothing can prevail upon the heart more then
the viewing of Christ. There is so many things that I cannot speak of them,
that when the soul comes to Christ, makes the soul hate sin, and makes it in
love with holiness. The knowledge of Christ in any common way, has as much
power to restrain sin as any thing, but now the knowledge of Christ in a
spiritual way, in a saving way, it has an infinite efficacy in it. And the
truth is, the special way for a soul to help it self against its own
corruptions, it is much to dive into the knowledge of the Gospel, look into the
Gospel, pry into the mystery of the Gospel, be much conversant in the mystery
of the Gospel, and there consider what argument thou may draw against thy
sins. They are poor, low arguments, that common people draw against their sins,
they have a temptation to sin, and they think, Oh! let me take heed I do not do
it, for my master and mistress will know of it, or such a one will know of it, or
if I do it, I shall be brought to punishment, these are poor, low arguments, But
says a believer, Oh let me not commit sin, Why? It is that that brought the
son of God down from heaven to be made a curse for man. It is that that made
the greatest stir in the world that ever was, it is that that Gods soul
infinitely hates and it is that that made such a breach between the soul and
God, as only can be made up by the son of God. These are the arguments that a
believer has against sin, and a believer being conversant ^n these arguments,
and often exercising faith in Christ, they being made real to the soul. They
must needs have a mighty power to overcome any corruption whatsoever. As we
read in the Gospel, when the husband man that let out the vineyard sent for
fruit, and they took the servant and beat him, and killed another, at length,
says he, I will send my son, surely they will reverence him. So may I say, there
is such and such arguments against thy sin, to overcome thy Corruption, and to
put thee on to the way of holiness, perhaps those arguments thy corruptions
break, and they are but like Sampsons cords, thy corruption snaps them asunder
like flax. I but, says God, I will send my son, and reveal the glorious
mysteries of the Gospel in my son, I will show to their souls what my son has
done, and what the deep counsels for the salvation of their souls in my son
are and these shall prevail upon you. And here is the reason of al their
fearfulness of sin, and strictness in walking with God, when the Gospel has
convinced them; you wonder why they will be so strict and fearful to offend, do
you wonder at it? Oh my brethren, they have arguments, perhaps, that you know
not of, God has revealed much of his son to them, the wonderful mysteries of
Godliness revealed in his son, and they are the arguments they go upon. They do
not go upon such mean and low arguments as you do; mean and low arguments may
keep men in an orderly course, to live quietly with their Neighbors, and keep
them from thievery, drunkenness, swearing, and the like, arguments that the
heathen had skill of may keep them from those things. But the saints, believers,
that are acquainted with the ways of Christ they have higher arguments, they
behold him with the eye of faith, and so they come to have power against their
sin, and to have ease in their souls. Thus, says Christ, come to me, you have
Corruptions prevailing over you, and you perhaps strive with them with such and
such arguments, but come to me, and I will give you such things, you shall see so
much against sin, and so much for holiness, as that that I shall discover to you
shall help you against your corruptions, and further you in the way of holiness,
and so you shall have rest unto your souls.

CHAP. XL.
Showing how Sanctification comes from Christ, in six Particulars more. 1. It
is he that reveals the Father to the Soul. 2. Through Christ the Love of God is
shed abroad into the heart. 3. All the Promises are made to us through him. 4.
In him all the Ordinances are effectual. 5. He sends the Spirit into the heart.
6. Christ Rules in the heart.

SEventhly: Christ comes to be our Sanctification, we have the rest of
sanctification in Christ thus: It Is Christ that does make known the Father unto
the soul: No man knows the Father (says Christ) but the Son, and him to whom
the Son reveals him. I suppose you know the Scripture; And if you have seen me
(says Christ) you have seen the Father, in John 14. It is Christ that makes
known God unto the soul, and there is a mighty power to work Holiness in the
heart by the knowledge of God. Says the Apostle St. John, in 1 John 2.4. He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar. The
knowledge of God cannot stand with the neglect of Gods Commandments. There is a
mighty power in the knowledge of God for the Sanctifying of the heart, the very
looking upon Gods Holiness has a great deal of power to sanctify the heart;
and the reason of all the wickedness and profaneness in the world, it is because
men know not the Lord, know not what an infinite, blessed, glorious God they
have to deal withal: They that know thy Name, will trust in thee, says the
Psalmist. So may we say, Those that know thy Name, O Lord, will fear thee, they
will serve thee, they will walk before thee in obedience and Holiness. Now the
knowledge of God, it is in Christ, there may be some kind of Natural knowledge of
God out of Christ, in beholding the Works of God, we may know somewhat of him.
But as the Scripture says in 1 Cor. 1.21. After that in the Wisdom of God,
that is, in the Creature, in the Glory of God that shines in the Creature, the
World by Wisdom knew not God. The World by Wisdom, that is, the World by all
their Natural Understanding, by all Learning that Philosophers had, that saw
much of the Glory of God shining in the Creature, yet says the Text, by all
their wisdom they knew not God; but yet it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. And what preaching was this? verse 23. We
preach Christ crucified, etc. So that there is no saving knowledge but only in
Christ, when the Soul comes to Christ, then the Lord Jesus Christ reveals the
Father to him, reveals the Counsels of God unto the Soul, reveals the very
heart of God unto the soul; and hence it is that many poor people that are very
ignorant before they come to know Christ, know little or nothing of God at al,
but had strange thoughts of God; yet as soon as ever the things of the Gospel
come to be revealed to them, they begin to have high thoughts of God, high and
honorable thoughts of God; and those high and honorable thoughts of God, do
mightily prevail upon their hearts to purge out sin, and sanctify their hearts
exceedingly. Do but consider of those places where the preaching of the Gospel
has been but very little, what poor thoughts they have of God, they know not
God, and therefore they live in all manner of Ungodliness. But now, when the
preaching of the Gospel comes to any place, and God comes to be known, there
the Devil is cast out, and the hearts of people being filled with the knowledge
of God, they come to be sanctified unto the Service of God. That is another
thing, It is Christ that reveals the Father unto the Soul, and so comes for to
sanctify the heart.

Eighthly, It is through Christ that the love of God is shed abroad into the
heart of a believer, and that has a mighty power to sanctify the heart, the
shedding abroad of the love of God into the heart, this only can be in Christ.
There may be, though out of Christ, common fruits of Gods bounty, general
patience, goodness, and the like, but the special love of God, that has a
sanctifying power that goes along with it, it is that only that is in Christ,
and when the soul comes once to have union with Christ, there flows the sweet
sense of the love of God unto the heart, it is shed abroad, according unto the
scripture Phrase, that the heart being filled with the sweetness of Gods love,
and comes to be sanctified thereby, then al base love of the creature, and the
love of sin comes to be eaten out, and the heart comes to be carried on, in a
blessed, sweet, and gracious manner after the Lord. All the terror of the Law
cannot sanctify, so as the shedding abroad of the love of Christ in the heart
can. Indeed, by the terror of the Law sin may be restrained, but by the terror
of the Law the heart can never be sanctified. This is a certain truth, the
terror of the Law may restrain from sin, but it can never sanctify the heart,
the terrors of the Law are useful to be preached in that way, for to restrain
Sin, but when we preach them, we do not think that we can thereby possibly
sanctify the heart, corruption may be restrained for a while, but, that which
must sanctify the heart must be the love of God in Jesus Christ, As I
remember. Fulgentius, compares the love of God in Christ in the heart of a
believer, to the fire that is within the furnace, and the love of God in his
common bounty, to a few sparks that fly out at a distance from the mouth of
the furnace; take all the love of God that is in the creature suppose the Lord
should give unto you the possession of all the world, and should make a thousand
worlds and give thee possession of them al, this were but as a spark from the
furnace; but the love of God in Christ is as the heat of the furnace: and as
the heat (you know) consumes stubble, and combustible matter put into it, so
there is that heat in the love of God shed abroad in the heart by Christ, that
consumes the lust of the heart, and the soul grows up into holiness thereby.

It is with the heart of a Believer, as it is with the fruits of the earth,
you know, that the frost may keep down some weeds, but it is the sunshine, it
is the beams of the sun, and the warm beams that makes the fruit to ripen and
to grow up, that fruit that grows in the sun is soonest ripe, your grass that
grows in the orchard is sour and the beast will not eat it, and other herbs
that grow in the shade comes to no maturity, nor to be so good as those that
grow in the sun, fruit that grows upon the wall, how quickly does that grow
ripe, whereas the other that grows in the shade withers; so there are some that
live altogether under Legal fears, and trouble of conscience perhaps they have
sometimes fruit but it is sour fruit, it is not so sweet fruit as comes from
those that are under the sunshine of the Gospel, that have the shine of the
love of God upon their hearts, their fruit is sweet, and they thrive better,
and look more lovely and live a more amiable and lovely life then the lives of
others. And this is another way, how Christ comes to be our sanctification in
shedding abroad the love of God into the heart; and that the scripture is full
of, how the love of God is shed abroad in Jesus Christ.

Ninthly, Christ is our Sanctification in this respect, because all the promises
of the Gospel are made to us in him he is the foundation of all the promises
that are in the Gospel, they are al made good in him, they have a boundance of
sanctifying power in them, Christ is our sanctification, I say, because it is
through him that the promises are made, which has a mighty sanctifying power.
As for the First? In 2. Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him Amen unto the glory of God by us. All the promises of God in him are
yea and in him amen: al Gospel promises are made unto us by christ and that is
a very useful and a notable meditation, to consider of al promises that they
come unto us from Christ, an excellent meditation to set out the excellency of
Jesus Christ that in him are all the promises, they are in him yea, what is the
meaning of that? That is they are confirmed to us in Christ, in him they are
made certain to us, they are made good in him, or as some of your books read it
thus, For all the promises of God in him are yea, and I find it is, I know not
whether it be in your books, but Calvin, Beza, and other interpreters say, it
is read in some copies thus, Therefore in him let them be yea and Amen, unto
the glory of God by us. All the promises of God in him are yea, that is, they
are made certain things in Christ as the foundation, therefore (...); so Beza
says it is read, therefore, let them be Amen in him unto the praise of God.
That is, as God has made al promises in him as certain, so let us look upon
Christ, and see the promises of God in him, and believe in them, and so by our
faith say Amen unto the promises that are made in him unto the glory of God, so
shall we Glorify God, when we shall look upon the promises by our faith, and
say, Amen unto our souls. Now the word, Amen signifies firm and sure, that
is, the meaning of the word Amen. Sometimes it signifies at the end of our
prayer, so be it, Amen, it is an Hebrew word that signifies, so be it, let it
be, O Lord, as we have prayed, and according to thy promise, that is the
meaning of the word Amen, when you conclude your prayer with Amen. It is a word
that is used for faith, and it is the expression of faith after we have made
our prayer, and that is the meaning here, therefore all the promises in him are
yea, they are made in Christ and affirmed in Christ as certain, therefore in
him let them be Amen unto the soul, let them be as firm and certain things
unto us, for us to rest upon, unto the glory of God by us, and thereby shall we
glorify God, ye have so many precious promises in Christ, but now they are
unto the glory of God by us, we by faith say Amen to them, and we make them as
firm and sure unto our souls by the exercise of our faith upon them. So you
may understand in some measure this scripture, which has exceeding much in it,
thus you see by Christ the promises are made to us.

Quest. I but you will say, How does this help our sanctification.

Answ. I answer, exceeding much, there is nothing helps the sanctification of
the soul of a believer, more then the promises of the Gospel, those that are
exercised in the promises of the Gospel, they grow more abundantly in
sanctification then others. The promises of the Gospel are channels, not only
of mercy for our salvation, but of holiness for our sanctification, and for
that you have a most excellent scripture, 2. Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these
promises, dearly beloved let us cleanse our selves from al filthiness of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. It is as full a scripture as
I know any, here you may see, what use the holy Ghost would have you make of
the promises of the Gospel, and of mercy. It may be you think that seeing there
is such promises of mercy you may take more liberty to the flesh, but that is
not the reasoning of the spirit, he would not take more liberty thereby, but
seeing we have such promises, says he, let us cleanse our selves from al
filthiness, filthiness cannot stand with believing of promises. And mark, he
says, from al filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit. So that it is not
enough for you to say, you have as good a heart toward God as any others, I
thank God my heart is right, my spirit is right, I but you must cleanse from al
filthiness of the flesh, as well as of the spirit, and these promises if you
have the right use of them, they will be mighty clensing. And mark, from al
filthiness, it is not enough to cleanse from some gross filthiness, that is,
that you do not live in the grost sins that others of the world live in, and
that your neighbors live in, that you are not whoremungers, drunkards cheaters,
prophaners of the saboth, and the like, but these promises will cleanse from al
filthiness, that is, there shall be no filthiness that shall stick to you as to
the wicked and ungodly, but it will cleanse gradually, by degrees from al
Filthiness of the flesh. And spirit, or of spirit, not to make you make
conscience of wicked actions, but cleanse you from your very thoughts, these
promises will cleanse from the filthiness of the flesh. I perhaps they may a
little serve the turn for them, I but from the filthiness of the spirit, the
filthiness of the thoughts, the Filthiness of the affections, those inward
spiritual wickednesses. Of pride, malice, and the like. May be you would count
it a vild thing to be accused of whordom, the Filthiness of the flesh, I but
what say you to the filthiness of the spirit, of pride, malice, distrust,
earthly mindedness, and such like, these promises are to cleanse from the
filthiness of the spirit, as well as of the flesh. And then perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, it makes them fear God more, and then it perfects
holiness, such a one as is acquainted with the promises of the Gospel, is
content with no measure of holiness, but grows higher and higher til he comes
to perfection. Here you see the use of promises, what a clensing nature
promises have, Oh my brethren, be much exercised in promises, lay up promises,
if you would get power over your corruptions.

And then one scripture more for this is that, in 2. Pet. 1.4. Whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises. The promises of the Gospel
they are precious, more worth then a world, a believer that knows the
preciousness of the promises, accounts more of them then of his estate. What do
you account precious? that you may have your ships laden home with precious
things, I but to have your hearts filled with precious promises, it is far
better then these. But now, wherein do these promises appear to be so
precious? It appears by this, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature,
that by these great and precious promises you might be partakers of the divine
nature, that is of holiness of sanctification, that is called the divine
nature, having escaped the corruptions that is in the world through lust. By
these the soul escapes the corruption that is in the world by lust, and not
only escapes the corruption of the world, that is, does not live so wickedly as
others do, but comes to be made partaker of the divine nature through these
promises. So that Christ is the rest of sanctification, because in him al
promises are made, they have a mighty clensing virtue to sanctify the heart,
you would willingly have interest in promises, and have the mercy that the
promise holds forth, now as you would have the interest in the promises, and
have the mercy that the promises holds forth, so you must labor to feel the
efficacy of the promises to cleanse your hearts and make you partaker of the
divine nature.

Tenthly, Christ is sanctification, because in him all the ordinances are
effectual, the ordinances are effectual only in Christ, Christ gave his
ordinances unto his Church at first, and then they come to be effectual through
him, It is not what you come to hear in the word, but how much of Christ you
have in the word, you come to the sacrament, it is not what you partake of
there, but what of Christ you get there, it is not what you partake of there,
but what of Christ you get there, it is Christ in the word, sacrament, and
prayer, that is the efficacy of all the ordinances, the ordinances are but al as
the vehiculum Christi, the conveyance of Christ unto the soul. And therefore we
should when we come to any ordinance think with our selves, what have we of
Christ, what have we of Christ here? have we met with any thing of Christ here?
In the word, prayer, sacraments, has my heart been drawn nearer to Christ in
them? For certain it is, that it is Christ, that is the virtue and kernel of all the ordinances. Hence it is that those that are acquainted with Christ, and
have been brought to him, they come to profit more in one month now by the
ordinances, then they did in all their lives. Before the ordinances were as
empty things, and liveless things to you, but in Christ they come now to be
made effectual.

Eleventhly, Christ is our sanctification, by sending the holy Ghost into our
hearts, for the holy Ghost comes from the father and the son, we can never
expect the saving work of the holy Ghost, nor the sanctifying work of the holy
Ghost, but through Christ, for so Christ says in that place in John 16.14.
concerning the spirit He says he will send his spirit, He shall glorify me for
he shall receive of mine. The spirit, the holy Ghost does receive of Christ,
when he comes into the heart, therefore if there be any sanctification by the
Holy Ghost, it must be through Christ, he must receive of Christ, he works from
the father and from the son. And therefore the scripture has that phrase, We
are baptized into one spirit, that is by being baptized into Christ, having the
inward work of baptism, we are made partakers now of that one spirit, the Holy
Ghost. Now such is the excellency of sanctification, as it cannot be wrought by
any natural means, but it must have the Holy Ghost to be sent into the heart,
and therefore the saints are said to be the temple of the Holy Ghost. Now what
ever work of the Holy Ghost there is required for sanctification that must be
in and through Christ, and from Christ. The Holy Ghost never comes to sanctify
any, but the members of Jesus Christ, for he is the spirit of Christ, as well as
of the father, and never comes to any but to the members of Christ in this work
of sanctification.

There are some common gifts of Gods spirit, that the heathens have, but for
this gift of true holiness it is only in the members of Christ, that the holy
Ghost does come into.

Lastly, Christ is our sanctification by his Kingly power, swaying his scepter
in our hearts, and ruling there, subduing our lusts as a king subdues rebels,
and walking and governing the hearts of his people. Christ does exercise a
kingly power when any soul does believe, when Christ comes into any heart, he
comes into the heart to exercise a kingly power there, to set up his throne in
a kingly manner, and by this he comes to sanctify the heart, and give rest.
And, as in a kingdom, there are mutinies, seditions, and the like, so in the
hearts of sinners, there are mutinies and seditions, even against God himself.
But now, whenas the king sends forth power, that very power prevails against
al things, if it prevail in a way of justice, al things are brought into right
and due order again: So here, when Christ comes into the heart as king of
righeousness, and then as king of peace, hereby he comes to bring rest and
quiet unto the heart by his kingly power. Carnal hearts, they think, that the
kingly power of Christ would be a disturbance to Christians, but certainly, the
government of Christ in the heart brings the only rest and quiet unto the soul.
Now these and several other particulars might be named, but joining these with
the other that went before, you may see, how Christ is res^ unto the soul in
sanctification, and thus we have done with that particular.

CHAP. XLI.
Six Consequences from the former Doctrine. I. The difference between believers
and the state in Adam. II. We see the difference between Civility and true
holiness. III. We see the reason why so many Vows and Covenants to live holily
come to nothing. IIII. It is impossible for any to be a member of Christ, and
not be holy. V. Be not hindered from coming to Christ, albeit you have not so
much holiness as you desire. VI. Hence we learn how to Understand Christ
aright.

NOW there are diverse consequences that flow from hence. As,

I. Hence we may see the difference between the condition of believers now, and
that in Adam, and we may see that believers are in a better condition then Adam
was Why? because the image of God in which Adam was made, it may be said to be
natural, that is, that only comes from God the creator, from him making him a
creature, and giving him the perfection that was suitable to the nature of a
rational creature, there was all the holiness that Adam had. All the holiness and
righteousness that was in Adam, was but only that that was suitable unto a
rational creature in such a condition, and when he had it, then he was to
trade, as it were, with that stock himself, and to live by the stock that God
gave him at first, only a general concourse of Gods providence there was, so
long as he did continue to obey God, that Gods providence should go along with
him, and uphold him in his estate, And this was the estate of Adam.

But now the holiness and righteousness that the saints have, comes from
another principle, it comes not from God as creator merely, but from God
through a mediator, from God through his son, it comes through Christ and it is
a partaking of the spirit of Christ, and of the father, and the holy Ghost in
Christ. We do not read of such a kind of work in Adam, only the text faith, the
Lord made him according to his own Image, but that he should have his holiness
through union of the second person in trinity, and through the spirit that is
sent into him by the father and the son, and to be made a temple of the holy
Ghost we read not. He had the principle of holiness to be in himself, but we
have our principle of holiness in Christ still, we are not trusted with our
holiness though holiness be conveyed to believers, yet they are not be trusted
with the principle of their holiness, but it is in Christ still. But Adam was
not so, Adam so long as he stood God would go on with a concourse of his
providence with him, but God never made such a covenant with Adam, that he
should have a principle of holiness laid up in his son and that by faith he
should fetch out this principle of Holiness.

I will show you the difference between the state of Adam and a believer, by
this similitude; a father puts a stock into his sons hand, but so, as he tells
him, here is your portion, I will give you your portion, go and trade with it
as well as you can, but you are never like to have any further from me, but only
what you get by this stock: This was the state of Adam, God gave Adam a stock
of holiness, a stock of righteousness at First, and bid Adam trade with it and
that that he should have to live upon should be that that he got by that stock,
and that's al. But now it is true, we have al lost that stock, and turned
banckrupt, now God is pleased to set up some of mankind again, there are others
that must perish eternally, and be cast into prison, and there rot in prison
eternally, but to some God is pleased to give another stock, yet so, that he
will not trust them with it wholly, but thus, he gives them Grace, and bids them
go and trade with it, but so as he gives them it by little and little, and
reserves the maine stock in his Sons hand, and says, go and trade with this,
and as you want come to Christ, if you have any losses in your Trade come to my
Son, and you shall have it made up again, you must give account to my Son every
day. And now one that is set up and has a little stock, but so that he must
give account to his Father every day, and then he being faithful though he have
losses he will make up his loss, and such a course is taken as he shall never
break again, for he shall have a continual supply in his Fathers hands, or
unkles hands, or friends hand, and this is the case of believers, though it is
true, they are not made so perfectly holy as Adam was; we have not so great a
stock as Adam, but our stock is better, for together with our stock of holiness
we have a supply from Jesus Christ, and that we have shall be taken care of by
him, that we shall not loose what we have, and if there be the least impairing
of what we have, he will make it up again. So that our holiness comes now from
another stock, is upheld by another principle then then ever Adams was, and
this is the Reason why the Saints never fall as Adam did, because the holiness
that they have can never decay, they can never turn banckrupt so as Adam did,
but they have the principle from Christ, the water of life that shall flow into
their hearts from Christ eternally.

II. Another Consequent that follows from our Rest in our Sanctification in
Christ is this, hence we see the difference between civility, or Morality, and
true holiness, true Sanctification, you have heard, I suppose, Ministers speak
of civil Men, and men that have mere morality, and live civilly, I make no
Question but you have wondered what they have meant, what is this morallity? We
hear Ministers speak of Morral men, such a one is a good Morral man, or such a
one is a civil man, what would they have more? Would they not have men civil?
Do they not live inoffensively? Pay every one their own, they do no wrong, they
come to Church and serve God, what would they have more? And yet we hear
Ministers say, this is not enough, to be civil, and not to live in scandalous
sins as others do, this is not enough. Now it is true, this is not enough, and
by that which you have heard out of this point, you may discern that it is not
enough, and that there is more required then so, and by this you may know the
difference between your civil and moral man, and those that have true holiness
and Sanctification. Your civil man and moral man, he has restraining Grace,
that keeps in his Corruption, and what he does it is through strength of
Reason, he sees in Reason that to live in such a wicked course as others do, to
Lie, Swear, Drink, be unclean, Cheat and Cozen, the light of Nature teaches
that this is a sin. And so the Heathen, the moral Philosophers, that is, those
that by the light of Nature saw the evil of such notorious vices, and saw what
the Rules of Nature were for the guiding of their manners. So I say your civil
men, they have improved somewhat of the light of Nature, they see by the light
of Nature that they must not live in such and such sins as others do, and it is
better to live justly, yea, and to be bountiful to the poor, many reach so far,
I but all this goes no further then the common light of Nature, then the
prudence and Reason of a man as a rational creature may carry him to.

Quest. You will say what is more?

Answ. This is more, there must be Sanctification of the Heart through the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, there must be a principle of Grace that must come
into the Heart, as a fruit of the Second Covenant that God has made with
sinners in Jesus Christ, through the mistical union that the Soul has with
Jesus Christ, this is higher. Now when a Soul comes beyond civillity, it is
wrought upon by God after this manner. I come now to see the breach that there
is between God and my Soul, what my estate is by Nature, that I am a Child of
wrath, I am dead in sins and trespasses, though I have not lived so wickedly as
such and such have done, yet I see my self a Child of wrath, and an heir of
Hell and death notwithstanding all that I have done. And I see that only
through the blessed Mediation of Jesus Christ this breach is made up, and I can
only have union with God through him, and his Spirit of Sanctification that
must come to my Soul, through the Covenant of the Gospel, I must have my Heart
raised up to God in an other manner, not only to live civilly but holily, to
have the Image of God renewed in me through the Spirit of Christ, and so to
live the life of Christ, and feel continual supply to come to my Heart through
Christ, to feed upon the promises through the Covenant of Grace, and thereby to
have my Heart Quickened more and more, and to perfect my holiness in the fear of
God through the promises of the Gospel, This is more then the civil and mere
morral man can come unto.

Your civil man is known, First, In this, that what he does is merely according
to common prudence and light of Nature.

Secondly, The chief of his Religion it is in Negatives, that he is not so bad
as other men.

And Thirdly, If he have any thing positive, it is but in outward actions,
serving of God, but as for being acquainted with the mystery of Godliness, and
power of holiness, of the necessity of a Mediator, of the need of continual
supply of Grace from Jesus Christ, this he sees not. And further, This civil
man he is not burdened with Corruption, with the remainer of corruption, but
thinks himself in a very good condition. Indeed he says, he must be saved by
Jesus Christ, but I put this to any civil man in the world, what need do
thou Find of Jesus Christ for thy sanctification? art thou so burdened with
those inward corruptions in thy spirit, that the world can take no notice of?
And do thou go groaning under thy Corruption, so as to see the need of the
mediation of Jesus Christ, a supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ to help thee
against thy Corruption, and sanctify thy heart, this thou art not acquainted
withal, this is a point above thee, and therefore in this point we come to see
the difference between civility and true holiness. We come to see by this, that
Godliness and holiness it is a mystery. The scripture speaks of a mystery of
Godliness, and of the power of Godliness, and Godliness is therefore powerful,
because it is a mystery. If we must have our holiness from Christ as a mediator
that Christ is first filled wsth holiness, and our souls by faith must draw
our holiness from him, then certainly Godliness is a mystery, the Godliness
that must save souls is a mystery, beyond that which ordinary men of the world
understand. Few understand what is the way of God in conveyance of grace unto
the souls of those that he intends eternal life unto.

The way of God in conveyance of grace unto the soul, is not this, in giving
you reason to understand that such and such things are naught, and therefore
for your own ease and quiet in the world you must live civilly, but the way of
God is to reveal his son to you, and reveal a necessity of union with Christ,
to be made a member of him, and to draw virtue from him as from a head, and to
see a fountain of life from him flowing into thy heart continually, so as to
repair to Jesus Christ the second person in trinity, made man for thy soul. I
say, to repair to him as the fountain of al grace to be conveied from him unto
the soul, here is the mystery of holiness that is beyond all the civility and
morality in the world. Oh that you did but by this point understand somewhat of
the mystery of Godliness and that it might cause but some suspicious thoughts
in the hearts of those that have lived but civilly and morally, that for many
years together it may be have bin good neighbors, pay every one their own and
no body can accuse them for wrong, but Oh that they would bethink themselves,
well, I have lived thus and thus long, but has my soul bin acquainted with the
mystery of the Gospel, to fetch virtue from Christ as a mediator? And have I a
stock of grace from him to trade by, that what I trade by I have from him? Have
I found the burden of my inward corruption? And have I got ease and rest by
virtue of the promises of the Gospel? And have I searched into the Covenant of
Grace, and found there promises to convey comfort unto my soul? Has my heart
been exercised after this manner? Certainly, if thou have not, thou know not
what the way of the Gospel is, what an evangelical life is, what is a true
evangelical life. When the soul is enabled to live upon Christ, that thou
feel thy heart live upon Christ, sucking and drawing virtue from Christ, for
the mortifying of thy corruptions and quickening thy heart in the way of
holiness, this is a true evangelical life, and that is another consequence
drawn from this, That Godliness is a mystery, and beyond civility and morality.

III. Another Consequence that may be drawn is this: Hence then we may see the
reason that many people, their vows and Covenants to live better then they
have done, does so often come to nothing; our Sanctification is in Christ, our
overcoming of corruption it is by virtue of Christ, then from hence, I say, we
see plainly the reason, why the vows and covenants of so many people, that do
promise in the time of their sickness, or when they are in any danger at sea to
live better. Oh, say they, if ever God restore us, they will never live as they
have done, they will live better then heretofore they have done, and though they
do not speak thus for the present to deceive people, but speak what they do
intend, their hearts are fully resolved to leave their sins, and to live
better, yet when they are restored they live as before, when they come to land,
whatever promise they made at sea yet they live as before. What is the reason
of this? Because they are not acquainted with the mystery of Godliness, they
know not how to fetch strength from Christ to enable them to keep their
resolutions, they do not know where the stock of grace lies. They depend upon
their own resolutions and promises, they do not see the strength that should
come from Christ, and hence it is that al their vows and covenants come to
nothing. As we read of Sampson, he said, after his strength was gone from him,
that he would go forth as before, but the Lord was departed from him: So you
think, if God restore you, you will live better, and overcome your corruptions,
you will not live as before, I but the strength of Christ is not with you, you
do not know that the strength of Christ is departed from you.

Adam had grace from God as the creator, it is not for us to pray to God for
grace as creator of al things, but we must seek God in Christ, and see how the
fullness of all the Godhead dwells bodily in him, and so we come to have strength
against our corruptions.

I remember a German Divine writing to his friend, professes that before he
understood the way of the Gospel, he had vowed and covenanted a thousand times
against some sins, and could never overcome them, but after the Lord revealed
to him the way of the Gospel, that al strength comes in by exercising faith in
Christ, and seeing the father giving his son to supply al grace, and exercising
faith in the Covenant of grace, he found strength against his corruptions, so
that he was able very comfortably to walk with God in the ways of holiness. So
Christians that understand the way the Gospel will find abundance of power
against their corruptions, more then they did with all their striving and pains
taking before; though we should strive and take al pains we can, yet we must
know that this will not do it, without the exercise of faith in Christ, for the
helping of us against our corruptions.

IIII. From hence follows also, that it is impossible any should be a member
of Christ, but he must needs be holy, because Christ is our sanctification,
Christ is Filled full of holiness, that holiness might be conveyed to his
members; therefore those that have yet their lusts in the strength of them,
that have not the rest of sanctification in some measure, surely the spirit of
Christ is not in them these cannot stand together, to be a member of Christ,
and yet to walk in Filthiness, these cannot stand together. For Christ is the
great prophet that teaches, and the great King of his Church to govern, and
certainly whatsoever is brought to him, must be taught of him, and governed by
him, it is impossible to have communion with the fountain of al holiness, and
yet for all that to live under the power of sin, this cannot be.

V. From hence follows likewise, That for any to be hindered in their coming
to Christ, because they have not that measure of holiness that they desire,
this is a great temptation for any soul that sees the want of grace, the want
of sanctification, and labors under the burden of corruption, for any such
soul to be hindered in the coming of it unto Christ, because it has not what
grace it does desire, this is a very strong and a dangerous temptation of the
devil, which we are to take heed of. It is a most irrational temptation, and
yet this is that that many poor souls are troubled withal, they think thus,
when we exhort them to come to Christ, alas, what should I do, poor creature, I
am so vild, I have such a wicked and sinful heart, how should I come to him?
were I thus and thus, had I power over my corruptions as others have, then I
could be bold to come to Christ. Now what a temptation is this? Christ says,
come and I will give you rest, you say, if I had rest I would come. Christ is
the fountain of al holiness, therefore to be kept off from Christ, because I
want holiness, is a very great temptation; it is the work of the Devil, should
I be kept off from Christ for want of holiness, when Christ is appointed by God
the father to convey holiness unto the heart, to renew the image of God in me,
and to draw it more beautifully then ever it was before?

Remember the point you have heard, that Christ is our sanctification and al
holiness comes from him, therefore surely my want of holiness shall not drive
him from me; but draw me to him. Let me not say as Peter, Master depart from
me, for I am a sinful man, the truth is he should rather have said, Master,
come to me, for I am a sinful man. So many poor souls will say. Lord, I cannot
come to Christ, because I am so sinful, thou should come to him the rather
because thou art so sinful.

VI. From hence we learn how to understand Christ aright, and how to believe
in Christ aright; some people, they understand Christ only as a savior, that
they must be pardoned by Christ, and saved by him, and delivered from hell by
him, but you must understand him to be sanctification to you also, you must
trust in Christ to sanctify you, as well as save you, if you understand Christ
aright, you must understand him to be a sanctifyer, as well as a savior and if
thou beleevest in Christ aright, thou beleevest in Christ as a sanctifier as
well as a savior; and thus much of the conseqences, that follow from the Rest of
sanctification in Christ.

CHAP. XLII.
Contains an exhortation to come to Christ, wherein Three hindrances are
removed, And six encouragments laid down. First, The Union between Christ and a
believer. Secondly, From the great Love of Christ. Thirdly, Corruption is the
burden of Christ as well as of a sinner. Fourthly, He Healed the bodies of many,
he will much more the soul. Fifthly he knows what it is to be Tempted. Sixthly,
It is for the Honor of the Death, Resu^rection and Life of Christ to give
Holiness.

NOW for the last thing that I propounded, To exhort and draw believers to come
to Christ, and in this I shall endeavor to take away the many hindrances of
the soul in coming to Christ for sanctification, and also give some
encouragements to the heart to come to Christ for sanctification.

You see, here is the way to get power over corruption, and to get grace,
namely to come to Christ, Yea say you if I knew I were a member of Christ, and
had interest in Christ then I could come to Christ for power over my
corruption, and for grace, but I am afraid I have no interest in him.

1. For answer to that, which is the main stop and hinderance of faith, know
that if thou have but a heart to come to him for grace that is as good a sign
of thy interest in Christ as any sign thou have, that is as good a sign of
evidence of interest, as any thou can expect.

2. You must come to him for grace, and if thou have not interest before, yet
thy very coming to him now for grace to help thee against corruption, that
very act of thine may give thee interest in Christ. What is it that unites thee
to Christ? what is it that makes a member of Christ? what is it that gives
interest in Christ? It is but the coming to him, as you heard before in the
point.

Quest. Is you will say, If I had a right to him.

If thou come now to Christ, to get power over thy corruption, and to get
grace, I say, though thou had no interest before, this very act may give thee
interest in Christ, and therefore be not discouraged but come to Christ.

3. Will thou stay til thou do find power against thy corruption, before thou will come to him, then thou will never have power against thy corruption, for
you have heard, that it is Christ that is the foundation of thy sanctification.

And then for encouragements, there are a great many excellent encouragements
for poor sinners to come unto Christ.

First, The consideration of the near union that there is between Christ and
us, in regard of his very humane nature. That place in Heb. 2.11. is a very
notable scripture for our encouragement. For both he that sanctifies and they
that are sanctified are al one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, He that sanctifies, and those that are sanctified are al one, what
is that. That is, Christ is of the same nature that thou art, Christ has taken
our nature upon him, and the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily in him, so
that thou may go with the more boldness. He that is thy brother, is not
ashamed to be called thy brother, and therefore do not look upon him as at such
an infinite distance as thy judge, but look upon him as thy brother, as one
with him. He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all one, Thou
and Christ together are one body. Now what encouragement is here to expect
Sanctification from Christ to overcome corruption because Christ and you are
made one body, of the same Nature, and so nearly united and made one.

Secondly, Consider that if Christ did love thee so dearly as to lay down his
life for thee, surely he will never suffer thee to perish in thy corruptions,
shall Christ come down from Heaven, and lay down his life for poor Souls, and
shall he suffer them to die under their corruptions? Now if a many should be
willing to lay down his life for a Child and he should come and see the Child
lie in the dirt, ready to be stifled in the dirt, could he go by and not regard
the Child? This is our case, Christ has come and laid down his life for poor
sinners, but yet they see themselves ready to be stifled by their corruptions
and they cry to him for help, surely Christ will not pass by and let thee lie in
thy filthyness, to be stifled in thy corruption when thou wast so dear to him,
as to lay down his life for thee.

Thirdly, Another encouragement is this, know, that thy corruptions are the
burdens of Christ as well as thy burdens, they are burdens to thy Soul, and
burdens to Jesus Christ, and therefore he does certainly pity thee under them,
and will help thee.

Fourthly, If Christ had so much pity as to heal the bodies of poor creatures
here in this world, so that there was no diseased body that ever come to him,
but he healed them, surely then Christ will heal Souls, Christ has more regard
to immortal Souls then to bodies.

Fifthly, Christ knows what it is to be tempted, for Christ had no Corruption
in him, yet Christ knows what it is to be tempted, and Christ knows by his own
experience what a Burden it is to be tempted to sin, and surely Christ cannot
but know what a Burden it is to be overcome with sin. Now Christ himself had
the Burden of being tempted unto sin, and Christ knows that thy Burden is
greater then his burden was, and that it is more to be overcome then to be
tempted to sin, and therefore he knows how to pity thee.

Sixthly, Know it is to the Honor of the Death of Christ, the Resurrection of
Christ, and the life of Christ, to help thee against thy Corruptions, and
quicken thee in Grace. Christ accounts his resurrection and life, to be
honored, when he sees the virtue and power of it to be in the Hearts of
believers. Wherefore then, if it be to the Honor of the Death, and
resurrection, and life of Christ, it may be encouragement to thee to go to him
for help against thy corruptions. And this remember when thou art upon duty,
and begging for help against thy corruptions, carry this Rule with thee. I come
to pray against my sins, but together with my prayer, let me act my Faith. I
come to hear the word, I but together with my hearing, let me act my Faith upon
Christ as Mediator to help me against my corruptions. I come to the Sacrament,
but I come to have communion with Christ to help me against my corruptions. Oh!
act thy Faith in the promises of the Gospel, through the blessed Covenant, and
thou shall find abundance of strength against thy corruption, and Rest unto thy
Soul.

CHAP. XLIII.
Contains the Conclusion of the former Doctrine of Sanctification, with diverse
directions how to come to Christ for holiness. I. Be sensible of the want of
it. II. Be not satisfied with the ordinances further then you meet with Christ.
III. Come not so much for comfort and peace as for holiness. IV. Be sensible of
new supplies. V. Converse with Christ in the Gospel.

I Shall now only add a word or two for the concluding of this, and so go on to
the next rest that is here promised.

Come to Christ for the Rest of Sanctification, for holiness, for the truth is,
there is no true holiness, but that which we have by our coming to Christ. The
Scripture speaks of true holiness, there may be abstaining from many sins, and
performance of many duties, but no saving holiness, but that that is had from
God through Christ as Mediator, no true holiness til the Soul comes to be
acquainted with Christ, and have it that way, and the holiness that we have by
exercising of Faith upon Christ as the Head of the Covenant, that indeed is the
mystery of godliness, that is the true godliness, that is godliness in a
mystery, which the world is not acquainted with, that is the power of
godliness, the powerful holiness that comes by Christ. And indeed that is the
Reason why there is so much strength of Grace in the Hearts of the Saints,
because they have it from Christ, it is from the spirit of Jesus Christ that is
in him, and Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, his spirit is a spirit of
might. Common gifts have not that strength as this holiness that comes from
Christ has, the holiness that is from Christ, that is the only supernatural
holiness, it is that that is the divine Nature, whereas that kind of abstaining
from sin and performing of duties, that civil men have, and that comes in by
common gifts, that is not the divine Nature, they have it but in a natural way,
what they have is by strength of Reason and argument, but that which comes in
by the exercise of Faith in Christ, that is supernatural, that is of a divine
Nature, and that is abundant, abundant is the holiness that the Soul comes to
have in exercising of Faith in Christ. In drawing of Grace from Christ the
Heart grows more in the way of Holiness, it exercises much more Faith in
Christ, in a little time, then it did in a long time before, though perhaps
those were truly godly before and members of Christ yet for want of a right
understanding how all Grace comes from God through Christ, and so drawing of it
that way, they did not thrive in the ways of Godliness. That text in the 3 of
the Ephesians and the 17. Is most admirable for this, the Apostle prays. That
Christ might dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in
Love. there is the strength of Grace, when Christ dwells in our heart, That you
may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and length and
depth and height, and to know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, that
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. Here is the fruit of it, that
you might be filled with all the fullness of God, a strange speech, had it not
been in Scripture who durst have expressed himself thus that by coming to know
God in Christ, you may come to be filled with all the fullness of God in Christ.
It were very much to say thus, by knowing God in Christ, you may come to have
God, that is somewhat, but secondly that you may come to be filled with God,
that is more, But Thirdly, That ye may come to be filled with the fullness of
God, that is yet more, yea, Fourthly, That you may come to be filled with all
the fullness of God. What a gradation is here, that shows the admirable use of
knowing God in Christ. Whereas now, other men and women, that only are taught
in their childhood to serve God, they must serve God, and they are restrained
from many sins, and they perform duties, they will pray, and come to hear, but
not being acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel, and drawing holiness from
God through Christ, how far are those from having this text made good in their
hearts, that is, from being filled with all the fullness of God. Whereas
afterward they come to have more clear understanding of the mystery of
Godlyness from Christ: then they come to enjoy communion with God more then
ever they did, whereas before they were strangers to God, now they have
communion with him* yea, now they feel Gods fullness come more fully into their
hearts then before, now they feel a fullness from God, and so come by degrees
to be* what is said in this text, to be filled with all the fullness of God.

The reason of all the emptiness, scantiness, and barrenness that is in your
heart, is for want of understanding, how God has filled Christ with all
fullness, from whom we are to receive grace for grace, and by drawing grace
from Christ we come to have permanent holiness and lasting holiness, and this
indeed is the reason, as heretofore ye have heard, why the grace of the saints
endures for ever, and they can never fail, whereas the grace of Adam did
fail, because the one comes from God through Christ, and the other did not,
that did not come from God through a mediator so as this did, and therefore
this is permanent and the other is not. But of that I spoke before, only we
bring it in now, as a further motive to make us seek for holiness in Jesus
Christ, this rest of sanctification.

Some rules I will briefly propound by way of direction as helps in seeking of
grace and sanctification in Christ. As,

First, Labor to get a sense of your want of holiness and of your need of
Christ for it.

Secondly, in the exercising of your selves in the ordinances, be not satisfied
with the ordinances, any further then you meet with Christ, be not satisfied
with a prayer, or with hearing, but think with your selves, what have I of
Christ here, that I told you in the opening of the point, how Christ was the
sanctification of the heart, because the blessing of all the ordinances is by
having Christ there. There are two or three things more that I would commend
unto you.

The First, Is this, in seeking Christ do not come so much for enlargement, for
comfort, for peace, as for sanctification, you seek your peace for holiness,
rather then seek holiness for peace, this is a special rule of direction to
thrive in seeking for sanctification by Christ. Many Christians, they seek to
have Christ, but why? that they might have peace, that they might have comfort,
and they make their holiness but subservient to their peace and comfort, They
think thus, except I be holy, I cannot have peace, therefore I will labor for
holiness that I might have peace. But a true gracious heart will rather say
thus, the more holiness I have, the more peace I have, and therefore, I will
labor for peace, that I might have holiness, One labors for holiness, that he
might have peace, and the other labors for peace, that he might have holiness,
Now those Christians that labor rather for peace, that they might have
holiness, will more thrive then the other, that labors for holiness, that they
might have peace. It is true indeed, it is one good motion to labor for
holiness, because it will bring peace, I but it is a stronger motive, to labor
for peace that we might have holiness therefore when we seek to Christ, we
should seek rather for holiness and sanctification from Christ, then that we
might have peace.

Would you know the reasons you say, you tell us that Christ is our
sanctification, but we have not found such sanctification from Christ to
increase holiness; but what is the Reason? you have exercised your faith upon
Christ mainly that you might have peace, that you might have enlargement and
comfort as others have, and that is the reason that your holiness is scant, if
you had exercised your faith in Christ that you might have holiness, then you
might have had more peace. Says Christ, be it unto thee according to thy
faith, so in this case, Christ says to every believer, be it according to thy
faith, according to what you exercise your faith, so be it unto you. As, do you
exercise your faith for peace and comfort, and mainly for that? you have some
peace and comfort, but you shall not have so much holiness: but do you exercise
your faith for holiness most? then you shall have most holiness. Now certainly a
true christian prizeth holiness rather than peace, and I know no surer argument
for the truth of grace, and the difference between an hipocrite, and one that
has true grace, than this, the hipocrite would have holiness that he might
have peace, I but the true believer would have peace, that his peace might
increase his holiness.

Secondly, Another rule is this, Though Christ does give in grace, increase of
sanctification and holiness, yet do not depend upon what Christ gives in for
the present, but still keep thy heart sensible of the need of new supplies.
There is many Christians, when they have been at duty, and have exercised faith
upon Christ for this rest of sanctification, and have got somewhat, some
enlargement, and some quickening of spirit, and some resolution in the way of
God, here they rest, and now they think they are well, they think to live upon
this stock a great while. But now we are to pray for our daily bread, and to
depend upon Christ for new supplies of grace and holiness, every day, every
moment, according to every work that we are set about, to go to Christ for new
supplies, as if we had nothing at al given us before, and Christ will be well
pleased with this, that though we have never so much Grace, yet to go to him to
renew our faith, as if we had none at all, that i^, as strongly; I do not mean
that we should apprehend that we have none at all, but as strongly and eagerly
to exercise faith upon Christ for new supply of holiness, as if we had none at
all, and indeed those that seem to have none, exercise Faith in Christ most.

Thirdly, For Conclusion of all, take this as a Rule, Those Christians that do
most converse with Jesus Christ in the blessed way of the Gospel, those will
increase most in Grace, and they have this by way of Sanctification: I will give
you but only that one Scripture, in way of allusion to apply it to this, in
Acts, 4 13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived
they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of
them that they had been with Jesus. Peter and John, had much boldness, they had
strength of Grace, they had much boldness notwithstanding all their opposition.
But how came they by it, they were unlearned men, ignorant men, poor weak men
in regard of their naturals, and yet they had got abundance of Grace, so as to
make their profession of Christ with boldness, notwithstanding all the rage of
their potent adversaries, and the people wondered how they could get such
strength as they had, but says the text, they took knowledge of them, that they
had been with Jesus. It was that that did so raise their spirits, it was that
quickened them, and enlarged their Hearts so much with Grace that they had been
with Jesus, that they had conversed boldly with Christ. Now I would apply this
in a spiritual sense, that as Peter and John did grow to that height and
strength of Grace by conversing bodily with Christ, much more may Christians
grow to a height, strength and fullness of Grace by much converse with Jesus
Christ. Converse with Christ in a way of Faith, and that will mightily enlarge
thy Heart in Grace. And the truth is, when you see any Christian, that perhaps
his natural parts may be but weak, but yet you see him grow in Grace mightily,
he has a mighty large Heart for God, and has much spirit in prayer, and his
conversation is very holy and convincing, you may conclude this man and this
woman to have been with Jesus Christ, that is, converst much with Jesus Christ.
Would you know whence it is that you see many poor Christians not long since,
how they have grown in holiness, and you think they have got a great deal more
than you have got, they can depend upon God more, and can rejoice in
tribulation more, and they have more spiritualness, and more Savor in their
conversation, and find a great deal more sweetness in the ways of God than
you, whence is it? Their means perhaps is not more, their outward means, their
parts in Nature is not more, whence grows it then? Would you know whence? They
have been with Jesus, they converse much with Christ, and you may have it too.

The Reason why you have been a professor perhaps twenty or thirty years, and
you now grow old, and yet perhaps weak still, and it is as much as can be said
of you that there is some hope that there is some good in you, but for the
seeds and sparks of divine Nature that are in others spirits, there is no such
matter at all, what is the Reason? because they are not acquainted with this
drawing of Sanctification from Christ by the exercise of Faith. Well, thus much
shall suffice for this Rest, the rest of Sanctification, the Rest of holiness,
that brings abundance of Rest unto the Heart, according as that increases so
does holiness increase.

CHAP. XLIV.
Shows that a believer has Rest in Christ in all troubles he can meet with
in the world, which is laid out in four Particulars, 1. All afflictions are at
his disposal. 2. In him the curse is taken away. 3. They stand with Gods love.
4. They are measured by God.

NOw we come to the fifth Burden: you may remember the fifth Burden was, The
Burden of outward affliction, come to me, says Christ, you that are burdened
with the guilt of your sins, you that are burdened with Legal performances, you
that are burdened with remaining corruption that is in you, come to me and I
will give you Rest; Now what Rest have been from all those you have heard. Now
Lastly, come to me, you that are under the burden of afflictions, for that is a
Yoke as we opened when we handled the point of being Laden, the Burden of
affliction, bodily afflictions, or spiritual afflictions: come to me, and you
shall have Rest. Now the spiritual afflictions have been spoke of much in the
handling of the former burden, and yet may be somewhat more afterward when I
shall come to speak about spiritual desertions, those kind of afflictions, that
many times are upon Christians, and there is Rest unto their Souls in regard of
them. But for the present all that I shall say now is, about outward
afflictions, come to me, and you shall have Rest, The afflictions of sickness
and poverty, and persecution, and dishonor, and trouble here in this world. For
we are to know, that there is Rest in Christ even in regard of this, and
abundance of Rest. Those that are acquainted with the mystery of godliness, and
the way of Gods Grace in Christ, though they may meet with much trouble in this
world, yet they find abundance of Rest of spirit in Christ, in regard of those
troubles.

Indeed, Christ did not say, come to me, and I will presently free you from all
trouble, that you cannot expect, but come to me, and this I will promise you,
that you shall have Rest in your spirits, your condition may be as troublesome
in regard of outward things here in this world as any, but this I will promise,
I will engage my self for, that you shall have Rest unto your souls in all
conditions whatsoever that you shall be put into. And is not this a blessed
Rest? Especially in regard of these times, such times as these, so full of
distractions when men are spoiled of their goods, and persecuted, and still we
are afraid every day when all these outward comforts may be wrested from us.
This point, perhaps, may be to some more seasonable than to others, what, to
tell some of the burden of the Law, this is a spiritual thing, and they have no
Skill of it, to have Rest from the trouble of the Guilt of sin, this is
spiritual, and they have little Skill of that, to have Rest from the remaining
corruption in their hearts this is spiritual still, and they have no skill of
that neither. I but now I come to speak of that which all of you will be
sensible of, in regard of outward afflictions, I, that is somewhat, that the
Hearts of all men will say, it were a good thing to be in Christ, to have Rest
in regard of outward afflictions. Now it is the way of God to draw men to his
Son in their own way, to show the good that is in his Son in that way which
themselves are sensible of, and those that are strangers to Christ may be
sensible of this, as to think, that if that be made out, that is here promised,
that indeed i^ a blessed thing to be in Christ, now that I shall open to you,
only I will give you one Scripture more for i^, and then proceed to the opening
of it. It is in the 16. of John and the 33. These things have I spoken to you,
that in me ye might have peace, in the world you shall have tribulation, but be
of good cheer I have overcome the world. This is a full text, Christ foresaw
that his disciples should have a great deal of affliction in this world, and
this is spoken to them but a little before Christ's death, a little before
Christ was to die and go from them, he tells them of a great deal of affliction
they should have in the world. But says Christ these things have I spoken, in
me ye shall have peace, though ye have trouble in the world, I will not free you
from trouble, but I will give you peace to your Souls in those troubles, in me
ye shall have peace, though in the world you have trouble, and be of good cheer
I have overcome the world, though you shall have troubles in the world, yet I
will give you Rest, for I have overcome the world, and therefore be of good
cheer, for all the troubles that you shall meet withal, shall not take away the
peace of your spirits, the Rest of your Souls.

So that then here the point that now we are to enter upon, is, That in Christ
there is Rest in the midst of all afflictions, of all troubles that we can meet
withal in this world. For,

First, A believer coming to Christ, must needs have Rest whatsoever
afflictions he meets withal, for when he is come to Christ, he may in him come
to know that there is no affliction either does or can befall him, but is at the
dispose of him that is his Father, and the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
is not this a great deal of Rest? To know that what comes unto me, though there
be such and such instruments, evil instruments to bring trouble upon my estate,
or name, or otherwise, yet I know that all this is by the wise ordering and
disposing of that God that is the Father of Jesus Christ, and in him is now my
Father. Were it that you could be all assured of this now, that you should
never hence forward, have any loss in your estate, any sickness in your body,
any trouble in your family any way, or should have no affliction ever befall
you, but it should be at the dispose of your own father, he should dispose of
it, and your Father a wise, and Loving Father; or take the de^rest Friend that
ever was in the world, and if I say, you should be made sure of this from
heaven that you shall never have any affliction in this world, but it shall be by
his dispose, would not this bring rest into your hearts, though you had a
disquiet heart before? Would there not be a great deal of calm, quiet, and
rest upon your spirits? I make no question, but if such a voice should come
from heaven, and you should know it were a voice from heaven, and not a
delusion, saying, be of good comfort, you that are so troubled, for fear of
loss and outward afflictions, be of good comfort, thou shall never have any
one minute of an hour of trouble and affliction more than thy tender father or
mother shall be willing unto, would not this give rest and quiet unto thy
spirit? Certainly, had thou faith to know, that al comes from thy father in
Christ, for when we are come to him he is our father in Christ, and all that
comes to us is from him through Christ, thou could not but have rest and
peace.

Secondly, By coming to Christ, there is rest from outward afflictions, for in
him there is the taking away of the curse* it is Christ that has taken away
the curse of al afflictions, and therefore there must needs be rest unto the
soul t^rough Christ. Faith in Christ ^eacheth believers to worm afflictions
(as I may so say) to worm them, that is to get out the worm that is there. The
trouble that eats the heart in affliction, it is the worm of the Curse, for all
afflictions are part of the curse in themselves, in their own nature, as they
come unto us, if out of Christ, I say, they are part of the curse. Now the main
trouble and burden of an affliction, it is the curse the secret curse that is
in them, but now, when thou art come to Christ, though the outward bulk of
affliction may be as big as it was before, yet the curse shall be taken away,
the worm, the trouble that did eat thy heart* that shall be taken away, and
therefore there must be rest in that way. Suppose there were a Snake that
should wind about thine arm, that would affright thee; but if thou did come
to know certainly, that the sting were taken out, thou would be quiet if
thou were a wise man, though perhaps a child, or a weak woman, might be
affrighted, but a wise man, that understands what he does if he knew that the
sting is out, would not be afraid, now know O thou believer, that upon thy
coming to Christ the sting of al affliction is taken out, there is nothing of
the sting in it. Affliction may make a noise, as the Be does when the sting is
out, though there were never so many bees about your ears, if you knew the
stings were out, you might be quiet. The core of affliction is taken out as
soon as thou art come to Christ. As some soars in the body do put the body to
a great deal of pain, there is some core in a wound, some malignant humor that
runs in a wound, that puts a man or woman to a great deal of pain: But now if
this core, this malignant humor, be taken out by the Chyrurgeon, there will be
ease and rest. So I say by thy coming to Christ, the core, the malignant humor
of affliction is taken out, the sting, the curse is taken away, and thou must
exercise faith for the taking away of this, and the way to exercise faith to
take away the sting and core of every affliction is this, to look upon Christ
under al his afflictions, as being made a curse for thee, for that indeed may
trouble, those pains that were upon Christ, that were in his body, and the
poverty that he endured, and the dishonor that he suffered, there was a curse
in them, and Christ he takes away the curse by bearing the curse. As you know,
when a Be stings, many times it leaves its sting behind it, so the curses of
the Law, the Law came to sting Christ, as it were, and left the curse behind it
upon him, so that now the curse is removed from believers. It is a good
observation that one has about the burnt offering in the Law, we read of the
burnt offering, that it was to continue burning al night. So now believers in
the night of their affliction, they should exercise their faith upon Christ for
burnt offering. Oh consider, though thou have sad nights, sad and very grievous
nights, and thou lie tossing and tumbling, can not sleep, art in pain and
trouble, what shall give thee rest? Now if thou could but exercise faith in
Christ, who typified out the burnt offering that was to burn al night, I say,
this was typified, that Christ is to be looked upon as burning under the wrath
of God all the night of thy affliction, to take away Gods wrath in thy
afflictions, and there is no such rest as this.

Perhaps in the time of affliction, sickness, loss of estate, and spoil of
goods, there comes one friend, and another, and says, you must be content, and
it is the hand of God, and others are afflicted as well as you, and it is the
portion of Gods children, these are some things to quiet the heart. I but these
are but poor, cold consolations, to tell them they must be content, and it must
be so, and they must endure it, these can never give rest to the soul, except
you can put your friend upon exercising of faith in Jesus Christ, here is the
way to comfort your friends when you go to visit them in sickness, loss of
estate, or spoiling of goods, to put them upon this, to exercise faith upon
Christ, that has born affliction, and by his death has taken away the curse
of al afflictions. It is true, there is a night of affliction now upon you, I
but there is Christ that is the burnt offering that burns al night to take
away the wrath of God in thy afflictions. There is no such way to worm your
affliction, to take away the sting of affliction, as to exercise faith upon
Christ, in whom the curse of affliction is taken away, and when that is gone,
now there is rest to the soul. A sick man that lies tossing and tambling and
cannot Rest, and is in such distemper in his flesh, and has such a Malignant
humor in his body, when the Chyru^geon comes and applies any salve to take away
that malignant humor, he says, when the Chyrurgeon comes again, Oh Sir, now I
can Rest: And so says a Christian, when he has been vexed with such and such
afflictions, and he has gone and excercised faith in Jesus Christ, for he sees
he was under the curse of the Law, and Christ has taken away the curse of al
afflictions, when he has thus acted faith upon Christ, now he can be at rest,
and he can say, now I see the sting taken away. As I said in the rest of
sanctification, Christ was appointed as the Brazen serpent was, the great
ordinance of God for the healing of them that were stung by the fiery serpents,
that if they did but look upon it, they were healed, those that were stung with
the fiery serpents, the very looking upon the Brazen Serpent were healed, it
being the ordinante of God appointed for that end. So I may apply it here,
those that are stung with affliction, Christ is set up as the ordinance, as the
Brazen serpent to take away the venom of the sting of thy affliction. No
question but those that were stung with the fiery serpents, they felt an
intolerable pain, and when they looked upon the brazen serpent, they had rest,
and they could say, now I have ease, now I have rest; So the curse of God in
affliction is the venom, and those that are ready to rave, and are almost mad
in affliction, and are so extremely discontented, it is to be suspected
concerning them, that the curse of God is upon them.

But now another that is under as great an affliction as thou art, can lie
sweetly, and contentfully, and blessing God under any affliction, thou wonderst
at it that he can lie so joyful, blessing of God under so much affliction, the
Lord has taught him a way to worm his affliction, the Lord has taught him a
way to deliver his soul from the curse of the affliction, the curse is gone and
he by exercising faith upon Christ has comfort in removing of the curse, and
this gives him Rest in time of affliction.

Thirdly, Come to Christ and thou shall have Rest in thy affliction, because
that then not only the curse shall be removed, but there shall be this blessing
upon it, that there is no affliction shall befall thee; but such as may stand
with Gods love, yea, such as shall come out of Gods love, and from Gods love,
love shall be the great principle, not only of thy affliction, but from thy
affliction, to know this, that though there are these and these afflictions
upon me, yet I thank God there is no want of Gods love upon me, for I would not
know any thing of Gods love then, if any spiritual judgment were upon me, but
these are no other but what may stand with the love of God. Yea, but that is
not so much, that they may possibly stand with the love of God, but this, that
they come out of Gods love, and come from Gods love, they come as really from
the love of God, as any thing that thou do enjoy in this world. Thou
think, if thou have a prosperous voyage, that God loves thee, if thou be
recovered out of an affliction that God loves thee, but I say, that the Lords
bringing thee into affliction, may stand with greater love to thee than
deliverance out of affliction to another. The afflictions that are upon the
Saints now, they do not come out of revenge, as they do upon the wicked, the
same, affliction that comes from the principle of love to thee, may come from
the principle of hatred to another, and although therefore in the outward view
they be the same yet they are infinitely different in the principle. It is not
so much what we see, or what we feel, but from whence that comes that we see
or feel, and indeed, a gracious heart is ever sollicitous about the principles
of those things that do befall it, if it be an outward mercy, I but, what is the
root of it? is the root of it the love of Christ to my soul? there is an
affliction upon me, but what is the root of it? is the root of it Gods
displeasure, Gods wrath, Gods hatred? Oh that were dreadful. Although the
affliction were vast, if there were a hundred temptations, if the root of it
were Gods displeasure, Oh that were terrible: I but then when he shall come to
know that the root of it were not from Gods wrath, but his love, that is joyful.

You will say, does not God sometimes chastise his people for their sins? what
if the affliction comes to me for my sin, can I have rest then? It is true, if
the affliction come to me for my trial, then the root may be from his love, but
I have sinned against God, I have abused my estate, my conscience tells me, I
have not honored God with my estate and therefore the Lord has taken it from
me, and spoiled me of al, and can I look upon this as the root of Gods love?

Now to that I answer, though this be a certain thing, and will and must hold,
notwithstanding all the late, wanton conceits of men, and all the vanities of
their thoughts which shall come to nothing, yet this shall hold, that God does
chastise his people for sins and offenses, that is not a part for me to enter
upon, yet still it holds forth this, That at that time when God chastises for
sin, at that time their afflictions come out of love, from a principle of Love,
even when God chastises them for their sins.

But you will say, has not Christ suffered? This derogates from the sufferings
of Christ, when he has suffered.

For this, it is true, Christ has suffered, and so has swallowed up al Gods
revenging wrath, and the curse, I but, does Gods wrath hinder me from having
the fruit of Gods Love. You will say, it comes from Love, therefore God
chastises not for sin, No? Why all Gods revenging wrath may be gone, and yet
God may chastise for sin and chastise out of Love too, at the same instant. You
know it is said of Zachary, because he did not believe, the Scripture says in
Luke, 1. For this Cause thou shall be Dumb, For this Cause, because thou did
not believe: And so, therefore, because of their sin they may be chastised.
Cannot a Father chastise his Child and yet do it out of Love? not only it may
stand with his Love, but because of Love; he would not meddle with him, but let
him go, if he did not love him. Certainly, affliction may come out of Love,
though for sin, but for God not at all to chastise them, would be an argument
of hatred, therefore for him to chastise is an argument of Love rather than
hatred.

If ye be not chastised, you are bastards and not Sons, so that you are to look
upon him, though God be displeased, yet still it is out of love. These two may
stand together, he may be displeased with thy sin and with thee, and yet he may
love thee in the very act wherein he manifests his displeasure against thy sin,
and he may manifest his displeasure against thee and against thy sin out of
love to thee. And therefore the people of God may have Rest in all their
afflictions, because it is out of Love. Here is an affliction, but from whence
does it come? It comes from Love, now I am at Rest. If thou can exercise
Faith in Christ in thy affliction, that I know that through Christ God Loves
me, and this is the efficacy of the merit of Christ, that in all thy afflictions
thou should enjoy the Love of God, this will give Rest unto thy Soul, and
until this be, all the arguments in the world will never do it. Come to those
that are afflicted and seek to pacify and quiet them with any argument in the
world, it will not do it, until they exercise Faith upon Christ, and that makes
them to know, here is the love of God to my Soul in this affliction, and then
it is no matter whether I be in prosperity or adversity. If God give me an
estate there is love in that, if he take it away, there is Love in that, if he
give me health, there is Love in that, if he cast me into sickness, there is
Love in that, and this indeed is the great mystery of godliness, that the
heathens were not acquainted with this Mystery of godliness.

Fourthly, We have Rest in all afflictions through Christ, because in his merit
it is that al afflictions are proportioned both for the time of coming, and the
time of continuing, and the measure and the manner of them, they are
proportioned by the infinite wisdom of God for the good of a believer, God
proportions all so as shall be suitable to the condition that thou art in. As a
wise Physician knows the full condition of thee that art his patient at all
times, therefore he does weigh every dram, and take care that there be not one
drop put into thy cup that he gives thee to drink, more than shall suit with thy
condition, for thy good, and takes care it shall be given at a seasonable time,
and that it shall not abide one moment longer than it has wrought out the
Corruption, wrought out evil, and brought good unto thee, now this is a mighty
Rest unto thy spirit. If so be a patient is to deal with a Physician that is
learned, and wise, and experienced, that I know he understands the state of my
body, to the full, to a hair in every thing, and I know that what he gives he is
very careful about, and what he gives he does it himself, does not trust the
Apothecary, but goes himself and sees how many drams is put into it, and has
it weighed before his Face, trusts not others but weighs it himself, and so
observes every circumstance that is suitable to his patient; now would not this
be quietness unto thee? Perhaps the potion may be bitter, but if thou know
that it comes from the hand of such a Physician, that is thus careful, and thus
skilful, and thus experienced, this causes Rest and quietness in thy Spirit.
So truly, by the Eye of Faith thou may behold God; though God uses creatures
as instruments, yet the Lord will not trust them, but stands by and looks upon
every dram that is put into the cup. If a man should give that which is
Poisonous or ratsbane to a dog, he cares not how he gives it: but now if there
should any venomous thing be put into Physic, then the Physician needs to look
to every dram, that it be proportionable to the state of the Body. So I say,
when God distributes his afflictions to the wicked he cares not for any
proportion, he cares not for doing them good by it. But now when he comes to
believers in Christ, God is careful to proportion every dram, for the time of
it, that it shall come but just when God would have it, and continue not one
moment longer than God would have it. That Scripture is enough to quiet the
soul in regard of any affliction, Which you have in Peter 1.6. Wherein ye
rejoice, though now for a season, if need require, ye are in heaviness through
manifold temptations. Though now for a season, for a little time now, so the
words are, though for a little time now, it is but now and it is but a little
time, and then too if need be, Mark what a blessed parenthesis this is, it is
worth Gold, this very Parenthesis is, wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now
for a season you are in heaviness, it will not be much it shall be but for a
little time, and that if need be, as if God should say, were there not need,
you should not be for one instant of time in heaviness, this is that you must
learn from this Scripture. Would it not be Rest to your Soul if you could hear
God out of his word this day, speak to every one of you, and say, did not I see
th^re was need, you should never have any minute of sickness in all your life,
this were enough to give Rest unto the Soul, and though there be need, it is
but for now, for a little time. I do not find in the original that the word
signifies season, but a little now, and if need be, so that you shall not be in
heaviness, no not for a little now, unless there be need, this is a great deal
of Rest.

CHAP. XLV.
The Rest believers have from Christ in outward afflictions discovered in four
Particulars more. 1. They shall be to good ends. 2. They shall be sanctified to
the good of believers. 3. God is present with his people in Christ. 4. There is
abundance of present good in affliction.

FIfthly, Come to me, says Christ, and you shall have Rest in your affliction,
for your afflictions shall have very good ends, God will never bring affliction
upon you, but he will have gracious ends that he will aim at in your affliction.
God has somewhat in his Eye that he aims at more than you imagine, and the
thoughts of this may bring a great deal of Rest unto the Soul, we cannot
always understand what those Particular ends are that God has in the trial of
his people, but we must satisfy our spirits in this, certainly God has very
gracious ends, what a great deal of trouble is there now in the nation, how
many godly people are spoiled of their goods, and wounded and made havoc of,
we think it is nothing but the rage of wicked men, certainly, God has gracious
ends in it, and God is about to bring to pass some glorious thing, though we
cannot understand it now, it is only one that is acquainted with the mind of
Christ that can be satisfied with this that when God brings trials he has
glorious ends to bring about, and why should not I be willing to be serviceable
to Gods ends, to those great ends that God has to bring about? Wherefore was I
made and brought into the world, but only that God may serve himself of me, and
therefore if God has need of my affliction as I may so speak, why may not I be
quiet in my affliction, for my affliction may be serviceable to God. Now this
is that I profess, that I may be serviceable to God and his ends, now if thy
heart be right in this, that thou would be serviceable to God and his e^ds,
then thou must not choose the way how God shall fetch about his ways and ends
upon thee.

Sometimes God may serve his own ends in thy prosperity, I but at other times he
will serve himself in thy affliction: now if thy Heart be gracious indeed, thou will be as willing that God may fetch about his praise in thy affliction, as in
thy prosperity, in this a gracious heart rejoices. Now if thy heart be right
in this, then if God take away thy estate and bring thee into affliction thou
may be quiet in this that God will be served by my wants, and bring about his
ends that way, though thou may think that God may be better served by thy
prosperity then by thy affliction, I but know this, that God has glorious ends
to bring about, and must have his people suffer to bring about those ends, and
therefore this may Cause Rest and quiet of Spirit.

Sixthly, Come to me, says Christ, you shall have Rest in trouble and
affliction, for not only you shall be serviceable to God for his ends, but al
your afflictions shall be Sanctified for your own good to you, God intends it
and you shall have a Sanctified use in them and this is more then removing the
curse, the Sanctified use notes a mighty operation of God in the affliction to
fetch out good unto thy Soul.

Now this were a large thing, to show what is the Sanctified use of affliction,
the purging out of Corruption, the quickening of Grace, yea, if it were but the
trial of Grace, it were enough to bring quiet to the Soul, for the Scripture
says, the trial of Faith is more precious then Gold, the trial of Grace, the
exercise of Grace, if it were but the exercise of the Grace of Faith that thou
art put upon in thy affliction, there may be more good to thee in that then
thou can imagine. There is more excellency in the exercise of any one Grace,
but especially in the exercise of Faith, then in all prosperity in the World,
if God should give thee a kingdom it may be thou have lost thy land, thy
House, and goods, I but God has put thee upon the exercise of Faith now more
then ever. Now know that the exercise of one Grace is more then a kingdom to
thee, better then all the prosperity in the world, thy friends may come and
tell thee this and that, I but do thou feel thy affliction Sanctified to thy
Soul? Do thou feel thy Heart drawn nearer to God? Do thou find the
discovering of thy Heart more, and the purging out thy Corruption more, and thy
Heart quickened in the ways of God more? This will bring Rest unto thy Soul, for
you have heard, Sanctification is Rest unto the Soul, therefore Sanctification
of afflictions unto the Soul, must needs bring Rest unto it.

Seventhly, God is with his people in time of affliction by Christ, thou have
the presence I say of God in thy affliction, Gods gracious presence is only in
his Son, no man comes unto the Father but by the son, it is true both ways, as
no man comes to the Father but by Christ, so the Father comes to no man in a
gracious way but by Christ, now Gods gracious presence will be with them in his
Son. I will be with thee in the fire and in the Water, that is enough for the
Soul to Rest upon, that God will be with them in the Fire and in the Water, in
Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the Water I will be with thee, and through
the floods they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the Fire thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord
thy God the Holy one of Israel thy Savior. I will be with thee says God, so
that there is Gods presence to support them, now as ye heard all the promises
are yea and amen in Christ, in Christ they are al made good, so that Rest in
affliction comes by Christ. As now in sickness, art thou in sickness, see what
Rest there is in Christ in time of sickness, in Psalm, 41.3. The Lord, will
strengthen him upon his Bed of sorrow, thou have made all his Bed in his
sickness, Surely then thou will lie soft, thou shall have Rest there. Many poor
sick people complain they cannot Rest, they cannot lie soft, their Bed is not
made well, their Bed is not made easy, high in one place, and low in another,
now here is a promise that God will make the Bed of his people in the day of
their sickness, in the day of their trouble, what an expression is here of Gods
love; that we may know how God tenders his people? And though it be but a hard
bed, a flock bed, a bed of straw, you may lie easy if God make it. And here
you see in this psalm God promises to make the bed of his people, now if you
have not Rest, it is because you have not been acquainted with the promises,
nor not exercised Faith upon the promises, such a promise will bring Rest unto
the Soul, when you cannot Rest otherwise. And so I might give you Scriptures
likewise for poverty, the many sweet expressions that we have in Scripture for
the quieting of the Heart in poverty the special regard that God has to poor
people, especially such as are godly who are in poverty. I might name abundance
of Scriptures, as that, The Lord has chosen the poor to be Rich in Faith, And
the Gospel is preached unto the poor. And not many mighty, and noble, but the
poor receive the Gospel. And in Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee,
an afflicted and poor people and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord, The
Lord has respect to them, and if thou be godly and poor, thou may search
into Scripture and find abundance of expressions to give thee Rest. Christ was
made poor that he might make us Rich, does therefore poverty trouble thee?
Consider that Christ he was poor, and the poverty of Christ it was to make me
Rich, and all the evil of my poverty is taken away by Jesus Christ, If poor
people would exercise their Faith upon the poverty of Christ, that he was made
poor, for so he says, though he was the Lord of all, yet the foxes had holes
and the Birds had nests, but he had not whereon to lay his Head. Christ had not
so good a House as any of you, Christ had not a cottage to dwell in, but went
abroad from one place to another, therefore exercise but thy Faith upon the
poverty of Christ, and that will help thee in thy poverty. And so for dishonor,
the Scripture is very full that way too. In Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are ye when men
shall speak all manner of Evil against you for my names sake. And that in
Peter, Blessed are ye when ye suffer reproach, for the Spirit of Glory shall
Rest upon you. Now all these promises in time of affliction is made to us in
Christ, and therefore come to me, says Christ, you shall have the virtue and
efficacy of al these promises.

Indeed carnal Hearts, they do not think the promises of the Gospel worth any
thing, and they think that if they can have no more comfort but that, this is
poor comfort, but those that are godly, they know that there is abundance of
comfort and sweetness to be had in the promises of the Gospel.

Eighthly, The abundance of present good that Christ will bring unto the Hearts
of the Saints that shall swallow up all the trouble of affliction, the abundance
of present good shall swallow up all the bitter of affliction. As thus, now
suppose you have a little Vinegar, one drop of Vinegar if there were a pint or
quart of the sweetest liquor in the world put into it, could you taste the
Vinegar? the taste would be taken away: So now the Soul that comes to Christ,
and exercises Faith upon him, Christ brings in the present good, besides that
that it shall have hereafter, the present good that is enough to sweeten all
things, and to satisfy the Soul. Christ sets up such a light in the Heart,
that such a one has light in the midst of darkness, though there be darkness
round about, yet there is such satisfying Contentments in Christ, that is
enough to overcome all the bitterness that is in the world, such a one though
never so afflicted, yet is able to say with David, as before, My Soul return
unto thy Rest. And indeed all afflictions, to those that are believers, and
have the exercise of Faith, I do not speak of all believers, one may be a
believer and yet not have Rest in affliction, but if he be a believer and have
the exercise of Faith, then all afflictions will be no more, but as if a poor
Woman were married to a great prince, and had all the nobles about him, and all
kind of dainties upon his table, and he should hear the Rain rattling upon the
tiles, that is in the windy wether abroad, what would this be to hinder the
Rest of such a ones spirit? The truth is, had we but the exercise of Faith, all
outward troubles in the world would be no more to us, no more trouble then this
is. If thou were come to Christ, and married to him, and come to sup with him,
there would be that satisfaction unto thy Soul in Christ, that al outward
troubles would be no more at all, then the rattling of the Rain upon the Tiles
to such a one that has al content within doors. You are not yet acquainted
with such blessed things that are in Christ who are troubled at any thing in
the world, certainly the soul that is acquainted with that, will say, it has
enough, let what will become of my estate, of my body, of my House, of my
Lands, yet I have enough in Christ, how have the blessed Martyrs cried out of
the fullness of Rest in Christ? I remember one German Martyr, that suffered much
from his enemies, he said, I verily believe that there is not a merrier Heart
in this world then my self. As Jacob had more blessed visions when he lay
abroad in the night, and laid his Head upon the stone; So the Children of God
have more visions many times of God in the times of their affliction, their
Veins are filled with blood, and bones with marrow, all the capacities of their
soul is filled with spiritual joy, and that keeps out affliction. As if a man
have filled his belly with good cheer, and especially if his veins be full of
blood and bones full of marrow, he can bare hardness the better. So when the
soul comes to Christ, he fills the veins full of blood, and bones full of marrow,
I mean thus, he fills all the capacities of the soul with heavenly consolations,
and that bares out any trouble or afflictions whatsoever, and thus there is
peace and rest unto the soul.

CHAP. XLVI.
Contains the conclusion of the last doctrine in the two former Chapters,
showing how unbeseeming a thing it is, for a believer to be troubled in
affliction.

THere might be diverse other things named, as by coming to Christ there is the
spirit of prayer, and so the soul has rest when it can go and power forth it
self to God in prayer. But to conclude this.

You see by all this, how infinitely unbeseeming it is for a believer, one that
professes himself come to Christ, to be troubled in affliction, Christ makes
this promise, that if he comes to him he shall have rest. Surely either thou art
not come to Christ, or thou have not exercised faith in Christ, Either thus,
thou chargest thy self for one not come to Christ, or one that has not
exercised faith upon Christ, or else thou chargest Christ with unfaithfulness
by thy coffeehouse. For Christ here professes to the wotld that all that
come to him shall have rest, that thou have not rest, but that a little trouble
does disquiet thee, thou either art not come to Christ, or do not exercise
faith, or else thou chargest Christ with unfaithfulness, now if thou have not
rest, which way will thou have it fall? Oh let it fall upon thy unbeleeving
heart, let it fall upon this, that thou do not renew thy act in coming to
Christ, for it is not meant of coming to Christ at the first, but of renewing
the act of coming to Christ, and this exhortation belongs to Godly men and
women, that have already come to Christ by faith, I say, it belongs to them to
come to Christ, come you to Christ again and again. Now thy disquiet and
trouble in time of affliction does argue, that thou art either no believer at
al, or have not renewed the act of faith. My brethren, the ways of many, that
we hope are believers, are such, as if so be they had no use of faith at al in
time of affliction, or as if faith were only of use to save their souls, and
not to give rest unto the soul here in this world, or as if it were of no other
use, but as a sun dial in a garden, to show the time of the day when the sun
shines, but in stormy cloudy weather, there is no use of it. And do thou make
no more use of thy faith, then of the sun dyal in thy garden, to show thee how
it is with thee in the day of prosperity, but the truth of thy faith should be
a dyal, to make thee know how it is between God and thy soul in a cloudy day.
And therefore you having now heard, where the rest in regard of outward
affliction lies Oh, do you repair hither for rest, you vex, and fret, and
trouble your selves, Why? because you have not as others, others can have rich
tables, fine houses, and accomodations, and al things for their content in this
world, but know that now the Lord has presented to you a way how to have rest
to your souls in time of poverty, Labor to know Jesus Christ that was made poor
for you. There is as plain a way for you to come to Christ as for the richest
in the world, and Christ will be as ready to entertain you as the richest. It is
likely that al your endeavors may come to help you so forward as to make you
rich in this world, I but, to give rest in this world, nothing can do it but
your coming to Christ. And above al, this may serve to help us to lay up
against the time of trouble, that however things go in this world yet you may
have rest to your souls in Christ.

CHAP. XLVII.
Shows that believers are often under inward affliction, and spiritual
desertions.

I Shall now speak of the rest that Christ gives unto the soul in regard of
inward afflictions, those inward afflictions are spiritual desertions, that is,
when the Lord shall be pleased to absent himself from the souls of his people,
and leave them in such darkness of spirit, though they be believers, and have
interest in Christ, yet they may be left for a time by God, so as their spirits
will be extremely afflicted with sorrow, and fear, and trouble, because of Gods
absence from them, and indeed, there is no affliction like to this affliction,
there is no condition so restless as this condition is. Now this is that that
every one is not acquainted withal, carnal people think that these afflictions
are only conceits, imaginations, and melancholy, but the saints know what
these afflictions are, that they are the most real afflictions in the world,
these spiritual desertions, for God to withdraw himself from his people. We
read of such an affliction that a godly man was much exercised withal, and that
was Heman that was the penman of the 88. Psalm, you read it in the title, it
was a song or Psalm for the sons of Korah To the chief musician upon Mahalath
Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite a Psalm of Heman. Now this Heman was
one of the greatest men exercised with desertions upon the face of the earth.
If you read this Psalm at your leisure, you shall find; that though he was a man
very Godly yet exceedingly exercised with spiritual desertions and afflictions,
the Lord withdrew the comforts of his spirit from verse the first, says he, Oh
Lord God of my salvation I have cried day and night before thee. verse the 3.
My soul is full of troubles and my life draws nigh unto the grave. verse the
4. I am counted with them that go down into the Pit. I am as a man that has
no strength, free among the dead, etc. verse the 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon
me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. What a strange expression is
this of a godly man? And then there is outward afflictions mingled with
spiritual afflictions, verse the 8. Thou have put my acquaintance far from me,
thou have made me an abomination unto them, I am shut up and I cannot come
forth. verse the 9. My eye mourns by reason of affliction verse the 13. But
unto thee have I cried Oh Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.
Lord why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me? God had
hid his face from him verse the 15. I am afflicted and ready to die from my
youth up, while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted. He was acquainted with
these spiritual afflictions from his youth up verse the 16. Thy fierce wrath
goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off. What expressions are here for a
godly man? and when we read this Psalm and know it is the Psalm of a Godly
man speaking how greatly he was afflicted, we may be put in mind of that
scripture. If the righteous scaresely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear. Where shall the sinner appear, if such a man that was wise,
that the spirit of God says of him* that he was one of the wisest men that
lived upon the face of the earth, and yet afflicted, excercised with inward
afflictions, the Lord hiding his face from him. In 1. Kings 4.31. There the
Holy Ghost speaks of this Heman that was thus afflicted, speaking of the
wisdom of Solomon, it is said, He was wiser then al men, then Ethan and Heman,
etc. So that it appears by that, that Heman was one of the wisest, for else it
could not be an argument of Solomon's wisdom that he was wiser then al men, and
that he excelled in wisdom above any other, And yet this man had the terrors of
God upon his spirit. Therefore let none of you, when God seems to withdraw
himself, and afflict you, say, that your condition is worser then ever any ones
was, when any of you have such thoughts as these are, remember the 88. Psalm,
and when you think of the great grief, sorrow, and trouble that is upon you,
and are ready to think that it is greater then others, then go and read the 88.
Psalm. As Luther was wont to say when they were in any trouble, go and sing
the 46. Psalm. So when you are in trouble, and sorrow, and grief, then say,
come let us go and read the 88. Psalm, and remember who was the penner of that
Psalm, Heman, a godly man, and what his condition was, and then thou shall see
that thy condition is not so sad as his was.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Contains Seven Directions how a believer may get Rest from Christ in
spiritual Desertions. First, Look upon Christ as once in the same condition.
Secondly. Look to Christ as full of Grace and Goodness. Thirdly, Look to Christ
as an advocate at the right hand of God. Fourthly, Look to Christ for
fulfilling the promise of sending the Comforter. Fifthly, Go to Christ as at
first in thy Conversion. Sixthly, Keep good thoughts of God. Seventhly, Resolve
never to take Rest in any thing else beside Christ.

WELL but now though thy condition be as bad as his, yet there is Rest in
Christ to be had for thee, and Christ calls thee to come to him that he may give
thee Rest. I shall not need to spend time in opening what this rest is in Christ
in this particular, because it is contained in what was said before, as in
deliverance from the guilt of sin, the burden of the Law, and the remainer of
corruption, and the like, those things if they were made good to the soul they
might give rest. But now all that I intend to show shall be, what course the
laden sinner must take in this case to have rest in Christ, for the soul it is
delivered from the guilt of sin, and the wrath of God, though it cannot
apprehend the love of God, and the pardon of the guilt of sin, yet it has it
already, but now to help such a deserted soul in this case, that it might begin
to have the use of the good that there is to be had in Christ, therefore by way
of direction to have ease in that grievous condition.

First, Labor to exercise thy faith upon Christ, as one that was once in the
same condition in some degree and some measure as thou thy self art in, that is
a good way for one that has spiritual desertions. I say, to look upon Christ
as one that for the present was in this affliction, for Christ was deserted,
and this breeds a great deal of rest to the soul in outward afflictions. If
one that is in poverty exercise faith upon Christ who was poor, as I told you
before, The Foxes have holes and the birds have nests but the son of man has
not where to lay his head. To exercise faith upon Christ as poor, does help to
give ease and rest unto the soul, under the burden of the affliction of
poverty? so when a soul feels the burden and trouble of spiritual desertions
the soul should look up to Christ as one that was under such desertion, as when
he was in the garden, and professes that his soul was heavy to the very death,
and that he began to be amazed with the apprehension of the wrath of God. Now
when thou art in a combat and strife in thy spirit with temptation, know that
Christ was in such a combat and strife, he sweat drops of blood. It may be the
soul is in combat, and in trouble and gets to prayer, and the soul is in a
sweat, remember what a sweat Christ was in when God withdrew himself from him,
and especially, when he was upon the cross, there he tells you plainly that he
was forsaken My God My God why have thou forsaken me? Thou think that God
has withdrawn himself from thee, no he will not withdraw himself from thee so
much as from his son in one regard, that is, thou have not such a dreadful
apprehension of Gods withdrawing from thee as Christ had, for Christ would
never have cried out else. My God My God why have thou forsaken me? This was a
real thing, Christ did not speak at uncertainties, he did feel a withdrawing of
the influence, sweetness, and comfort of the Lord; though still he had union
with him by Nature and he was his Father as before, but the Human Nature did
not feel the influence of the Grace, and sweetness, and the shine of the Favor
of God as at other times, and therefore he cries out, My God, My God, why have
thou forsaken me? Exercise thy Faith upon Christ as one that was in spiritual
desertions. It is true, perhaps that Christ did not come to determine himself
that he was utterly forsaken as thou do, but Christ was apprehensive of Gods
withdrawing himself, and therefore this may bring ease and Rest unto thy Soul,
and the rather because that his being so forsaken it was to Sanctify thy being
forsaken, it was to take away the curse of those desertions that thou have in
thy self. Such desertions as are in any afflictions materially, they are a
curse, they are such things as in their own Nature are a curse, Christ being so
forsaken by the Father does take away the curse, that is in spiritual
desertions, and there is no such way for the soul that is in spiritual
desertions, as to look up to Christ, and to consider that Christ was forsaken
for my sake, Christ was forsaken for me, that I might not be eternally
forsaken. So there is these three things in looking up to Christ as forsaken.
First thou see that the Lord that is the beloved son of God was forsaken,
forsaken by God. Secondly, here thou may see the merit of this that it was to
sanctify thy forsaking, that thy forsaking might not be a curse to thee.
Thirdly, It was that thou might not be eternally forsaken by God, so that by
exercising of thy Faith thus upon him thou may get a great deal of Rest and
ease unto thy soul. A carnal Heart when he finds this terror of spirit he runs
to his company, Music, good cheer, and business of the world, but a gracious
Heart runs to Christ, and goes to him that was thus forsaken of the Lord for
him.

Secondly, If thou be under the burden of spiritual desertions, then look up
to Christ as being such a Mediator, as is full of Grace and goodness, there
being such a fullness of the Grace of God in him, as makes him a sufficient
object for the Faith of adherence, when he cannot be unto me an object of the
Faith of evidence. I say, we are to exercise Faith upon Christ when we are
under this Burden of spiritual desertions, thus, we are to look upon Christ as
being the fullness of the Godhead, of all the treasure of Grace and goodness,
having so much of the Grace and mercy of God in him, as shall make him a fit
object of the Faith of adherence, though he is not now to me an object of the
Faith of evidence.

Quest. You will say, What is the meaning of that.

I mean by the Faith of evidence, that I am able to say that Christ is mine and
I have an argument to persuade my conscience, that he is mine, that is the
Faith of evidence, but yet there is enough in Christ to draw forth the Soul to
Re^t upon him from the Faith of adherence, that is thus: Though I cannot draw
arguments to rely upon Christ as mine, yet I will cleave to him, and adhere to
him, I know there is no help but here, and therefore here I will cleave and
cling, here now is the Faith of adherence. Now because there is so much Grace
in it therefore Christ may be a great object of thy Faith of adherence, when
thou can not see him to be an object of the Faith of evidence, and that is a
way to help the Soul in time of spiritual desertion. When many poor souls are
under spiritual afflictions and desertions, they think of no other Faith to
rest upon Christ, but barely upon the faith of evidence and when they have
evidence to their Souls, that Christ is theirs, and that from some fruits of
Grace in them, then they rely upon him, but now learn that there is such a
Faith, the Faith of adherence, and Christ may appear to a Soul as a fit object
to the Soul for the Faith of adherence, when he cannot be to it an object of
the Faith of evidence.

Thirdly, Another help to the Soul that is under spiritual desertions is this,
the soul in this case is to exercise Faith upon Christ, as an advocate, that is
at the right hand of the Father to plead the cause of his people. That
Scripture you have often named to you, in 1 John, 2.1. If any man sin, we have
an advocate with the Father. Christ is at the right hand of the Father as an
advocate for you, as we showed when we spoke of the Rest of the soul from the
guilt of sin: So now when thou have not the sense of the Love of God to thee,
exercise thy Faith upon Christ, that he is at the right Hand of the Father to
plead for poor sinners. In Jer. 50.34. Says the Text there. Their Redeemer is
strong, the Lord of Hosts is his name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause,
that he may give Rest to the Land. It is true, this is meant literally, of an
outward Rest unto the people of God, to deliver them from the Captivity of
Babylon, and here is a promise, that the redeemer is strong, and the Lord of
hosts, that he shall thoroughly plead their cause; they were carried into
Babylon, and they were scorned, and contemned, and despised, and they said,
where is their Lord of hosts? Now here is a promise, that their redeemer will
come, and that he shall thoroughly plead their cause, and give them rest in their
land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. This promise we are to make use
of in regard of our outward troubles at this day, in regard of our adversaries,
and though the Lord let them prevail sometimes, yet the Lord has showed
himself at hand to plead his cause and no question he has thoroughly pleaded
the cause of his people, when the adversaries began to lift up their hands
against them, when they insulted in regard of the late blow that God gave us,
the Lord has begun already to give them a blow, and I hope we shall hear
further of it. But now that which is true here literally, is true spiritually,
the Lord will redeem them from spiritual captivity, and this redeemer is the
Lord of hosts, he will give them rest, he is at the right hand of the Father
thoroughly to plead the cause of his poor Servants; when accusation comes up to
the Father against the Soul, then the Lord Christ stands at the right hand of
the Father, and thoroughly pleads their cause.

Fourthly, In thy spiritual desertion, thou must look up to Christ, to seek the
fulfilling of that promise of his, that he makes to his disciples, to send to
them the comforter, When Christ was to leave his disciples (he says) Be of
good cheer; I will send the comforter to you, and therefore be of good cheer.
Christ does comfort his disciples against his absence, he was to go from them,
and leave them in regard of his bodily presence. Now Christ was so careful of
his poor Servants, that when he was to leave them in regard of his bodily
presence he tells them he will send the comforter to them, that is, the Holy
Ghost shall come so much the more fully, and he shall manifest me unto you. Now
plead this promise of the Lord Christ, in the times of spiritual desertion, and
say, Oh blessed Redeemer, were thou careful of thy disciples, that when thou
were to leave them in regard of bodily presence, that thou would send the
Holy Ghost, that should come to testify of thee, and reveal thee to them, and
bring things to remembrance, Oh, much more will thou have compassion of a poor
Soul, from whom thou art absent in a spiritual way, it is a greater affliction
to want thee, O blessed Redeemer, in a spiritual way, then to want thy bodily
presence, and therefore there is a great deal more need that the comforter
should come in now, to supply the want of spiritual presence, then bodily
presence.

Fifthly, In the time of spiritual desertion, if thou can find no evidence at
all, nothing at all to satisfy thy Soul, then go to Christ in the very same
way that thou wentest to him at first, better to do so then to lie grovelling
and sinking under thy Burden. If thou think that yet thou have nothing, that
all is nothing, all is lost, and the like, go again in the same way that thou
wentest at first unto Christ, thou art not in a worse condition then thou wast
then, when thou were an enemy, and thou foundest ease and rest in him at first,
now renew that work that there was in thy Soul at the very first. There are
many people, in the time of spiritual afflictions and desertions, they spend so
much time in looking after old evidences, whereas the truth is they might get
new ones sooner then the old ones. As sometimes a man may spend a great deal
more time in looking after an old Key of a Box then in making a new one, he
might make a new Key with a great deal less trouble, and it would not be so
much prejudice to him to have a new Key made, as to look the old one. He may
look up and down, and spend a great deal of time, that may be more worth then
to make a new one. So it is with the Soul in time of trouble, and under
spiritual desertion, it is looking about for its old evidence, and to such and
such works of Grace and cannot find them, and is poring and cannot be at quiet
til it can find those former signs and marks that he had before, I say, such
and such may sooner get new ones, then find the old ones. If a man have
writings, perhaps he cannot find such a writing, he may be at less charge to
have new ones writ over again, then to look the old ones: so thou want the
evidences of thy Grace, and can not find them, I say, renew thy Grace upon
Christ again, and thou may get thy evidence new writ over again, and have it
with less cost, then to look after the old ones.

Sixthly, Be sure in time of thy desertion to keep good thoughts of God, though
thou have no comfort in them for the present, yet believe it there is comfort
in Christ, and whatever becomes of thee, acknowledge Christ to be faithful,
Christ is to be thy Lord, and thy king and let thy Heart Love him, and strive
(at the least) ^o do so. It is true, the sense of his Love will inflame Love
again, yet at that time when thou can not have the sense of his Love, yet
resolve to Love him, and Love his ways. You know Christ, when God seemed to
forsake him, yet at that time, when he was upon the Cross, when human Nature
could not but see he had need of Gods presence, but then he cried out, My God,
My God. And so in Psalm, 88. The example of Heman. O God of my Salvation. He
speaks yet still well of God, and calls God the God of his Salvation^ O God of my
Salvation, he speaks yet still well of God, and calls God the God of his
Salvation. O God of my Salvation, still keeps good thoughts of God. And so the
Church in the Canticles, when Christ had withdrawn himself from her, yet she
would call him her beloved, and go up and down asking for her beloved, and where
her beloved was, so let the soul in time of desertion. Keep good thoughts of
God.

Seventhly, And Lastly, If thou can not have Rest in Christ resolve thou will
never find rest in nothing else, that thy Heart shall be restless til thou have
rest in Christ. Perhaps in the time of desertion there comes one to thee, and
says, Christ has forsaken thee, go and have comfort elsewhere, look for it
other where; or may be, the tempter will come, to a poor deserted Soul, as he
did to Christ, in Matthew. 4. When Christ was a hungry, then comes the tempter to
him; and says, Command that these stones be made Bread, As if the tempter
should say thus, do do not you see how your Father has forsaken you, that he
will not afford you bread take a course for your self. So here, just thus it is
for all the world with a troubled Soul, the Soul is troubled, the Lord is
withdrawn from the Soul, and now comes the tempter, and says, you see you
cannot have comfort, you have prayed all this while and you cannot get comfort,
Peace, and Rest, now therefore seek for Rest elsewhere. Oh take heed of this, a
deserted Soul should abandon such temptations, and resolve that it will be
content to be in a restless condition to al eternity, if it cannot have Rest
here. As it is with those that do ill offices, if there be any breaches between
Father and Child, or one friend and another, they take the advantage of that
and say, do not you see your Father regards you not, though you be in such
need, he will not regard you, nor help you, come therefore and take my counsel,
I will show you how you shall live a better life; and so when they would
withdraw one friend from another, those that would do ill offices, they go and
take advantage of the breach; so does the Devil, when the Lord is withdrawn
from the soul, and the soul is in a deserted condition, then comes the Devil to
draw the soul to unlawful ways, he will be sure to take the advantage to do al
ill offices between God and the soul, and therefore let such as are in such a
condition take heed of such temptations. And these now are the helps to those
that are under the burden of spiritual desertions, there is enough in Christ to
help them, and these being observed, they may come to have rest in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XLIX.
Shows that believers have not only Rest in, but Rest also from afflictions.

BUt now further, besides all this Rest you have heard of, there is a time when
the Lord shall not only give the soul rest IN Afflictions, but shall give the
soul rest FROM Affliction* yea, it may be in this world. He speaks as if there
were a rest to the people of God to be delivered from affliction, not only in
Affliction, but delivered from Affliction. That place that we have in Isai.
54.11. O thou afflicted, tossed with Tempest and not comforted, behold, I will
lay thy Stones with fair colors, and lay thy Foundations with Saphires, and I
will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant Stones. Thou art now afflicted, Tossed, Tempted, and not
comforted, but it shall be otherwise with thee. It is true indeed, the Church
ever since the beginning of the world has been in an affl^cted condition,
tossed with tempest, and not comforted, not according to what is expressed, but
here is a promise of a glorious time, when there shall be a sure Foundation
laid, and that Foundation of precious stones, and rest there shall be. And if
you compare this scripture with that in Revel. 21. You shall see it aims at a
glorious time, when Christ shall give Rest unto the Soul, at verse. 4. And God
shall wipe away all tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are passed away. And if you read after, you shall find, that he does seem
to allude unto this Isai. 54. And there tells what those precious stones shall
be, that shall be the foundation of the happy estate of Gods Saints, and that it
is not to be in Heaven, but here, before the great and general day of
judgment. It appears plainly by this, that the Text says, That the Kings of
the Earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it, at the 24. verse, The
Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings of
the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor unto it. It is such a time of the
Church, as the Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory and their Honor unto
it, Now after the day of judgment in Heaven, the Kings of the Earth do not
bring their glory and their Honor to the Saints in Heaven, but they shall bring
their glory and their Honor to the Saints here. It is a prophecy of such a
happy condition that the Saints shall be in, that the Kings of the Earth shall
bring their Glory and their honor to them, and therefore here it is upon this
Earth, this promise is made of a glorious time that the Saints shall have, that
all tears shall be wiped away from their Eyes here in this world, and it seems
to be spoken of the same time that was spoken of in the Chapter before, in the
20. Chapter, of the first Resurrection. Now after that time it appears, that
the Devil shall be loosned, and Gog and Magog shall gather themselves together
against Gods people after that time. But there is such a world here for the
people of God, a rest to be had from all affliction, even here upon the Earth
to be hoped for, when the saints of God shall be honored before all the world;
and all wicked and ungodly men shall be subdued before them. But further, there
is certainly a rest of Glory in the world to come, and that is to be added to
all the rest, when the saints shall keep an eternal Sabbath before the Lord, and
shall there be always exercised in praising, Magnifying, and blessing of the
great God.

Quest. You will say, Shall that be such a Rest in performing of Holy Duties?

I, that shall be a rest indeed, for there shall be no weariness of the flesh
but the Soul shall be in a spiritual condition, and the flesh shall be
subservient to the soul, that there shall be no wearisomness to the flesh, that
it shall enjoy communion with God, and be in blessed visions with God, and be in
his Fathers House above al enemies, above sin, they shall neither sin more, nor
sorrow more, nor fear more nor doubt more, nor be troubled more, this is the
rest that the soul shall have in Christ. And I make no question but Christ means
this among the rest, when he says, come to me. But to speak of this glorious
rest is a large point, and elsewhere I have opened it at large, what the glory
of the Saints shall be in Heaven, and therefore I shall speak no more in this.

Now then put al together that I have said, concerning the Rest that I have
spoken of, and may we not conclude of this rest, and well may it have that
epithet which is spoken in Isay 11.10. In that day, there shall be a root of
Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles
seek, and his Rest shall be glorious. Here it is spoke of the Rest of Christ,
his Rest shall be glorious. We may well apply it to the Rest of the Saints, the
saints shall have a glorious rest, and it has been showed unto you in many
particulars, wherein I have opened this rest unto you, that you may see it is a
glorious rest.

CHAP. L.
Five marks of true rest in Christ. I. It is not but upon discovery of
glorious things the soul knew not before. II. It comes upon the soul, ceasing
from its own work. III. It makes the believer active for God. IIII. Rest in
those things wherein Christ rested. V. True Rest will abide the trial of the
word.

YOU Will say, Oh, that we did but know, that this was our rest, that we did not
presume, but that we were sure that the rest that we have in Christ was a true
rest. Now I told you before, that there was a faith of adherence, that might
bring rest, though there were not a faith of evidence. But now, you will say, if
we might have both, a faith of evidence, as well as a faith of adherence, it
would ad much to our Rest.

Now I will help you to some notes, whereby you may come to examine, whether the
Rest you have is the glorious Rest here spoken of, and two things I shall do
because notwithstanding all this glorious Rest, many of Gods servants here in
this world are under much trouble of spirit, I shall give further rules how to
make use of the rest that is to be had in Christ, and some rules likewise how
to keep the rest, when the Lord Christ gives you Rest.

First, For the evidences to know whether your Rest be indeed the right Rest
that is in Christ.

First, This Rest in Christ, it can never be but upon great discovery of
glorious things that the soul was not acquainted with before, many men go on
and are quiet in their way and think that their rest is Christ's rest, how will
that appear that it is Christ's Rest? It will appear that they have had poor
weak grounds to stand upon, only that which they have in a natural way, they
live quietly among men, and the creatures does not trouble them, and in a
prudential way they are loath to trouble themselves in their own thoughts. But
now, I appeal to thy soul, what discoveries have thou had of the glorious
things of the covenant of Grace, and the covenant of life, in those ways that
God has had in his eternal counsels to reconcile God and thy soul? What
discoveries of Gods ways have thou had, to draw thy heart to Christ? Thy Rest
must come from these, these must be the means to bring thy soul to rest, if
thy Rest come from blindness, Ignorance, and deadness of spirit, it is far from
the true Rest in Christ.

Secondly, The Rest that the soul has in Christ, it is that that the Apostle
speaks of in Heb. 14, It comes upon the souls ceasing from its own work, as
God ceased from his, verse the 10. For he that is entered into his Rest, he also
has ceased from his own works, as God did from his. As God did Rest the
seventh day from al his works, he gives that note of the rest in Christ. There
remains therefore a rest to the people of God, for he that is entered into his
rest, he also has ceased from his own works, as God ceased from his. He
comepares the rest that the soul has in Christ, to Gods rest upon the seventh
day. Now says he, as God seized from his work that he wrougt upon the sixth
day, and the seventh day he rested, so whatsoever enters upon this rest, he
must cease from his own works what is that? The work that a man works for
himself, as in his natural estate, every man in his natural estate does not
Gods work at al, but works his own work. Now, says he, look as God cease
from his own work, and then rests, they that enter into this rest must cease
from their own works, those works of sin that they lived in, and wrought for
themselves, for their own ends, while they were in their natural estates; so
that then examine this, have thou cea^ed from thy own works? do not thou work
for thy self in all thy ways? Art thou taken off from thy self and all the
creatures? It may be thou do some work, but materially it is nothing of Gods,
thou prayest and make profession of religion, I but it is thy own work
still. But if thou be entered into this rest, thou must cease from thine own
works, not only from those works that are sinful in themselves, but thou must
not work for thy self in the best things, thou must be taken off from thy self
in the best things, thou must work the works of God, and be emptied of thy
self, and then thy soul shall have rest, That is both an evidence that thy rest
is true, and a means to bring rest unto thy soul. Take heed that thy work be
not thine own work, when thou do any work, I am about such and such a work,
I but is it my own work or Gods work It is true, there was a time that all the
work I did was for my self, and then if there were any argument, whereby I
could see that it was for my self I could work, if it was for self ends, if I
had self to be promoted I could work, this is the way of men in themselves. But
now when the soul has entered into the rest of Christ, he has ceased from his
own works, and therefore now though there be not strong arguments and ends to
persuade me to do a work, yet it is enough that it is the work of God, and God
shall have praise in it, and I can work as earnestly and and strongly in the
work as ever I did any work for my self,

Thirdly, Another note of the true rest of the soul in Christ is this, The more
rest thou have in Christ, the more active thou art for God; the false rest that
the soul has makes it dull, secure, sluggish, and negligent: but now the true
rest that is in Christ, makes the soul mighty active, and stirring, maks it to
do great things for God; never had that ability to do for God, as now when it
has had rest from Christ, as now we know that many people are very active and
stirring, when their conscience is stirred, then they will rise early in the
morning, and hear, and read, and pray, and mightily stir, when their conscience
is stirred, but if they have got any quiet and rest to their spirits, they grow
lazy, dull, and secure, and are less active in the places God has set them in
then before; but the soul that has true rest from Christ, is more active and
lively in the work of God then before. As Archimedes said, give me a place
where I could rest my self on, and he thought then he could move the earth, so
let the soul get but once the foot stopped upon Christ, so as he can have rest in
Christ, he can do more for God then ever he could before. And therefore I
remember (and you may afterward by comparing find this note to be true) that
whereas God commanded Moses while they were going up and down in the wilderness
and had no rest, to make an altar for sacrifice of such a bigness, so many
foot, in the story you shall find that when Solomon came to make an Altar to
God, he made it twice as big as Moses in the time of their being in the
wilderness. The two several places I cannot stand to look to, but you shall find
this note to be true, that the altar of Solomon, was as big again as the altar
of Moses, Why? for they were then in a restless condition, went up and down,
and were not at rest, But now when they came to the Land of Canaan, there they
had rest, and there the altar is as big again; noting, that they should offer
as much sacrifice again as they did before in the time when they were in the
wilderness, in their restless condition. So, thy soul was once in the
wilderness, hurried up and down, and then the altar for thy sacrifice was bu^
little, but when once God brings rest to thy soul in Christ, thy altar shall be
as big again, and thou shall do as much more for God as thou did before*

Fourthly, Another note of the true rest in Christ is this, if so be that thou
have this rest, then that which is Christ's rest is thine, as thus. If thou have
rest in Christ then look what Christ has rest in, that is thy rest too, as
now. what is the rest of Christ? Christ has rest especially in three things,
there are three things that are the rest of Christ. Gods rest in his Saints.
His rest in his Ordinances. And his rest in his Sabbaths. Now those that are
partakers of true rest for their Souls in Christ, look what Gods rest is, thy
rest is. As now for the Saints the soul has rest in them, that is, thy soul
has content and rest in them, in their company. Mark what is said of them in
Zepha. 3.17. Says the Holy Ghost. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his
Love, he will joy over thee with singing. Is the society and company of the
saints a rest to the, or rather a trouble to thee? Oh, to many, the company of
the saints it is a trouble to them but when they get into their own company,
amonst their own Companions, then they have some Rest,

And then for the ordinances, for that you have a text in the 132. Psalm. and
14. Speaking of Zion. For the Lord has Chosen Zion, he has desired it for his
habitation, this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it.
Oh, in Zion, in ordinances, in duties, in the worship that is tendered up to
thee, here is my rest for ever, and here is my delight, Lord let me have rest
this way, my spirit is never so much at rest, as when I am in the duties of
Gods worship, when I am exercised in Gods ordinances, here my soul is at rest,
what ever I have else, If I should have peace again, and enjoy estate quietly,
yet except I have Gods ordinances I cannot have rest. Now does thy soul enjoy
more rest in the ordinances then in any other way? then thy rest is Christ's
rest. And then for the sabbath, you know what the scripture says, what a
sabbath is, it is nothing but rest, and is the saboth a day of Rest unto thy
soul? do not many people think the sabbath day most troublesome to them,
especially, if they be kept to holy duties, prayer, hearing the word, and the
like: Suppose you be put to pray in your closet, and then to pray in your
family, and to ask some questions to your servants and children, and then come
to the public, and there to sanctify the name of God, and then when you come
home again, to examine your family, over what they have learned, and so prepare
your selves again to the ordinance and so to spend your self in prayer, and
hearing, and excercising all the day, would not this be a weariness to many of
you? And would not many of you say, as those in Malachy, When will the sabbath
be over? Men indeed count the sabbath a rest, Why? because they cease from
working, and they put on fine cloths, and go abroad, and walk in the feilds and
upon this they count the sabbath a rest, surely such are not acquainted with
the rest that is in Christ; but if thy soul be acquainted with this rest, then
the sabbath is but a tipe of that rest, that thou shall keep in the highest
heavens, it is but a tipe unto thee, and a forerunner of that Glorious Rest
that thou shall enjoy hereafter.

Fifthly, If thy soul have true rest, it is such rest as will abide examination
of the word of God, though it does touch to the quick, and the more the word
does touch to the quick, the more it comes to thy soul, the more rest thy soul
has. In Heb. after the Holy Ghost had spoken of the rest that is to the people
of God, in 12. says he. The word is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any
two edged sword, peircing to the dividing a sunder of Soul and spirit, and of
the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
Heart. As if he should say, if you enter into the Rest of Gods people, you shall
have such a rest as will abide the most narrow, and quickening searchings of the
word of God, the word of God will search you through and through, and your rest
shall be such a rest as will abide the search A rest that comes by the word, the
more the word searches, the more it increases quickening, it searches between
the marrow and the bones, and the more rest a true gracious Heart finds.

CHAP. LI.
Eight means to get and keep Rest in Christ. 1. Beware of secret sins. 2. Be
thankful for what good God has given thee. 3. Judge not thy self in time of
temptation. 4. In trouble wait upon God in the use of means, 5. Meditate much
upon the promises. 6. Proportion humiliation to thy comfort. 7. Be thoroughly
grounded that thou art in Christ. 8. Improve the Rest thou have to God, by
doing much work to him.

OBJECT.
BUt you will say, notwithstanding all this you have spoken, yet many of the
Saints of God, though they have been careful to do what you have said, yet they
do not find this Rest you speak of in Christ.

Answ. It is true, it is not enough for you to be a believer, for one may be a
believer, and yet not have the evidence of the Graces in Christ, so as to have
Rest unto his Soul. You will say what should we do then?

First, Take heed that there be no secret sin abide in your spirits, you had
need examine and look to that, for that will be a thorn in the flesh, that will
trouble you, if there be any secret sin thou live in, it will be as a thorn
in the flesh! that thou can not be quiet.

Secondly, Another thing that will hinder the rest of believers is, That
because they have not so much as they desire, they will not take notice of what
good God has granted to them; because they have not al they would have, they
think they have nothing at al. Now take heed of that, though thou have not all,
yet take notice of what God has done for thee, and be thankful for that. We
read of the Women in the Gospel that went ^o seek Christ, they found the
Angels, and heard news of him, though they found him not at first: So, though
thy soul find not Christ for the present, and the rest thou desire, yet if
thou have any news of him, any beginning of Gods work in thy Soul, take notice
of that. Should the Women have said, what is that to us, that we find the
Angels, and that we hear news of him, it is Christ that we seek; No, they said
not so* And therefore, I say, bless God for what ever thou have, it is more
then others have, bless God for it, and that is the way to have more.

Thirdly, Never judge of thy self as thou feel thy self in a time of
temptation, it may be thou art under a temptation, or spiritual desertion, now
do not judge of thy self as thou find thy self at that time. As now, if so be
a man when he has been long in a Quartan Fever, or one that has layen long
in the Disease of the Pox, if he shall at last look upon his visage, and judge of
the constitution of his body, according to his countenance this would
discourage him, but he must judge of his constitution at that time, when the
distemper is not upon him: So many poor Christians, they judge of their
condition then, when they are under the greatest temptation, No, you should
rather judge of your estates as you are when you enjoy your selves most, when
God and your souls are together, and most free from temptation. If a man would
weigh Gold, perhaps the Gold has one grain more then the weight, yet if you
come to weigh it and hold it in the wind, the wind may toss up the scale and
make the Gold seem to be too light, and you will say, the Gold is not weight,
Why? Because the wind tosseth up the scale the other way. But now, if you would
see whether the Gold be weight indeed, hold it steady where the wind comes not;
So, if you would weigh your condition aright, do it at that time when your
spirit is most settled and stayed, and do not do it when temptation tosseth you
up and down.

Fourthly, Another help to believers to prevent another hinderance of their
rest is this, That their spirits because they have not what rest they would
have, many times grow impatient, and trouble themselves more then God would
have them. Now this is a Rule, labor to quiet your hearts by waiting upon God
in the want of comfort, and Labor in the use of what means God shall give you
for a waiting frame. That Text is very notable for that purpose, in Isai. 30.7.
For the Egyptians shall help in Vain, and to no purpose, therefore have I cried
concerning this; their strength is to ^it still. And than at verse, 15. Thus
says the Lord God, the Holy one of Israel, in returning and Rest shall ye be
saved in quietness and confidence shall be your strength, but ye would not. And
so in Isaiah, 52.12. For ye shall not go out with have, nor go by flight, for
the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward, There
shall not be a tumultuous, hurrying, hasty Spirit. You will say, can a man make
too much have to get assurance of Gods Love in Christ? The truth is, you make
the best speed, when you can in the quiet and calm of your spirits wait upon
God, while he will please to speak to your Souls, when we can go on in the use
of means, til God seal up by his spirit of assurance to your Souls. Many
Reasons might be given, to put on the Soul to wait upon God, but I pass on.

Fifthly, Another Rule is this, be much in Meditation upon the promises, swallow
down promises, do not let them role upon your Tongues. Wicked men, they role
the promises upon their Tongues, but they do not take them down. But now, as
when we take bitter Pills, the way is to swallow them down whole, when we take
sweet things the way is to chew them, if a man should chew his Pills, he would
suddenly throw them out of his Mouth. So a Godly man should not chew the Pills,
that is, by Meditating upon the threatenings of the Law, this is not the way,
rather swallow down the Pills, by Meditating upon the Gospel, and the Covenant
of Grace, and so thy soul may come to find rest in Christ this way. And when
thou have done all that thou can, yet still the only way is for thee to depend
upon God in his ordinances, and to pray for the spirit, no evidence that can be
given, can quiet the Heart till that comes to pass. But now if so be the soul
has gained this, what a thing is it for the soul to loose it again. In Isaiah,
26.^0. Come my people enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut the doors about
thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment until the indignation be
overpast. What is it to come and enter into our Chamber? To get into Christ our
hiding place; and then shut the doors, that is, take heed of parlying with
temptation. As thus now, when as the Lord has given thee rest, and thy rest
comes in by the word, by applying the word to thy soul, now shut the door
against temptation, there will arise some fears and Jealousies at that time, now
therefore, shut the door against al surmises, ^ea^es, and Jealousies, and call
for the word, let the word be the rule for thy fear, as well as for thy comfort
and rather depend on one Scripture for thy comfort, then upon a thousand
Jealousies for thy fear. And this is now to shut the door against temptation,
resolve here will I venture, here is the word of God, which is sure and
certain, and for temptation, the Devil will trouble me with the Rapping and
knocking at the door, but let him Knock as long as he will, I have got a
promise here, and I will venture my Soul upon this promise: And for want of
this, though thou have gotten the promise, yet upon every temptation thou
openest the door. You know in time of danger, when any come and rap at the
door, will you open the door presently? No, you bid your Servant ask who it is,
and they must give a good account what they would have, and from whence they
come, before you will open the door; So, when any temptation raps at thy soul,
inquire what it would have, and whence it comes, does it come from God or no,
or from the Devil? Many people, they think the word to be a rule for their
Faith, but they think the word is not a rule for their fear, you must have as
good a warrant for refusing any comfort that is tendered to you, as well as for
the taking of any comfort, and if you would observe that rule, that you will
never refuse comfort, but you will have a word to warrant you. If the Lord come
to you and say, why did you refuse such comforts, and you say, I was in fear
and Jealousies, I but if God should say, what word have you for it? What were
you able to answer? Oh, This is that that God will require of you, for it is a
dishonor to the truth of God, that whenas there is a word to ground thy Faith
upon, and nothing but Jealousies to ground thy fears, yet thou will make thy
Jealousies and thy fears to weigh down the word.

Sixthly: Again, according to the degrees of thy inlargment, so let thy
Humiliation be, as thou find thy Heart enlarged with joy, at the same time
let thy Grace work downward in way of Humiliation, observe a proportion between
thy joy and Humiliation, many people are enlarged upon the joy they have in
Christ, but they are not humbled, and therefore they vanish.

Seventhly: Again, Be not satisfied merely that thou art in Christ, and a
believer, but labor to be thoroughly grounded that thou art in Christ, for who
knows what troubles and desertions thou may meet with all, labor to root thy
soul, be established in Christ, grounded in Christ, to be a grounded Christian,
and therefore not to live upon sense, but to live by Faith when thou have sense.

Eighthly: Lastly, Improve thy rest for God, be sure to do much work when the
Lord gives thee Rest, as we use to say of outward peace, it brings plenty, so
the truth is, the peace tha^ God gives in our consciences, and the rest that we
have in Christ, should make us plentiful in all good works. And by these rules,
if thou do keep the door shut against temptation; if according to the degrees
of thy inlargment thy Humiliation is. If thou art not satisfied merely that
thou art in Christ, and a believer, but laborest to be thoroughly grounded, that
thou art in Christ; if thou do root thy soul in Christ, and if thou do
improve thy rest to God, to do much work for God, when he gives thee Rest. Thus
doing, thou shall have rest, an abiding rest unto thy soul, thus thou shall be
in thy Chamber of Rest, with the door shut, while the indignation is overpast,
thus thou shall have rest in the time of evil, and all the troubles in the
world shall be but as the rattling of the Rain upon the Tiles while thou art in
the House, Yea, and the rest thou have in Christ, is but the forerunner of the
glory that thou shall have with Christ, which thou ought to long for, when
thou have fears and troubles, thou ought to pray, O Lord Jesus Christ,
fulfill the things thou have promised to thy Servants, and give Rest and Peace
unto my Soul.

FINIS.

