JEREMIAH BVRROUGHES Gospell-Preacher To two of the greatest Congregations in
England Viz. Stepney and Cripplegate London Aetatis Suae. 45.
portrait of Jeremiah Buroughs C^^ss sculpt: June. 1. 1646


AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED Upon the Eighth, Ninth,
and Tenth Chapters of the PROPHESY OF HOSEA.

Being First delivered in several LECTURES at Michaels Cornhil, LONDON.

By Jeremiah Buroughs.

Being the Sixth Book published by Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, Sydrach
Simpson, William Bridge, John Yates, Will. Adderly.


LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1650.

To the READER.
WHAT We have by way of Preface set before the Edition of the Fourth, Fifth,
Sixth and Seventh Chapters, may sufficiently serve for a Premise to these
Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Chapters, as holding forth the Use and Scope of the
whole Prophecy, and the Authors Intentions in his Comment thereon: So as We
shall only need now to give LETTERS of CREDENCE before the World, to the
passing of These, as the best, and most authentic Notes that could any way be
obtained, both as the Extracts of the best Notes of Sermons, taken from his
Mouth, and chiefly his own Writings, which were more brief. Exspect shortly the
Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Chapters from the same hand. We commit Them,
and the Reader to the blessing of God.

Thomas Goodwyn, Sydrach Simpson, William Greenhil, William Bridge, John Yates,
Will. Adderly.


THE CONTENTS
Hosea, Chap. VIII.
VERSE I
Observation 1 MInisters must not only be trumpeters of Mercy and Peace, but
also of Judgment Page 2 Obs. 2 Ministers must not be weary of their work though
little good come of it 3 Obs. 3 The denunciation of threatening in the Name of
God, is a terrible sound ibid. Obs. 4 Men flatter themselves when danger is at
a distance 4 Obs. 5 All the swiftness of an enemy is from God 5 Obs. 6. God
does not presently cast away a Church, though it be guilty of many sins. ibid
Obs. 7. It is an high expression of the Privilege of a Church, That it is the
house of the Lord. 6 Obs. 8 Though we be Gods house, yet enemies may come upon
us. 7
VERSE II.
Opened 8 Obs. 1 In affliction men see their need of God. 9 Obs. 2 The vilest
wretches in time of distress will call for help of God ibid Obs. 3.
Acknowledgment of God in a formal way, is that Hypocrites think will comend
them to God 10 Obs. 4 Degenerate children look for favor for their godly
parents sakes. 11 Obs. 5 They will think to have the same mercies their fathers
had ib.
VERSE III.
Obs. 1 The true Worship of God is the Good thing by way of Excellency 12 Obs.
2 Gods Worship is repelled by carnal hearts ib. Obs. 3 Though at first men only
leave God, yet at last they cast him off with abomination ib. Obs 4 When the
good of Duty is cast off, the evil of punishment will come in 14
VERSE IV.
Expounded 15 Obs. 1 We may do the thing God would have done, and yet sin
highly against God 17 Obs. 2 To go about great businesses without consulting
with God, is sin. 18 Obs. 3 Alteration in Civil Government is a great matter
ib. Obs. 4 When we are about great businesses we must look at Gods ends. ib.
Obs. 5 We can have no comfort of Gods mercies, if we stay not Gods time 19 Obs.
6 When we have a mercy promised, we must take it by lawful means ib. Obs. 7
When we have a mercy we must improve it for God 20 Obs. 8 God knows how to make
use of men's sins 22 Obs. 9 God many times suffers sinners to prosper a long
time ib.
VERSE V.
Obs. 1 Though Idolaters promise themselves safety by their Idols, yet they
will leave them at last 26 Obs. 2 Take heed of Engagements in what is evil 28
Obs. 3 If by custom in evil we have no power to get out, this will be no excuse
ib.
VERSE VI.
Obs. 1 None are so so^^ish in wicked ways as Apostats 30 Obs. 2 To he
devisers of evil in Gods Worship is a great aggravation of sin ib. Obs. 3 Men
stick close to their own inventions in Gods Worship ib. Obs. 4 There is no sin
more hereditary then Idolatry ib. Obs. 5 Idols must be broken in pieces 34 Obs.
6 Whatsoever may be broken in pieces we may not make our God ib. Obs. 7
Deifying a Creature makes way for the destruction of the Creature 35
VERSE VII.
Obs. 1 Idolaters are willing to take pains for their false worship 35 Use. Let
us take pains for the the true Worship ib. Obs. 2 Idolaters sow in hope 36 Obs.
3 Idolaters lay a ground for succession ib. Obs. 4 Idolaters observe their
season ib. Obs. 5 Many sow the wind 37 Who sow the wind 1 Some Students ib. 2
Idolaters ib. 3 Formalists 38 4 Vain glorious ib. 5 Carnal Politicians 39 6
Such as serve themselves of sin. ib.
Use 1. Comfort for the Church that al their enemies do but sow the wind 39 Use
2. Ministers must beware of sowing the wind 1 If they bring empty words. 2
Their own fancies to the people 41
Obs. 6 They that sow the wind, it is just with God they should reap the
whirlwind 42 Obs. 7 Sometimes wicked actions may seem to prosper, though the
curse of God be upon them. 44 Obs. 8 To have our desires satisfied for a while,
and then destroyed, is a great judgment 45
VERSE VIII.
Expounded 46
VERSE IX.
Expounded 50 Object. Why does God compare the ten Tribes to a wild Ass? Answ.
1. To show their stubbornness 52 2 To show their contemptibleness 53 Obj Why
does he say [Alone?] Answ. 1. To show they would be under no Government 54 2
That they were fit for no society 55 Obs. 1 Where we place our confidence,
there our love should be placed ib. Obs. 2 Idolaters will not stand upon terms
if they may have their Idols any way 56 Obs. 3 It is an evil thing to be drawn
to false worship 57
VERSE X.
Obs. 1. It is a great evil when wicked men seem to prosper more than Gods
people in outward estate 59 Obs. 2 Many times when men think they provide most
for their peace, they provide most for their ruin 61 Obs. 3 People many times
run headily on in evil ways that will destroy them 62 Text opened in diverse
Particulars 63 Obs. 1. When sinners have brought trouble upon themselves, then
they complain much 66 Admonition to England ib. Obs. 2. Taxes upon men's estates
is but a little burden in respect of being brought under the power of the enemy
67 Obs. 3 Taxes are but little burden in comparison to the carrying of our
brethren into captivity 67 Obs. 4 It is Gods mercy to bring lesser evils upon
us thereby to prevent greater ib. Obs. 5. The consideration of little burdens
upon us, should move us to turn to God 68 Obs. 6. Gods judgments against wicked
men are the beginings of further judgments ib.
VERSE XI.
Opened 69 Object. Why God would have but one Altar? 74 Answ. 1. These Altars
did typifie two things 1 That Christ was to be the only sacrifice 74 2 That all
our services are accepted only in him ib.
2. That it might be the bond of the Church.
Other Objections Answered. 76 Obs. 1 Man's inventions in Gods Worship are
rejected of God 77 Obs. 2 There is no stop in superstitious worship 78 Obs. 3
We are ready to imitate our forefathers in what is evil, but not in what is
good 79 Obs. 4. Take heed distance of time make us not to fear the threatening
the less. 80 Obs. 5 Every age ads something to Idolatry and false worship 81
Obs. 6 What ever names we give to things it may be God will give other names
and titles 83 Obs. 7 When men's hearts are set upon falls ways of worship, it is
just with God to let them have their desires to the full ib.
VERSE XII.
Obs. 1 Whatsoever is urged or practiced in matter of worship, it must have
warrant out of the written Word of God 85 Obs. 2 We should look upon the
Scriptures as concerning our selves 92 Obs. 3 The things of Gods Worship are to
be looked upon as great things. 96 1 Because they are from a great God ib. 2
The luster of the great God shines in them ib. 3 They are the mysteries of Gods
will 97 4 They are of great concernment. 98 5 They have great power on the
heart of man ib. 6 They make all those great that receive them 99 7 They are
great in Gods account ib.
Obs. 4 The word is matter for the greatest spirits to exercise themselves
about 101 Obs. 5 It is a special means to obedience to have high thoughts of
Gods Law 102 Obs. 6. The worship of God is a great matter 103 The Word of God
accounted strange 1 As not concerning them 105 2 Strange in their
apprehensions. 106 3 There is no sutableness between their hearts and the
Doctrine. 107 4 They use the Word as a stranger viz. for their own ends 108
Obs. 7 Superstitious people that are very zealous in their own way of worship,
are very negligent in Gods way 108 Obs. 8 It is a dangerous thing for men to
have their hearts estranged from Gods Law 110 The Degrees of the hearts
estrangement from God. 1 His delight in God abates 111 2 They are less frequent
together. ib. 3 He has hard thoughts of Gods Word ib 4 He wishes the things
in the Word were otherwise ib. 5 He begins to listen to things that are against
the Word 112 6 He will not search thoroughly into truths ib. 7 An engagement in
some unlawful practice ib. 8 Weighty arguments now become weak ib. 9 He
violently rejects the Word. ib.
Obs. 8 That which men's corrupt hearts will not close withal they put it upon
Christ, as if Christ had delivered them from it 113
VERSE. XIII.
Obs. 1 Men may continue in outward profession, and yet the great things of
Gods Law may be strange to them 115 Obs. 2 Most men offer up nothing to God in
sacrifice but flesh 116 Obs. 3 To aim at Self in serving God, eats out true
devotion 117 Obs. 4 If Self be regarded, all is rejected 119 Obs. 5 Men may be
much in holy services and yet their sins stand upon the score nevertheless 120
Obs. 6 Howsoever God may forbear wicked men a time, yet he has a time to
remember all ib. Obs. 7 God remembers the sins of wicked people, especially in
the performance of holy duties 122 1 Because we come into Gods presence ib. 2
Holy Duties are aggravations of sin. ib.
Obs. 8 God visits men's sins when they think he neglects them most 123 Obs. 9
Carnal hearts, when God visits their sins, plot which way to shift for
themselves 124 Obs. 10 It is one of the most dreadful judgments of God upon a
Nation, when he has delivered them from one bondage, to deliver them into the
same again 125 Obs. 11 It is just with God that those that inherit their
fathers sins should inherit their fathers judgments ib. Obs. 12 All places are
places of misery when God forsakes a People ib.
VERSE XIV.
Obs. 1 God punishes for sin when men are most secure 126 Obs. 2 It is Gods
favor that makes a man 127 Obs. 3 The greater excellency God raises a man to,
the viler is his sin to forget God 128 Obs. 4 When men's hearts are farthest off
from God, then are they forwardest in superstition 128 Objections answered 129
Obs. 5 Men are more subject to secure themselves from outward things than from
Gods wrath 132 Obs. 6 When men bless themselves in their own thoughts, they
should consider what are Gods thoughts? 133 Obs. 7 Brave things are subject to
Gods devouring fire 134
CHAP. IX.
VERSE. I.
Obs. 1 That Is a sad war where the Conqueror has cause to be sad at the
Conquest 137 Use for England ib. Obs. 2 Leagues wherein we much rejoice may
prove occasions of sorrow. 138 Use. Be not greedy of peace before the time ib.
Obs. 3 Carnal hearts bless themselves in in outward prosperity 139 Obs. 4 When
men be jolly and merry, they should consider whether it be from God or not 140
Obs. 5 We may prosper, and yet have no cause of joy ib. Obs. 6 Carnal hearts
are immoderate in joy 141 Exhortations. 1 Be not taken with the worlds jollity.
142 2 Imitate them not in their ways of rejoicing ib. 3 Do not rejoice as a
People 143 4 Rejoice not profanely ib. 5 Rejoice not as having so much cause as
others 144
Obs. 7 Many that scorn mean men may not be in so good a case as they. ib. Obs.
8 Although we enjoy the same blessings that othess do, yet we may not have the
same cause to rejoice that they have 144 Obs. 9 It is a great argument of men's
misery that others rejoice, when they cannot 145 Obs. 10 That which we call
little matter in corrupting Gods Worship, God calls a going a whoring from him
147 Obs. 11 A People may be free from the gross evils of another people, and
yet be in a worse condition than they 147 Proved 148 Obs. 12 To be constant to
evil principles is not so great an evil, as to be false in good principles ib.
Obs. 13 The sins of Gods People are the greatest sins of all 149 Obs. 14
Idolaters love outward prosperity because it is a reward of their service to
their Idols 153
VERSE II.
Obs. 1 God often lets wicked men come near a mercy, and then cuts them off 154
Obs. 2 God strikes wicked men in those things their hearts are m^st set upon
ib. Obs. 3. The promises of the creature will lie, the promises of the world
will not. 155 Obs. 4 Men shall fail at last in what they think they to get in a
way of sin ib.
VERSE III.
Obs. 1 It is a great judgment of God to drive men out of a Land for sin 159
Obs. 2 The state of the Church of God is excellent ib. Use 1. To show the
happiness of Believers ib. Use 2. To show what a judgment it is to be cast out
of the Church of God ib.
Obs. 3 Those that make Leagues with wicked men, it is just with God they
should be enthralled in their abominations 161 Obs. 4 When men are inwardly
unclean, God cares not for their outward cleanness ib. Obs. 5 A great sin it is
for the Saints to join with the World in evil worship 161
VERSE IV.
Obs. 1 Those that abuse their joy to lust, it is just with God to take it from
them 163 Obs. 2 This makes the affliction bitter when the joy in Gods service
is gone ib. Obs. 3 It is a sad thing when a creature would seek to God, and yet
God rejects him 170
VERSE V.
Opened 173 The perplexity of the wicked in the Lords day. 1 All comforts are
gone 177 2 God Himself fights against them ib. 3 Conscience terrifies them ib.
4 They know not whither to go for help ib. 5 The thoughts of God are terrible
to them ib. 6 These miseries are but the beginning of sorrows ib.
The Saints know what to do in a day of calamity 1 Bless God that ever they
knew him 178 2 Exercise Faith in the Word 179 3 Sanctify the Name of God in
his Judgments ib. 4 Ease their souls by Prayer. ib. 5 See beyond present evils.
ib.

VERSE VI.
Obs. 1 Carnal hearts have always some shifting thoughts how to provide for
themselves 180 Obs. 2 Carnal hearts will rather make any thing their refuge in
affliction, than God 18^ Obs. 3 It is a great affliction to be forced to leave
ones own Country and never return 183
VERSE VII.
Obs. 1 God has his set time for execution of Judgment 187 Obs. 2 The
apprehension of present evil terrifies the soul 188 Obs. 3 Wicked men will not
know till they feel ib. Obs. 4 The knowledge men have of God in time of
affliction is a working knowledge 189 Obs. 5 In time of affliction men cry out
that those are fools that seduced them ib. Obs. 6 It is no excuse for men to be
led aside by their Ministers 190
VERSE. VIII.
Obs. 1 Many vile things are hid under glorious titles 191 Obs. 2 When the
Truth is clear, it is dangerous to seek the Opinions of others 192 Obs. 3 No
cause so ill but will be maintained by some learned 193 Obs. 4 It is a great
grief to those that have interest in God, to see those that maintain that which
is evil, to pretend as much for God as any ib. Obs. 5 You must have ground from
Scripture before you submit to any thing in the Worship of God. 195 Obs. 6.
Those that have interest in God rejoice when they see faithful Ministers keep
close to God 199
VERSE IX.
Obs. 1 When superstition has gotten deep root in the heart it is hardly got
out 202 Use to England ib. Obs. 2 We may find wors usage from those that
profess Religion than from those which profess it not 207 Use. Take heed how
you carry your selves toward your Brethren ib. Obs. 3 God may behold those
filthy who carry fair shows in Religion. ib. Obs. 4 For men to stand out
impudently in wickedness committed is abominable in the eyes of God 208 Obs. 5
To join with others to do so is wors ib. Applied to some of the Gentry and
Nobility of this Kingdom ib. Obs. 6 Such as do so may prosper a while. 209 Obs.
7 At last they shall all perish ib. Obs. 8 The sins of the forefathers is an
aggravation of the childrens sins ib.
VERSE X.
Obs. 1 We should lay to heart Gods love to our fathers, and seek to continue
it to our selves 211 Obs. 2 The greatness of Gods love is not enough to engage
carnal hearts. 214 Obs. 3 There is no evil so shameful but a carnal heart will
forsake the glorious God to cleave to it. 216 Obs. 4 So to leave God and cleave
to wickedness is abominable ib. Obs. 5 It is usual for people to be of the
Religion those are of whom they love. 219
VERSE XI.
Obs. 1 Multitude of children is a glory to a people 221 1 By them they are
multiplied. ib. 2 What excellency is in their children they look upon it as
their own ib. 3 They have hope of continuation from generation to generation by
them ib.
Use. Bring up your children in the fear of God ib. Obs. 2 Godliness brings
blessings swiftly, and wickedness drives them away as fast 245
VERSE XII.
Obs. 1 Many think all is well when they have escaped some judgment. 246 Obs.
2 It is a judgment to be deprived of children ib. Obs. 3 It is God in the
Creature that upholds it 248
VERSE XIII.
Expounded 253 Obs. 1 God may depart from men or kingdoms in their greatest
prosperity 255 Use Take heed when you are in your prosperity ib. Obs. 2. God
never shows so much respect to any, but if they forsake him, wrath follows 256
Obs. 3 The curs of God goes forward from the Parents to the children 257 Obs. 4
For the curse to follow from the parents to the children is an heavy curse 259
VERSE XIIII.
Obs. 1. Men's sins oftentimes make Gods Ministers at a stand what to say in
prayer 263 Obs. 2 The fruitfulness or barrenness of the womb is from God. ib.
VERSE XV.
Obs. 1 Above all sins, the sin of Idolatry makes a people hated of God. 169
Obs. 2 To take occasion to sin from Gods mercy is a thing which God hates 269
Obs. 3 It Is a hateful thing to cast off the Government that God would have men
under 271 Obs. 4 Some sins provoke God to hatred. 272 Obs. 5. Sometimes God
manifests his displeasure in the places where we sin. ib. Obs. 6 God cannot
endure wickedness in his own house. ib. Obs. 7 Men in Authority think it a
dishonor to be persuaded to alter their minds 276 Obs. 8 Engagements work
deeply in men when they are engaged in their honors ib. Obs. 9 According to
peoples interests so they are 277 Obs. 10 Princes though they should be used
with reverence, yet they should not be flattered ib. Obs. 11 When Princes
successively are wicked, there is little hope of good to that people 278
VERSE XVI
Obs. 1 God will not always forbear sinners 278 Obs. 2. If God leave Governors
to revolt the people will be smitten 282 Obs. 3 Compulsion of Authority does
not excuse sin 283 Obs. 4. Tbe apprehension of Gods hand in smiting should
humble the hearts of sinners 284 Obs. 5 God has his time to dry up the roots
of sinners 285
VERSE XVII.
Obs. 1. Let all the world forsake God a faithful soul will not 290 Obs. 2 It
is no presumption for a few to challenge interest in God, when the generality do
not 291 Use. Let thou be offended at the (...) of those that keep the faith ib.
Obs. 3 It is a dreadful thing for wicked men to be declared against by the
godly 292 Use. Do not slight it 293 Obs. 4 When men are violent in wickedness,
God will be violent in his judgments ib. Use. Take heed of being violent in the
wais of sin 294 Obs 5. In matters of Gods Worship we must hearken to God ib.
Obs. 6 It is a judgment to have an unsettled spirit 296 Obs. 7 Prize the
Communion of Saints. 298
CHAP. X.
VERSE. I.
Obs. 1 The Church is compared to a Vine 300 Reasons
1 It has an unpromising outside ib. 2 It is the most fruitful plant that
grows ib. 3 No plant requires so great care ib. 4 It is the most depending
creature 301 5 If not fruitful it is most unprofitable ib. 6 It is the emblem
of peace. 302
Obs. 2 Emptiness of professors is a very great evil 303 Reasons.
1 It Is unnatural 304 2 It Is a dishonor to their root. ib. 3 It frustrates the
Lord of all his care ib. 4 There is no blessing upon thy soul ib. 5 If there be
Grace it cannot but bear fruit ib. 6 Common gifts shall be taken away 305 7 An
empty spirit is fit for the Devil to possess 306 8 God does not let us sit
empty of blessings ib. 9 The Lord has justly made our Vine bleed for its
emptiness ib. 10 The evil of emptiness is great according to the greatness of
opportunities ib.
Use 1 If it be evil to be empty, what an evil is it to bring forth ill Grapes
ib. Use 2 Let us prize fruitfulness 307 Obs. 3 It is all one to be an empty
Christian, and to bring forth fruit to ones self 315 Obs. 4 When God is
spoiling a Nation it is vain for people to think to provide for themselves 317
Obs. 5 To increase our wickedness by Gods blessings is an abominable thing 319
Reasons
1 It is against the ingenuity of a Christian 320 2 Christian Principles are
above estate ib. 3 It is against our prayers. ib.
Obs. 6 The love Idolaters have to their Idols is according to that ability
they have to show their love. 320
VERSE II
Obs. 1 Though men strive never so much to maintain what is evil, God will
break it 326 Obs. 2 Though men be convinced of an evil, yet if the temptation
abide they will fall to it again. 327 Obs. 3 Superstitious Images and Altars
are to be taken away. ib. Obs. 4 If we give that respect that is due to God to
another thing, the Lord will destroy it ib. Obs. 5. If God break down what is
evil let not us set it up ib. Obs. 6 We must not break down Images to make up
our own broken estates 328 Obs. 7 Men's divisions break the neck of what they
contend for ib.
VERSE. III.
Obs. 1 It is a great evil for a people not to have the protection of a right
Government 331 Obs. 2 It is a great evil not to fear the Lord 332 Obs. 3. When
men have the countenance of great ones, there is little fear of God amongst
them ib. Obs. 4. The taking away of Kingly power is a punishment for the want
of the fear of God 333 Obs. 5. The times of Gods wrath forces acknowledgment
from their hearts that fear not God 334 Obs. 6 When the heart is humbled it
will not put off the cause of evils to other men 335 Obs. 7 When God forsakes a
people there is nothing can do them good 337 Obs. 8 It is just with God to make
those things unuseful which sinful people dote upon ib. Obs. 9. God can soon
change the hearts of people in reference to their King 339 Obs. 10 The
difference between Gods people and wicked men ib. Obs. 11 The stouter creature
confidence is, the more do they sink when they are crossed in their hopes 340
Obs. 12 When a carnal heart is knocked off from creature confidence then he
despairs ib.
VERSE IV.
Expounded 361 Obs. 1 Carnal hearts in their straits take shifting courses,
because they have no God to go to 364 Obs. 2 It is an evil thing for professors
to combine with wicked men 365 Obs. 3 There is no trust to wicked men's Oaths
and Covenants 365 Obs. 4. Breaking Covenant, though with wicked men, is a great
wicked^ness ib. Obs. 5 Injustice and Oppression is a forerunner of Ruin 372
VERSE V.
Obs. 1 Those that fear God least, are most afraid of any thing else 379 Obs. 2
In times of danger we should be most solicitous about the Worship of God 384
Obs. 3 Cities that are safe should be sensible of the miseries of others. 385
Obs. 4 Idolaters that dedicate themselves to Idols, are the people of that Idol
387 Obs 5. Idolaters account their Idol worship glorious 391
VERSE VI.
Obs. 1 Our depending upon men for help is dearly bought 392 Obs. 2. It is the
fashion of Idolaters to rejoice much when they get one another gods ib.
Applied to England ib. Obs. 3 Men's own counsels in matters of Religion bring
them to shame. 396 1 Because it is much regarded ib. 2 God leaves them to
folly. ib. 3 They provoke God by them. 398
Use. 1. What to avoid in Counsels. 1 False principles. ib. 2 Wicked men ib. 3
Self ends ib. 4 Pride and conceitedness ib. 5 Flesh and blood ib. 6 Passion and
frowardness ib.
Use. 2 What we should attend in our counsels 1 Look up to Jesus Christ 399 2
Pray much ib. 3 Let the fear of God be strong 400 4 Keep to the Word of God.
ib. 5 Be not put off with shows of Reason 401 6 Be humble ib. 7 Consult with an
indifferent judgment ib. 8 Do as you would be done by ib. 9 Whether it may not
cost too dear, though good ib.

VERSE VII.
Obs. 1 Ungodly men in their greatest rage are but as foam, if God come against
them 403 Scripture Expressions touching the vanity of great persons 404
VERSE. VIII.
Obs. 1 God destroies the glorious Names of Idolatry 406 Obs. 2 The nearer a
thing comes to the nature of sin, the viler it is. ib. Obs. 3 False worship is
the great sin. 407 Obs. 4 We may so abuse the creatures, that we may turn
them into sin it self ib. Obs. 5 When any Ordinances of God are abused, they
are to be but purged; but inventions of men are to be destroyed ib. Obs. 6 Man's
sin brings destruction upon the creatures 408 Obs. 7 If it be sad that false
worship is neglected, how sad is it that true worship is? 409 Obs. 8 The ruin
of Idolatrous places is more pleasing to God than their pomp 410 Obs. 9 What
men account highly of in matter of worship, when the enemy coms in he contemns
them ib. Obs. 10 God can make an alteration in Cities and Kingdoms 413 Obs. 11
It is a great misery to fall into the hands of ones enemies 414 Obs. 12 The
wrath of God is very dreadful ib. Obs. 13 To live in misery is worse than
present death 415 Obs. 14 The misery of wicked men in affliction is wonderful
416 Obs. 15 Desperation is a dreadful thing. ib.
VERSE IX.
Opened 418 Obs. 1 To commit the same sins our ancestors did, is greater than
theirs was 419 Obs. 2 God takes it ill when those whom he has used to punish
others for sin, commit the same sins themselves ib Obs. 3 Children of iniquity
may escape once and again 423
VERSE X
Expounded 425 Obs. 1 When God has a mind to bring about a thing, he will
gather a people 427 Obs. 2 God will choose his rod he will scourg us with ib.
VERSE XI.
Obs. 1 Such as are divided in prosperity, shall be bound together in bondage
430 Obs. 2 It is a sign of a carnal heart to avoid any work God calls to,
because it is difficult 431 Obs. 3 Hypocrites are content with such services as
bring present comfort ib. Obs. 4 It is a sign of a carnal heart to seek present
accommodation 432 Obs. 5 God looks with indignation upon such as mind nothing
but ease and delicacy 455 Obs 6 It is an honor for men to go thorough
difficulti^s for God 439 Obs. 7 Let no men boast they live more at ease than
others ib. Use. Comfort for the afflicted Obs. 8. Those that for sake the true
Worship of God, it is well if they come into the meanest condition among Gods
People 441
VERSE XII.
Obs. 1. Though the sins of people be great, and judgments near, we know not
what an exhortation may do 441 Obs. 2 The actions of men are seeds 445 Obs. 3
They shall come up in the same kind ib. Obs. 4 The seed lies in the ground
rotting a while, yet afterward comes up. ib. Obs. 5 The seed sown comes up
through the blessing of God upon it ib. Obs. 6. The better the seed is, the
longer it lies under ground 446 Obs. 7 The Ministers of God are sowers. ib.
Obs. 8 Large oportunities of doing service for God should be our riches ib.
Obs. 9 It is not every seed will serve the turn 447 Obs. 10 As a man sows so
shall he reap. 450 Use. Let the Saints set a price upon the actions of
Righteousness 451 Obs. 11 God will give abundantly above our good works 455
Obs. 12 The hearts of men naturally are fallow grounds 456 Obs. 13 It is high
time to seek the LORD 474 Reasons.
1 God has been a long time patient ib. 2 Mercy is even going ib. 3 It is an
acceptable time. ib.
Obs. 14 It is time for England to seek God 478 Obs. 15 God will come to sow
Righteousness in time 480 Obs. 16 Sometimes God does not presently rain
Righteousness upon his people that sow it 481 Obs. 17 Those that seek aright
will continue seeking till God comes ib. Motives to continue seeking. 1. Thou
art doing thy duty. 482 2. Thou can not do better. ib. 3. While you are
waiting God is working good ib. 4. While thou art seeking thou art not without
some dews. 483 5. When he comes he will come more fully. ib.
Obs. 18 To those that are content to seek God till he comes, he will come with
plentiful showers 484 Obs. 19 The help of those that seek God is from Heaven
485 Obs. 20 When God comes he makes his people fruitful ib. Obs. 21 God comes
in righteousness to them that seek him 486 Obs. 22 Though the good we do be our
own good yet God rewards us as though he got by it ib.
VERSE XIII.
Obs. 1 The fruits of false worship is the increase of sin 490 Obs. 2 A man is
ready to trust in his own way 492 Use, What a shame is it Saints should not
trust in Gods way 495 Obs. 3 When great men go along with Religion men think it
must needs be right 497 Obs. 4 Great Armies are the confidence of carnal hearts
498 Use, Examine what your confidence is 499
VERSE XIV.
Obs. 1 Tumults are a token of great wrath of God 500 Obs. 2 Policy will not
prevail if God be against us 507 Obs. 3. Great is the rage of war if God let it
out 508 Obs. 4 The sins of parents many times comes upon little ones ib. Obs.
5. The judgments of God when near us should awaken us. 509
VERSE. XV.
Obs. 1 Miserable judgments many times arise from causes we little think of 510
Obs. 2 From places of Idolatry come the greatest evils to a Kingdom ib. Obs. 3.
False worship is the great sin God is provoked against a Nation for 511 Obs. 4.
God takes notice not only of men's sins, but their aggravations ib. Obs. 5.
According to the greatness of sin is the greatness of wrath 512 Obs. 6 When
people have some enlightening then Gods displeasure breaks out upon them 514
Use for England ib. Obs. 7 God loves to draw forth great sinners to the light
516 Obs. 8 God will make quick work with great sinners ib.
The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange, in LONDON.
A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY; or, a Translation of the London DISPENSATORY. Whereunto
is added, The Virtues of the Simples and Compounds. And in the second Edition
are 784. Additions, the general heads whereof are these, Viz. 1 The Dose (or
quantity to be taken at one time) and Use, both of Simples and Compounds. 2 The
Method of ordering the Body after sweating and purging Medicines. 3 Cautions
(to all ignorant people) upon all Simples and Compounds that are dangerous.
With many Additions in every Page, marked with the letter A.

Five Books of Mr Jer. Buroughs lately published: As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded. VIZ.
1. The rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed:
1 What Contentment is. 2 It is an holy Art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of
it. 4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 2.
Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed: 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general: and particularly, in Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3. Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1. 27. Wherein is
showed: 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the light of Nature. 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men
that have their Portion in tbis life, on Psalm, 17. 14. 4. A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed: 1 What Earthly-mindedness is. 2 The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, a Treatise of Heavenly mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24.
and on Phil. 3. 20. 5. An Exposition, with Practical Observations, on the 4th,
5th 6th and 7th Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea.
Twelve several Books of Mr Will. Bridge, collected into one Volum^. VIZ.
1. The great Gospel-Mysterie of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2. Satan's power to tempt; and Christ's
love to, and care of his People under temptation. 3. Thankfulness required in
every condition. 4. Grace for Grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's fullness
received by all Saints. 5. The Spiritual actings of Faith, through Natural
Impossibilities. 6. Evangelical Repentance. 7. The Spiritual-Life and In^being
of Christ in all Believers. 8. The Woman of Canaan. 9. A Vindication of
Ordinances under the Gospel. 10. Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 11. The Saints
Hiding Place in time of Gods Anger. 12. Christ's Coming is at our Midnight.
Dr Hill's Works. VIZ.
1. The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2. Truth and Love happily married in the Saints, and in
the Churches of Christ. 3. The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages
Christ Jesus. 4. The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength
5. The best and worst of Paul. 6. Gods Eternal Preparations for his dying
Saints.
Mr J. Owens two Books.
1. Stedfastness of Promises, And the sinfulness of Staggering. 2. The Death of
Christ, the Price he paid, etc. The Oath of Allegiance, and the National
Covenant proved to be Non-obliging, etc. by Sam. Eaton. Dr Sibbs on the
Philippians. The best and worst Magistrate, by Obadiah Sedgwick. Barrisf's
Military Discipline. Cum multis (...)
AN EXPOSITION Of the PROPHESY of HOSEA.
CHAP. VIII.
VERSE. 1.
Set the Trumpet to thy mouth: he shall come as an Eagle against the House of
the LORD: because they have transgressed my Covenant, and trespassed against my
Law.
THE Prophet still continues the Denunciation of Judgment against Israel, with
the Declaration and Aggravation of their sins.

Set the Trumpet to thy mouth. 1. Text.

Let there be a full, 2. Apptic. by paraphrase.
and free, and open manifestation of the sin and the danger of Israel: The same
commandment that we have here to the Prophet, we have in the 58 of Isa. at the
beginning to the Prophet there, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, show my people their transgression, and the House of Jacob their sin.

Ministers must not only be Trumpeters of the Gospel, Trumpeters of Mercy and
Peace, Obs. 1
but Trumpeters of Judgment and of War; they are set to give warning to people
of danger, and woe to them if they do not, God will require the blood of people
at their hands. How ever peoples spirits may be against it, against the free
and bold work of the Ministry in denouncing Judgments, yet the spirits of Gods
Ministers must go on in their way: Luther called the trumpet of rebellion
Luther in his time for the freedom and boldness of his spirit inveighing
against the sins of the times, he was called the very Trumpet of Rebellion, he
enveighs against their sins and threatens Judgments, and they exclaim against
him, they are as loud against him, and trumpet out their exclamations against
him, calling of him the Trumpet of Rebellion and sedition. If a Town be
besieged by the enemy, it is not the crying of children or women that must
hinder the beating up of the Drums, simile
nor the roaring of the Canon. God takes it exceeding ill at his Ministers
hands to be mealy mouthed, when his wrath is incensed; and therefore he calls
the Watchmen that did not give warning by an ignominious name, DVMB DOGS, that
cannot bark, Pliny
in Isa. 56. 10. I remember Pliny in his 29. Book, 4. Chapter, tells of the
Dogs in Rome, that were set to keep the Capitol, because when the Gauls did
scall the Capitol, the Dogs being fed too full, lay sleeping and did not give
warning; they therefore not only hanged them up, but every year the Romans
observed that time of the year, and on that day, hanged up certain Dogs in the
City for exemplary Justice, by way of crucifying of them alive upon an Elder
tree, Why crucifying on a tree was so hateful to the Romans.
and upon this ground it is thought that the Romans did so hate that kind of
death, of hanging upon a tree. And therefore it was the more cursed death that
Christ died to hang upon a tree. It is that that God is exceedingly provoked
against his Watchmen for, if they give not warning.

Hosea had proclaimed war before this in the name of the Lord, Expos. 3.
but he must do it again; from whence the Note is further.

That Gods Ministers must not be weary of their work though they see little
good come of it; Obser. 2.
yea so far from being weary or discouraged as their spirits must rise up in
their intentions strength and fervency of it.

Before Hosea's voice was the voice of a man; The paraphrase.
but now it is the sound of a Trumpet: Let wickedness stop her mouth, but let
the mouths of Gods Servants be opened, yea let a Trumpet be set against their
mouths in disclaiming against the wickedness of the times wherein they live.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
The denunciation of threatening in the Name of God, it is a terrible sound, if
men be not afraid of this Trumpet, and awakened by it, there is a time that
shall awaken them, when a Trumpet (I say) shall awaken them and make them
afraid, when the Arch Angel shall blow his Trumpet, those that are most awakned
and fears the sound of this Trumpet shall have the most comfort when the
Trumpet of the Arch Angel shall blow.

He shall come as an Eagle.
Luther upon the place thinks this Prophecy meant against Judah, Luther
because of the naming of the House of the Lord, as follows after. And then
this Eagle must be understood of Nebuchadnezzer, who is called an Eagle in
Ezekiel. 17. 3. and Jer. 48. 40. Author.
But rather I think it to be meant of the Assyrian, for the Prophet here is
prophesying against the ten Tribes, and he seems to take away the two great
confidences that they had whereby they hoped that they were not in so great
danger.

The first was, that they had made a league with Egypt which Assyrian he was a
great way off, and there was not so much danger to be thought of the Assyrians.

He shall come as an Eagle, against the House of the Lord: The Assyrians Army,
why an Eagle.
that is, the Assyrian, Salmanesser he is called an Eagle, and because he was
to come with an Army, therefore an Eagle; (and it may be his He shall come as
an Eagle, that is swiftly, with a mighty Why the Eagle was unclean under the
Law.
though the Eagle the King of Fowls, and of a brave spirit, yet he was unclean,
God would not have the Eagle offered in sacrifice, but rather the Dove, God
many times does not regard Eagles spirits, Obs. Go^ accepts not Eagles, but
Doves.
those that sore aloft and fly on high, but he does receive Dove-like spirits,
such as are of meek and quiet spirits.

But he shall come as an Eagle swiftly, that is upon the prey before it is
aware.

Men flatter themselves when danger is at any distance from them, Obs. 1.
if it be not just upon them, then think themselves safe, but God can bring
evil suddenly and iresistably upon them. In Isa. 5. 26. He will lift up an
Ensign to the Nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the
earth: Gualt.
and behold, they shall come with speed swiftly. Gualter upon this place
applies it to the Turks coming into some part of Germany, they were come on a
sudden from the uttermost part of Europe, yea from Asia, and so Spain and
Secily, and Italy; God, to punish the contempt of the Gospel, Applied to
England.
brought them suddenly upon them. Howsoever the Lord has delivered us hitherto
from foreign Nations, we think our selves secure because God has put work
enough into their hands for the present, the Danes, French, Spaniards, but how
easily is it for the Lord in an instant when there is no fear of them at all,
to bring them swiftly.

Secondly, Obs. 2
All the swiftness, and fierceness and quick-sightedness, and spirit of an
enemy is from the Lord: If an enemy be swift in his course, and quick-sighted
and fierce, and has a strong spirit we are to attribute this from the Lord.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
Wicked men in satisfying their rage and malice, they are as Eagles; much more
should we be in our service, we should not be slow: if they be to sati^fie
their rage as Eagles, we should imitate them in this to be much more so in the
service of God. But it follows,

He shall come as an Eagle against the House of the Lord.
Interpreters differ much about this, Against the House of the Lord: Luther.
because Hosea prophesied against the ten Tribes, therefore Luther and diverse
others think that this clause must be meant against Judah, as if God threatening
Israel should say, do not you think to escape, for the enemy shall come as an
Eagle even against the house of the Lord. Author.
But we need not strain it so, for it may be meant against the ten Tribes
notwithstanding this expression, upon this ground: because they called that
place, the Eminent place, Bethel, the House of God: and so ironically here the
houses of their Idols may be called the House of the Lord, because they chose
those Houses and Places instead of the House of the Lord. He will come against
the House of the Lord; that is, against that which you account so. But I think
that is not

That God does not presently cast away a Church so as to unchurch it though
they may be guilty of many heinous sins. Obs. 1.
Great sins do not ipso facto, do not un-church a Church therefore there should
be much patience before any do decline from a Church by way of renouncing it.

It is a high expression of the privilege of a Church, Obs. 2.
that it is the House of the Lord, wheresoever there is any true Church, yea
though it be very corrupt. But you will say, What do you mean by a true Church?
I take it for the present nothing but this: Any company of Saints in body to
set up what Ordinance of God they know, A true Church.
that is a Church wheresoever it is, and here God dwells, here God keeps house;
Use. It Is good dwelling in Gods house
and it is good keeping house with God; He is worse than an Infidel that
provides not for his own house: certainly God will provide for his own House:
Moses was faithful in all the House of God; that is, in all the Church of God:
What then though thou dwell in a poor Cottage, so be it thou be a Member
of the Church of God? if God give thee this blessing to dwell in his own House,
you are well enough. In Psalm. 26. 8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy
House, and the place where thine Honor dwells. The Church is not only Gods
House, Ps. 26. 8. explained.
but the House wherein the Honor of God dwells. Princes may have some houses
where they may retire to for a time, but they have some principal Houses to
show their magnificence and glory; and such a house is the Church of God unto
the Lord; all then that are in the Church, especially Officers, must behave
themselves and be faithful in the Church as in the House of God, Officers of
the Church
He will come against the House of the Lord.

Though we be Gods House, Obs. 3.
yet the enemies may be suffered to come upon us, it will not serve us if we
transgress the Covenant: Joab was plucked from the horns of the Altar; and so
may we be plucked even out of the House of God; Gods own House is no security
to sin and wickedness. It follows.

Because they have transgressed my Covenant.
God loves to clear his Justice, and to show what the cause of the evil is that
comes upon us, he would have it clearly charged upon our selves, that we may
not put it off to Gods Decree, that we are predestined to such and such
evils, but the Lord has his time to charge all the evils that comes upon
sinners, upon themselves; Thy destruction is of thy self; the bond that is
between God and his Church, it is his Covenant, and all the good or evil of a
Church depends upon the Covenant; and therefore it was the way always of the
people of God when they were far declined from God, to return unto him by way
of renewing Covenant; The good of Christians depends upon the Covenant more
than formerly.
in Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that
keep his Covenant; and especially all our good now depends upon the Covenant
more than formerly the good of the people of the Jews did, because the Lord
has sealed the Covenant now with the blood of Jesus Christ actually, which was
not so then. But for this expression we had it formerly, and somewhat was
spoken about the opening of the Covenant of the Jews and what kind of Covenant
it was, but yet not then fully opened, and as then I said, so still I look at
it as a Point that will require a particular Exercise of its self.

And trespassed against my Law.
Says Calvin upon the place, Calvin
further to covince them, to show that it was not through ignorance that they
did transgress, they could not say, Lord, what is thy Covenant? for says God,
I did make it known clearly in my Law, they had it plainly set out in my Law:
The Heathen can know the mind of God no otherwise but only by looking into the
book of the Creature, and there the mind of God is written but very darkly, and
they can see but little of it there: I but says God, my people have my Law
where my mind is written plainly, and they may see it there and know what my
Covenant is with them, and therefore their sin is so much the greater, they
have transgressed against my Law. The Seventy translate these words, They have
dealt ungodlily against my Law: The 70. (...).
and the word especially has reference to the worship of God that is commanded
in the Law, they have not worshipped me according to my Law; for though God
looks at every part of his Law, yet more especially at that that requires his
more immediate worship. And in the Hebrew it is, they have prevaricated against
my Law, Praevaricati. (...)
they have made a show that they would do what my Law requires but they do
quite contrary, that is the propriety of the word in the Hebrew. What people is
there in the world but will make some show, that they would obey Gods Law? no
people but say it is fit that they should be obedient to Gods Law, what variety
of opinions and practices are there among men, and yet all will father their
opinions and practices upon Gods Law? and mark, but they do prevaricate in
this; they pretend one thing but they go quite the contrary way, and this is
that which God charges his people withal, upon which he would send his enemies,
even an Eagle upon them. It follows.

VER. 2.
Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.
THE words as they are in the Hebrew are somewhat different from what they are
in your books, for Israel in your books is in the first place, but in the
Hebrew it is in the last, that is, To me they shall cry, My God, we know thee,
The Heb. reading.
Israel: What difference is this? yes, the words thus read have more elegancy
in them than otherwise, and they hint some observations that would hardly be
hinted to us as it is in your books, as thus:

If you read it as it is in your books, then it is only a speech of God to
them.

But if you read it according to the Hebrew, they shall cry to me, My God, we
know thee, Israel: They here seem to put God in mind who they were, as if they
should say, we are Israel who know thee, remember we are not strangers to thee;
They shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee, Israel: It Is Israel that cries to
thee, Oh my God!

Or as if they should put God in mind of their Father They shall cry to me, My
God, we know thee, Israel: Oh remember our Father Israel and deal graciously
with us for the sake of our Father Israel: Just like those in Matthew. that would
cry, We have Abraham to our Father: so here this people would cry; in their
cries in the time of their affliction they would cry to God that they had
Israel to their Father, we have reference to Israel who did so prevail as a
Prince with God, and therefore we hope we shall fare the better for Israel;

Or thus, They shall cry to me, My God, we know thee, Israel: [Israel] if you
set it in the last place in the verse, more than if you set it in the beginning.

From hence the Notes are these:

First, Obs. 1.
That in affliction men see their need of God. So the Chaldae paraphrase upon
this place, Chaldae pa^ephrase
Always when I bring straights upon them then they pray before me and say, Now
we see plainly that we have no other God besides thee, Oh! redeem us because we
are thy people Israel; so that is the meaning.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
Even Hypocrites and the vilest Wretches that are, in the time of their
distress, will claim interest in God and cry to him; even those that have
departed most from him will be ready to claim interest in him in their
distress. What an impudency was it for this people that had so grossly departed
from God, that had gone so against their light, and yet they will come boldly
and claim their interest in God in the time of their affliction? Truly we see
the same spirit in men at this very day, the most wicked and vile ungodly man
or woman that is, yet will be ready in afflictions to claim interest in God;
Applicat.
My God. I appeal to you in this Congregation, if one should go from one end of
the Congregation and speak particularly to every one, and ask but this
question, Do you hope that God is your God? Every one would be ready to say,
Yes, we hope he is. This is the impudency of men's hearts that will take liberty
to go on in a way of rebellion and fighting against God all their lives, and
yet in the time of their distress claim interest in God.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
That knowledge and acknowledgment of God in an outward formal way is that which
Hypocrites think will commend them much to God in time of affliction; that by
which they shall have favor from Him because they have made some profession of
God: We know thee: as if they should say, Lord, we were not as others that had
forsaken thee, we continued Israel still, we did not turn to be Heathens: It is
very hard for men's spirits to be taken off from trusting in formality, in
outward worship, we are all Christians, we are not turned Heathens; so they
shall call to me, My God, we know thee, Israel; we continue Israel still. Oh!
how sweet and comfortable is it then to have a true interest in God?
Comfortable; if in truth.
in the time of affliction to be able to say, in truth Lord we know thee, and
blessed be thy Name Lord we have known thee, we have had experience of thy
goodness, and faithfulness, mercy, love, and tender compassion toward us, we
have known thee an infinite al sufficient good, thou have satisfied our souls
with thy love, the light of thy countenance it has been the joy of our hearts,
and blessed be the time that ever we knew thee, Oh blessed be the time that
ever the Lord made himself known to us; we can say, Lord, we have known thee,
and therefore now Lord have mercy upon us; Oh let us all learn to make more of
our interest in God, and to labor to know Him more and more, that we may have
this comfort in our afflictions, to be able to say in truth, Oh Lord, thou art
our God, and we have known thee. If Hypocrites think it to be so great a
comfort that they are Israel, Oh what is it then to be a true Israelite in
whose heart is no guile?

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
Degenerate children they think to have favor for the sake of their godly
parents.

We have known thee, Israel.] Children should imitate the virtues of their
godly parents, and then they may draw comfort from the godliness of their
parents.

But lastly, Obs. 5
Hypocrites though degenerate will not only think to fare the better for their
godly parents, but they will think to have the same mercy as their godly
parents had; they little think of the difference that there is between Israel
heretofore, and that Israel that is now so basely degenerated. It follows.

VER. 3.
Israel has cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue him.
THEY cry, We have known thee: but they cast off the thing that is good; they
profess to know God in word, but in works they deny him. What is it to say, We
know God, Elongavit, (...) abominatus est
and to cast off the thing that is good?

Now the word that is here translated, cast off, signifies, Has put off a
great way, yea, has abominated the thing that is good: does not only forsake
the thing that is good, but to cast off with a kind of abomination the thing
that is good.

Has cast off the thing that is good. That is:

First, Anselm.
cast off God Himself who is as, Anselme speaks of Bonum in quo omnia bona.
that Good in which there is all Good: God the highest and chief good they have
cast him off.

Secondly, The thing that is good indefinitely. That is, they will not be
ordered by any rule, they care for the good of no body but only to have their
own lusts satisfied.

But that which I think is most properly aimed at by this phrase, The thing
that is good: is, the Worship of God, My Worship: They say, We know Thee, but
in the mean time they cast off that good thing, Oh that Good Thing, that which
I hold indeed to be the thing that is good. Hence observe:

The true Worship of God is the GOOD Thing by way of excellency. We account our
Estates are goods, Obs. 1.
we use to speak in that kind of language, the goods of such a man. Is our
Estates our goods? Are they such good things? Oh! what is the Worship of God
then? The Worship of God that is the thing that is good by way of excellency
above all our goods, that is the good thing that a spiritual heart can prize,
that is that which God delights in, and wherein his people enjoy, so much
communion with Himself; that is the thing by which God lets out so much good to
His People, it is the safety, protection, the blessing of a Kingdom; the purity
of Gods Worship where that is all other good things will follow, that is THE
Good thing; and it is a sign of a gracious spiritual heart to prize the Worship
of God in the purity of it as the good thing, above all good things that a
Kingdom is capable of.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
Yet Gods own Worship is by carnal hearts of men repelled, and cast off as
evil, if it suit not their own ends, and designs: The spirits of men rise
against it, they will not so much as examine things in any peaceable and quiet
way, but by prejudice; because they see it not suitable to their own ways their
spirits rise, abominating that which God Himself prises.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
Though first men do but only leave God, forsake the thing that is good, yet at
length they grow to such a ripeness in sin as they cast it off with
abomination; and that is a great deal worse: Merely to neglect that which is
good is an evil, but to cast off that which is good by way of abomination, Oh
then the sin of a people is grown to an height, then they are near to Judgment
indeed, when they cast it off; thus men who heretofore have been very forward
in the profession of Religion, and seem to love and delight in the thing that
is good, but by degrees their hearts were drawn from the ways of God, now they
cannot bear the sight of those things to be presented, nor bear the hearing of
those things, their hearts rise against any that they see practice them, they
now shut their eyes, and stop their ears, and with violence repel the Truth;
according to those in Jer. 44. 16. As for the Word of the Lord that thou have
spoken to us, we will not hear thee. Backsliders from what they have found good
in.
Oh! are there not some that heretofore have thought they have received much
sweetness in the ways of God, and now not only left them, but their hearts
rise against them, and if any thing be spoken for them, shut their eyes and
ears and cast it off and even abominate such? Let such take heed that God cast
not them off for ever. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. (it is a speech of David to his son
Solomon) If thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake Him,
He will cast thee off for ever: How much more if thou do cast off the thing
that is good. Oh! my brethren, let us take heed of casting off the thing that
is good; we may pass over many Truths that it may be God has convinced us off,
but let us take heed of casting off any Truth, for then we are ripe to
Judgment, then the Lord may justly cast us off for ever.

Lastly, We should the more cast off falls worship.
If wicked men's hearts be so vile to cast off God, and his Worship that has so
much good, how much more should we cast off with abomination, that that is
abomination it self? How much more should we cast off false worship with
abomination and say, Get thee hence? and so all kind of evil and sin that would
stick so fast upon us? (...).
In Romans 12. 9. Abhor that which is evil: to abhor it as well as to abhor Hell
it self; it comes from a word that is used for Hell. Thus we should learn from
wicked men's casting off what is good, to cast off that which is evil and wicked.

One thing further, Obs. 4.
Whatsoever knowledge of God, or profession we make of worshipping Him, yet if
we cast off any thing that is good, this deprives us of any interest we have in
God, of any comfort in crying to God in our afflictions. I beseech you take
notice of this; They cry to me, my God we know thee, but says God, they have
cast off that that is good. The Note is,

To cast off violently and that against light, any one thing that is good;
though it be meant of the Worship of God principally, yet it is spoken
indefinitely, to cast off any thing that is good, any truth of God, it is that
which does deprive the soul of having comfort and interest in God, or crying to
God in the time of distress: Oh thou sinner how dearly do thou pay for thy
beloved sin? Appli^.
at what a dear rate do thou buy every beloved lust of thine, when as it
does deprive thee of all comfort and interest in God that otherwise thou
might have in crying to God in the day of distress?

The enemy shall pursue him.
When the good of duty is cast off, Obser.
evil of punishment will come in. By casting off that which is good we cast off
mercy, and protection, we open a door to all kind of misery: if we retain that
which is good we retain God; but when that which is good is cast off, we lie
exposed and naked to all kind of misery, for God owns us not. It follows.

VER. 4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it
not.
HERE we have their Civil apostasy, the other was a Moral apostasy; They have
set up their Kings, but not by me. Though all Government it is to hold on God,
yet we are to know that God had an especial hand in the Government of the
people of the Jews; Lapide
It was as Lapide upon the place calls it, a Spiritual, and a kind of Divine
Kingdom; it was not merely Civil, the Government that God set over them was
typical, it was to typifie the Government of Christ. And hence we are to take
this Caution, We may easily be led aside into many mistakes and errors if we
argue thus, Caution concerning imitating the Kings if the Jews
That because the Kings of Israel and Judah did thus and thus, therefore it is
in the power of any King at these times to do so; for certainly there was a
mighty deal of difference between the Government then, even the Government in
that State, and the Government now: for State and Church was mixed together, and
the Government then it was typical, it was to typifie the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, therefore though God leaves People, leaves States now to their Liberty
to set up what Government may be best for them, yet it was not permitted to the
Jews, they were to have only that Government that God should reveal from
Heaven, for their Civil State: therefore when they would change the form of
their Government first from Judges to Kings, God said, they had rejected him in
casting off that.

They set up Kings, Expos. 1.
but not by me
Some think that this has reference to the choosing of Kings at first, because
that they did it without Gods Warrant when they chose a King to themselves at
first, and so they have set up Kings but not by me. 2. The Authors opinion.
But I rather think that this has reference to Jeroboam and his successors,
they set up Jeroboam and his successors, and not by God. This you will say, is
very strange, for it is clear in Scripture that it was from God that Jeroboam
should be King, and that the ten Tribes should be rent from Solomon's posterity
for the punishment of Solomon's sin, it was prophesied of by Ahijah the
Shilonite, 1 King 11. 29, 30, 31. the Prophet came to Jeroboam, and ren^ the
Garment of Jeroboam in twelve pieces, and said to him, Take thee ten pie^es:
for thus says the Lord the God of Israel; Behold, I will rent the Kingdom out
of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten Tribes to thee. The Lord sent his
Prophet to tell him expressly, that he would rent ten Tribes from the house of
Solomon, to give them to him; and yet here it is said, That they have set up
Kings, but not by me. Again in the 10. chap. and 15. ver. Rehoboam hearkened
not unto the people: for the Cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his
saying which the Lord spoke by Ahijah the Shilomite unto Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat. It was from the Lord that Rehoboam gave such a churlish answer, was from
the Lord that he was left to such a Tyrannical, cruel spirit, that the Lord
might fulfill the word that he had spoken by Ahijah the Shilonite.

Abulensis thinks that the ten Tribes for the matter of the thing did no more
than they might do, and he gives this reason, Ipsae tribus liberae erant,
populusque liberi, Rehoboam autem volebat eas in servitutem redigere, easque
regere ut Tyrannus non ut Rex; poterunt ergo ab eo recedere, et novum regem
sibi creare; populus sui vel resp. principib. and regib. dedit impium in se,
sed certis justisque condicionibus, inde and potest illud jisdem auferre vel
imminuere, si ipsi eo abutantur and Tyranni evadant, non enim populus se
absolute dedit Regi uti quis Aurum vel equum amico, ut omne suum jus in eum
transferat, nec unquam illud revocare possit, sed certis pactis
intervenientibus. Abulensis in 1 Reg. 12. Quaest. 8. T. 9.
for says he, the people, these Tribes were free Tribes, but Rehoboam would
bring them into slavery, and he would reign over them as a Tyrant, therefore
(says he) they might lawfully depart from him and leave him, and make to
themselves a new King; and then he puts the Cause, viz. for that a people or
Commonwealth (says he) they first gave the power to Kings and Princes, but
they did it upon certain conditions at first, therefore as they first gave
power unto them so says he they may diminish it if they abuse it and Tyrannize
over them, for (he has this further expression) the people did not absolutely
give themselves to him, when a people do choose a chief Governor says he they
do not give themselves to them as a man gives to his friend a piece of money,
or a horse, so as they give all out of their own possession, and that he might
do with them what he will, but upon certain conditions thus and thus: this
Abulensis has.

Now though I do not altogether approve of what he has said, because at least
the case between People and Princes now is different from what it was; then God
challenged a peculiar Prerogative over them for tendering their Government, yet
thus far in Divinity is true; There is more reason that people should now have
more power to cast off Tyranny than there was, because now none comes viz.
orderly and ordinarily.
to Government over others but by Scil. formal or tacit.
Agreement, therefore if the Agreement and Law of the Country be that they
shall be elect and not haereditary, they are so: if that the males shall only
inherit, he shall only inherit: and so if the Law of the Country were for
delivering themselves from tyranny, so far certainly God allows it in His Word.

But now to answer the Case more clearly, A direct Exposit.
They set up Kings, but not by me; though GOD had foretold that the ten Tribes
should be rent away from the house of David, and that Jeroboam should be set
up, yet they did not do this thing in a lawful way as they ought, for they
should have consulted with God about the time and manner of it when God would
have it done; it was not enough that God did fortell it should be done, but
when they did it they ought to have done it in a way of consulting with God,
and they ought to have been ordered by God for the way and manner of it, and
they did not do it in way of fulfilling the Prophecy, for the people generally
knew no such thing but merely minding their own passions and lusts, they looked
at no further, though God did overruled it to fulfill his own Counsels, yet they
aimed at no such thing. Whence we have these useful Notes for our edification:

First, Obs. 1.
That we may do the thing that God would have done, and yet sin highly against
God. God would have Jeroboam set up, but they only looking at the matter, and
did not observe Gods way, God did reject them.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
To do that which God would have done, yet if we do not know that it is Gods
mind, we sin against God: Though we do the thing that God would have done in
His secret will, yet we sin against God, if we know it not to be His revealed
will. Now no action can be good, but that which is done; not only materially
good, but formally also, that is which is done in obedience to God; And that
shows the dangerous condition of ignorant people, all their actions are sin
because they know not Gods mind in them. Misery of Ignoran^s.


Thirdly, Obs. 3.
To go about great businesses without consulting with God, it is sin. Even the
Heathens were conscious of this, therefore Pullius Scipio would never go out
about any great business but would go to the Capitol to pray to the gods.
Publius Scipio,


Fourthly, Obs. 4.
Alteration in Civil Government is a great business. God had need be much
consulted withal, especially if there be any Church-work mingled with it, there
was never a time that England had the calling for such consulting with God as
it has at this. England.
Now England is about the greatest and weightiest business that ever it had
since it was a Nation: The very alteration but of an Officer is a great matter
and requires much consulting with God, and especially if it be in the Church:
it is very observable of our Savior in Luke, 6. 12, Luke 6. 12, 13. opened.
and 13. verses, when as Christ was to send out his twelve Apostles as Officers
for the Church, the text says, That he was at prayer all night before, then in
the morning he calls his Disciples and so sends forth twelve of them and gives
them his Commission. But he makes a preparation all night long in praying to
God. Surely those that are about choosing Church Officers, Church Officers with
what religious care to be chosen.
Ministers of God to be their Pastors and Teachers they had need spend days
and nights in prayer. Here they did not consult with God in setting Jeroboam
over them, and therefore says God, they have made them Kings, but not by me.

Lastly, Obs. 5.
When we are about great businesses, we must look at Gods ends; we must take
heed of our passionate wills, and our own self ends, else we do it not by God.
In Civil Affairs, a man that is a Magistrate perhaps does that which is just,
but he is carried on in his passion, but this is not by God; and so in Church
affairs, the Church Elders, the party does deserve it, yet if they be carried
on in passion and self ends, this is not done by God: They have set up Kings,
but not by me.

And then further; As the people sinned and God would not own what which they
set up, so Jeroboam sinned too. Why Jeroboam might say, Lord, did not thou
send thy Prophet to tell me that I should have the ten Tribes, and yet will thou not own me? No, God would not own him.

First, Ieroboams sin.
Because Jeroboam did not seek God.

And secondly, Jeroboam did not stay Gods time. As David, he was anointed by
God, and though he had many opportunities for to have taken away Saul's life, he
would not, and to come to the Kingdom, but he did wait till he saw the time was
come that he should be brought to the Kingdom. But Jeroboam would not do so.

Thirdly, Jeroboam had not right ends in taking the Kingdom.

Fourthly, Jeroboam did not administer the Kingdom for God, and therefore God
would not own him, and so some read the words; They have not administered the
Kingdom by me; but administering the Kingdom by their own lusts therefore God
would not own them. From whence you may have these Notes:

First, Obs. 1.
That when God promises a mercy, if we stay not Gods time we can have no
comfort of the mercy.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
When we have a mercy promised we must be brought into it by God, by lawful
means; he that believes makes not have says the Scripture: many they are so
greedy of places, and preferments, and other things they desire, that they make
so much have as if they did fear that if they stay for the orderly coming into
the place they desire, they fear they should go without it: What blessing then
can there be in that which we would seek to get without God in making so much
have.

And again, Obs. 3.
When we have a mercy (that is the third note) when we have what we would have,
yet if we do not improve it for God, we do thereby renounce our acknowledgment
of it from God. God has given thee an Estate, or Honors, or Preferment: What
do thou do? Do thou now abuse this for thine own lusts? Thou do hereby
renounce thy acknowledgement that thou had it from God. They have set up
Kings, but not by me, I will not own that; Why? because in the way of their
Administration they have indeed renounced any right I have to their Government:
(...).
And so the Seventy translate the words, They have reigned to themselves.

Yea, Quest.
but it may be said, How were the people that were living now, guilty of this?
this was a long time ago when the people did thus set up Jeroboam and rend
themselves from the house of David, how came they to be guilty of this?

The Answer is, Object.
That they continuing and retaining the Government of Jeroboam upon the same
ground their progenitors first raised it, are guilty of their sins. Children
going on in the way of their parents, R. Kimc. ap Merc. in lo.
contract the guilt of their parents sin upon them.

And Mercer upon this place quotes an Hebrew, Quando quidem ridebant quod
prohiberet eos, ab Ascendendo Hierosolyman, in conspectum Domini, and fecerat
illis vitutos, illorum erat eum Regno pellere.
David Kimchi: That the people now when they saw what Jeroboam and his
successors did, that they would keep them from going to Jerusalem before the
Lord, and when they saw that he made them Idols, and so forsook Gods true
Worship, they (says the Hebrew Doctor) should have driven him from the
Kingdom, that was his opinion: but merely for Religion it cannot be, except the
Law of the Country will bear them out in it; any farther than the Law of a
State, the Civil Law will bear men out in it: and therefore War, it is not
meeely undertaken for maintaining Religion immediately, but for maintaining
those Laws by which Religion is established, the Civil Right that men have to
the practice of their Religion: And so Wars may be undertaken. When Arms may be
taken for Religion.
If it were in a place indeed where the Law of the Kingdom were utterly against
Religion, could not there be justified, except those that had power likewise
for the altering those Laws, should alter them, and then take up Arms.

But now, Englands case in this particular.
Our taking up Arms is justified in this, To maintain the Civil Right that we
have to the practice of our Religion; so that our Case is not the Case of the
Christians among the Heathens: Law of Nature.
There is a Law of Nature (I confess) beyond the Right of any Law, and the
Right in that cannot be given away by any Predecessors. But because the
mischief would be infinite great if it were left to every man to judge, when by
this Law of Nature he might resist, and so to resist upon it, Particular
persons must sufer, not resist.
this would cause infinite mischief: therefore there is a necessity that men
should for their particular suffer, rather than so to resist; it is necessary
for us to stay till we be helped by some orderly legal way. I say, the God of
Order never leaves people to such miserable Inconveniences and Mischiefs, and
therefore for particulars they are rather to suffer, though they should be
tyrannized over against the Law of Nature.

But certainly, States not so.
for the State or Country, they may judge when the Law of Nature is to be
maintained, and Right of a Kingdom that the Law of Nature gives, Law destroies
not Nature.
besides that which is given by Positive Laws; the Right of the Law of Nature
is never taken away by Positive Laws. It follows.

They made Princes, and I knew it not.
They made some very desperately, and God might well say, I knew not them: but
God speaks of them all, not only of those, but even of Jeroboam himself, and
Jehu, though they were in some regard set up by God, yet says God, I knew it
not; that is, I approve it not, I approved it not in that way they did it, Text
paraphrased.
I let them alone in their way and let them go on; as if God should say, I
neither did nor will take Cognizance of what they do to bless them in it: When
we seek not God for a mercy, when we enjoy it, God will not so much as own it
to be His.

The Seventy translate the words, (...).
They have not made it known to me. When we ask not Gods mind and seek not a
mercy from God* we do as if we would get it without Gods knowledge; we must tell
God what we would have before we presume to take it, and by this means we may
go to God with more comfort (if we meet with straights) for help and direction;
whereas otherwise, whatsoever straights we meet with, if we should seek to God
to help us in such a business, God would say, I knew nothing of it, you
undertook it without me, and you must shift in it; but now look to it as you
can, sink or swim I will have nothing to do with it. We use to put off men in
this manner that have any reference to us, if they will go and undertake a
business of their own heads, and if they come to any straights and then they
should come for our help, Nay, as you underrook it without me so go on without
me. So now I make no question but many thousands of the Servants of God in this
great business of the State where they meet with so many difficulties, they can
go to God and say, Lord, we did advise with thee, and we undertook this in
obedience to thee, and now, Lord, help us in our straights; Oh! it is a
comfortable thing for to have the use of our seeking God when we meet with
straights in a business.

And I knew it not.] Further there are these two Notes from this.

First, God knows how to make use of men's sins, they sinned and yet God brought
about His own ends by it.

Secondly, Many things are done in a sinful way, and yet God suffers them to
prosper a long time: even this Kingdom of Israel that was thus set up without
God did prosper outwardly for 200. years together, therefore this is no
argument of Gods owning a business because it prospers, it is but as a Cipher,
ad a figure to it indeed then it will make somewhat, if you can warrant it is
Gods Work then you may when it prospers have comfort. It follows.

Of their silver and gold have they made them Idols.
See the ill success of it (so great an evil is it to do any thing and not call
upon God) and all because God was not sought, whatsoever we do to satisfy our
passions and lusts for our own ends without seeking God, we cannot think but
very il fruit will come of it; though God suffered this Kingdom to prosper
outwardly, yet woeful mischievous fruit did come upon the alteration of their
Government without God; for this Kingdom these two hundred years continued in
Idolatrous worship, and it came upon this. The danger of setting upon any new
form of Civil Government.
We had need take heed to our hearts that we be upright, and seek God in
setting up any new form of Government, lest though it be very specious to our
eye, we may think that we are delivered from many yokes and burdens, yet such
effects may come of it, that we may be brought hereby under many yokes and
burdens. They cast off the house of David because of the burdens that were upon
them, but yet they castiug it off from them in a passionate way, now they have
brought a greater yoke upon them, for now Jeroboam and his successors, he lays
a very heavy yoke upon their very consciences, the yoke of Idolatry; it was a
burden that before was upon their backs and shoulders, but now it comes to be a
burden upon their consciences, and that's a great deal heavier than upon their
backs and shoulders.

They have made them Idols of their silver and gold.] God does instance in this
as indeed the ground of all for the setting up of false worship, and is the
foundation and ground of all kind of mischief in a Commonwealth, they were
content to contribute their silver and gold for their Idols, they had rather be
without that than without their Idols: drossie vile spirits had rather be
without God and Christ and his Ordinances, Profane covetous men worse ^han
Ido^aters.
than without their silver and gold, let them have their silver and gold, and
let God and Christ and His Ordinances go; yet these Idolaters say, Let us have
our Idols and let our silver and gold go. Pulchior est cite Sol quam pecunia
tua, and tamen iste Sol no^ est Deus tuus. Aug. de Disciplina Christiana.
Yea, they parted with their gold and silver to make them gods; but many of you
keep your gold and silver and make them Gods too, The Sun (says Austin) is a
more beautiful thing than thy money, but it is not thy god: That which brings
in silver and gold to drossie carnal spirits, that they love; but if it brings
not this in they care not for it whatsoever it be. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 28. Hom.
84.
Chrysostom has another expression: A Covetous man (says he) is not delighted
with the beauty of Heaven, nor with the motion of the Sun: why? because the Sun
does not send forth golden beams into his house.

That they may be cut off.
The word translated Idols, signifies those things that bring them much labor.
(...)
And then follows: That they may be cut off, as if he should say, they are at a
great deal of charge to undo themselves, many men make their own damnation to
be chargable to them; says God, They made Idols of silver and gold, that they
might be cut off. My end was, that they might be cut off, whatsoever their end
was. When we are busied to attain plots, God he may be working even by those
very things we bless our selves in, and expect great advantage by, God may in
the mean time be working our ruin in them; Oh consider of this, while I am
plotting for my self in this and the other thing, Finis cujus and finis cui
and I am blessing my self in hope of advantage, but Gods Thoughts, and
Counsels, and Workings, and Ends may be now cross to mine, even intending my
ruin, my eternal ruin, where am I then? Whatsoever we do which evil does
necessarily follow it, is accounted by God, as we brought the evil on purpose
upon our selves. Surely they set not up silver and gold on intention to destroy
themselves, but because destruction does necessarily follow, therefore God
accounts it done on purpose: in Jer. 7. 18. in Pro. 8. 36. All them that hate
me, love death: Surely no man loves death: but when you do cast off the
instruction of wisdom, you do as mnch as if you should say, You love death: as
here, that they might be cut off. It follows.

VER. 5.
Thy Calf, O Samaria, has cast thee off.
THY Calf, O Samariah. He calls the Idol a calf by way of contempt. Calf of
Samaria why so called.
But why is it called the Calf of Samaria? It was not set up in Samaria: There
is two Calves only that we read of, and yet here it is called the Calf of
Samaria. The reason is this; that Samaria was the chief City, and because the
Calf was by the power and riches, and countenance of the chief City of the Land
maintained, therefore it is called the Calf of Samaria; Where that is corrupted,
the whole Land will quickly be corrupted, and where that stands right it goes
well with the whole Land: that is the reason why the Adversaries seek to corrupt
and overthrow our chief City. As all did depend upon what Samaria did,
therefore the corruption of false worship is attributed to Samaria, it is thy
Calf Oh Samaria. And therefore if God had not moved the hearts of the People of
this City, London.
but we had brought Popery in, it might have been said, it was the Popery of
London: and whereas on the other side, if God please to work their spirits
right to go on to the end, the children not yet born may have cause to bless
this City, and say, This is the Reformation that we may bless London for.

It has cast thee off.
Has cast thee off from me, so some have it. But rather as you have it in your
books, Thy Calf has cast thee off. Whence note.

That though Idolaters promise to themselves safety and protection by their
Idols, Obser.
yet they will leave them at last. All you that go on in the ways of sin, know
that those ways of sin of yours will leave you in the lurch at the last: as
they say, the Devil leaves the Witches when they come to the prison: when Judas
went to the Scribes and Pharisees in the anguish of his spirit and cast down
the money and said, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood.
What Is that to us (say they) see thou to that? Therefore the best way is to cast
off our sin and wickedness first. But God will not do thus, God will not cast
off his People in the time of trouble, and when our unbeleeving hearts do think
that God will cast us off in the time of trouble we make God an Idol, as if God
would do as the Idols did, cast us off. We may in Gods Cause be brought into
straights but God will never cast us off in them, when we are ready to think
our selves to be utterly forsaken in straights, then God may be working the
greatest good for us; we have a most notable Scripture for that in Isa. 49. 13,
and 14. verses, Sing Oh Heavens, and be joyful Oh Earth, and break forth into
singing Oh Mountains; for God has comforted His People, and will have mercy
upon His afflicted. But mark, Zyon said, the Lord has forsaken me. They were
in a singing condition, and God calls the Heavens to sing, and the Earth to be
joyful, and the Mountains to break forth into singing, because of so great a
work that God was making for His People: but Zyon said, The Lord has forsaken
me. And so it is with particular souls, they are ready to say, the Lord has
forsaken me, but God will not do so.

Mine anger is kindled against them.
When wicked men are brought into the greatest straits then Gods wrath is
hottest, Excanduit [as in hot Iron there is whiteness mixed with the redness]
and then also Conscience belks and burns most hot; as men's countenances change
red and pale sometimes with anger, so it is said here, that even the
countenance of God grow red and pale with His anger against this people. Though
superstitious men may think that outward pompous worshipping pleases God most,
yet we see here that it does stir up the anger of God, so that God grows even
pale against them with anger.

How long will it be ere they attain to innocence.
Men's hearts are stubborn in their own ways, they will not be taken off,
wicked men will be true to their own principles, there is a stubborn constancy
in evil, as well as a gracious constancy in good, How long will it be?

Again secondly, God is very patient a long time. Then,

Thirdly: Continuence in sin is no excuse but an aggravation of sin to make it
grievous to God; when God chastises us we are ready to cry, How long Lord? Will
he reretain his anger for ever? Know that our continuance in sin, is as great a
burden to Gods Spirit, he cries out when will they be made clean, when shall it
once be? and in Jer. 4. 14. ver. Oh Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness
that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee.

Ere they attain to innocence.
The words are, (...)
He cannot attain; that is, he is so deeply engaged that he cannot attain to
innocence: Non poterunt innocentiam.
when men are engaged in evil ways they cannot get out.

Take heed of engagements in that which is evil. Obs. 1.


Secondly, Obs. 2.
If by custom and engagement in evil we have no power to get out, this will be
no excuse to us. In 2 Pet. 2. 14. They have eyes full of adultry, Non poterunt
far innocentiam.
and they cannot cease to sin: This is the aggravation of sin, no excuse. A
learned man of late has an excellent Note upon this, They cannot bear
innocence: and indeed according to the Hebrew this may as well be added for
explication, for in the Hebrew there is nothing else but this, They cannot
innocence; the word attain, is not in the Hebrew, and it may very well suit
with the time wherein Hosea did prophecy; and the meaning is this: They cannot
bear with those who will not join with them but will go to Jerusalem to
worship, and this provokes the Spirit of God against them, because they cannot
bear those that would seek to free themselves from defilements in the Worship
of God: there is nothing in the world wherein men cannot less bear one with
another than in dissentions about the worship of God, and commonly the Nocent
party is the most bitter against the Innocent; as the Lutherans they were worse
in their ways than the Calvinists, specially in the point of superstition, but
they were a great deal more bitter against the Calvinists than the Calvinists
were against them; it was an expression that Calvin has, Though Luther (says
he) should call me Devil, yet I would honor him, as a Servant of Jesus Christ.

The word here that is translated Innocence, (...)
signifies cleanness: false worship whatsoever holiness may seem to be in it yet
they are not clean, but Gods Worship is clean, the fear of the Lord is clean:
it is such wickedness as if God should say, You are never like to wash off the
guilt of it as long as you live, it is not so easy to get off the guilt of
superstitious worship as men are aware of, we cannot but acknowledge to our own
shame that we have sullied our selves with superstition formerly, we had need
wash and rinse our hearts again and again, and be willing to lie abroad a
frosting whole nights, that we might be cleansed from the filth that we
heretofore have defiled our selves withal, yea we should not think much, nor
mervail though the fire of Gods wrath comes out against us and burn hot and
long, if it may be but to purge us and not destroy us, it is well; for it is
not easy to be cleansed from superstition; it is only the blood of the
immaculate Lamb that is able to cleanse it, (this filth) it sticks very fast.
And so much for the fifth verse.

VER. 6.
For from Israel was it also: the workman made it, therefore it is not God: but
the Calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
THE Prophet proceeds in his conviction of Isreal's sin, with the threats of God
against it.

For from Israel was it. Exp^s.

That is,

Their Idolatry was from themselves: It was hard to get them off from their
Idolatrous worship, for it was from themselves. Other people worshipped
Idolatrous Images, as being deceived, either made to believe that they came
from their gods; Acts 19. 35.
as that wise Town-Cleark of Ephesus, in his grave, sage speech, Acts, 19. 35.
says, their Image came down from Jupiter, or else they were such as were
brought from the Temples of other People, whose Original they knew not. But
says God, My People are more sottish than any, for from Israel themselves does
come these their Images that they do worship, they have set them up themselves,
they know that the other day they were but pieces of wood, overlaid with Gold
and Silver; for their Calves they were such kind of Idols as Israel invented
themselves, Apis what kind of Idol. the Calves of Israel not the same.
they were not the same as some think with the Egyptian Apis, that Idol, for
that was bigger, it was rather a Bullock, and it was a live one, and with
several spots and diverse things wherein it differed from the Calves that Israel
worshipped, so that the Calves of Isreal's worship, it was their own invention.
Hence there is these Notes:

First, Obs. 1.
That none are so sottish in wicked ways as Apostates. Israel was more sottish
than any people.

And Secondly, Obs. 2.
To be devisers and inventors of evil, and especially of any thing in the
Worship of God, of false worship, it is a great aggravation of ones sin; Those
that are the first inventers and devisers of wickedness, and especially of any
false worship, they are most wicked and abominable before God. It was from
themselves.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
What comes from our selves we will stick much to in the Worship of God. For
this is given as a reason why they could not be brought off from that false
worship; It was from themselves: And hereby men show that they honor their own
Fancies and own Wills above the Will of God, and the Mind of God: We will a
great deal more easily part with the Worship of God, that comes from God, than
with Worship that comes from our selves.

For from Israel was it also. Expos.

There is somewhat in that likewise: that is, As formerly in the wilderness
they set up a Calf; so here again from Israel also: Former examples of Gods
wrath against their progenitors will not deter them, they follow still the guize
of their Ancestors in false worship.

No sin is more haereditarie than Idolatry: Obser.
Hence the second Commandment only threatens to visit the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children, because Idolatry is so haereditary, From Israel also.

The workman made it; therefore it is not God.
There are Two Arguments why their Calf was not God.

First, From the workman that made it.

Secondly, Because it should be taken in pieces. It Is the greatest folly to
look upon that which has its excellency from our selves to be superior above
us, and that in the highest degree. To forsake that God that made us, and to
make that to be a God unto us that we have made our selves: The Father looks
upon his Child as inferior to him, because he was the instrument of his being,
and so he may well: If any man have maintenance by one, or is raised by him,
he expect that he should be serviceable to him. Idolatry drives men against
principls* of reason.
Only Idolatry makes men go against the very principles of reason: They made it
and yet they accounted it their god,

And an especial Note from hemce it, That man by any work of his own cannot put
a Divinity upon a creature. They made it, therefore it is not God. Man by any
work that he can do cannot put Divinity upon a creature, no, he cannot so much
as put holiness into a creature; all the workmanship of man by his consecratien
or any thing that he can do, cannot make stones and mortar to be holy, so as
now it should be a sin to use them to any in case of need.
common use, man takes too much upon him to think to raise the creature so near
to a Divinity, he cannot by any work of his put any Religious respect on any
creature so as that God shall be nearer to him, or he nearer to God than in any
other place. Whatsoever is of man's work in Gods Worship it perishes in the use
of it, surely then man's creation cannot be God, The work man made it, therefore
it is not God.

Indeed there is a creation of man that the Scripture speaks of that is called,
God, but not truly, not God really, rather a Metaphorical God; 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Kings and Magistrates man's creation in some sort.
that creature that the Scripture speaks of in 1. Pet. 2. 13. he calls their
Kings and Governors man's creation, man made them; and you know the Scripture
calls Governors, Gods. I have said, you are Gods. Ps. 82. 6
I but it is said, they die like men: this text will show it: if man made them
they cannot be Gods. And the former Scripture tells us, that Kings and
Governors are man's creation. In your books it is translated man's Ordinance but
it is in the Greek, (...).
man's Creation: man made them and therefore they are not Gods; therefore we
must not give them the honor of a God, to subject our consciences unto them,
no, neither are we bound to subject our outward estates and liberties, and
lives to their humors and lusts, merely to their own wills, for this is proper
to God to subject all to his will, merely because it is his will; but seeing
man made them they are not truly God, and therefore they must not have the
honor that is due to God.

If all the Art, and Skill, Power and Riches, if all the men in the world were
put together, and all the wisdom and power of Angels joined to it, to extract
all excellency in all things in all creatures, and to make that which should
have all created excellency in it, yet this surely could not be a God to us; I
say, if we conceive all art, skill power, and riches, of all the world brought
together into one man, yea, all the skill and power of Angels put into him too,
and if he were able to make an extract of all the excellencies of all
creatures, and put into one thing, yet this could not be a God unto us; because
it was made. And shall we say further, God himself by his infinite power cannot
make any thing to be a God to us: I say, God himself by his infinite power
cannot make any thing to be a God to us; if he himself were made he could not
be God to us; nay, if God himself were made he could not be God: therefore
surely that which the workman has made cannot be a God.

How vile then are our hearts? and how do we debase our selves, to subject our
selves to every vanity, as if it were a God, when as that all the power in God
himself cannot raise a created excellency to that height as to be a God to us?
how vain is the heart of men that makes pleasure their god? as the voluptuous,
his belly; that makes money his god, as the covetous; that makes honor and the
applause of men, as the ambitious, to be a god unto us. Bernice and Agrippa
came with great Pomp, Act. 25. 23.
they came with much Fancy as the word signifies; the excellency that al
their pomp had, (...).
it was but that that fancy put upon them.

In this God shows the excellency of an Immortal Soul, The excellency of the
soul.
that it is in that excellency that only an Infinite Eternal being that is of
Himself can be a God to us.

Again, Use 2. the abominableness of the Mass
This is an argument against the Idol of the Mass* a vile Priest, a filthy
Whoremaster makes it a God: What a Deity is that that is from his maker? Is
there any greater stumbling block to Jews, Turks, or Heathens, to keep them
from Christian Religion than this, That Christians should make their God, and
eat him when they have done? That Is the first Argument: It is no God, because
the workman made it.

Secondly: But the Calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.

No God surely. Psalm, 106. 20. Romans 1. 23.
He speaks here with indignation (it is not God, it is a Clalf) as he does in
that of the Psalmist, he made a Calf that eat grass, It shall be broken in
pieces, it shall not be able to help it self, much less help them; it shall be as
Dagon before the Ark, broken all to pieces.

Hierom upon the place says, that he learned from an Hebrew (this word, broken
in pieces, the word is not a Verb, but a Noun, shall be breakings in pieces) he
learned from an Hebrew, that this word signified a thin web, Signifi^ of the
word
like Spiders webs in the air, As you see in some times of the year in the
Fields, thin Webs, and upon the grass, thin webs like Spiders webs that
presently dissolves into Attoms; so that their Calf shall be like unto those
thin Webs, like unto Spiders Webs that dissolves it self and comes to nothing.
All the confidence and hopes in any thing we set up in the place of God, A God.
it is such unto us; What difference is there between such a thing and a strong
Rock, and an high Tower, such as God is to his people.

And again, The word signifies Saw-dust that comes from Timber that is sawn,
and so it shall be broken in pieces: Look as the Calf in the wilderness was
broken even to dust, to powder, and Moses made the people drink of it; so God
will serve this Calf.

And then further observe: Obs. 1.
Idols are to be broken in pieces; so God commanded, Exodus 34. 13. Deuteronomy. 7. 5.
Ezekiel. 20. 7. with many other Scriptures; and thus godly Magistrates have ever
done, broke Idols in pieces. And blessed be God for that that has been done of
late among us that so many Idols, and that great Idol that was in the eminent
place of the City, that God put a spirit into those that were in Athority to
break it in pieces: it must be done by the Magistrate.

I remember Austin in his sixth Sermon upon Christ's Sermon, speaking of that
place in Deuteronomy. 1. 5. first, says he, You must possess the Land, and then, you
must overthrow their Altars. And then notes, That those which have the
possession of the Land, as now those Public places, men only in Authority have
the possession of them, and therefore it is for them to break the Idols in
pieces. A custom on Basil.
In the City of Basil we read, that every Ash Wednesday (as they call it) is
observed a Feastival instead of the Popish Fast on that day, because of the
burning of Popish Images, and they account it a great mercy. And though we have
no such warrant to observe such a day as an Holy day, yet certainly as a day of
an outward civil rejoicing, we have cause to observe those times wherein
notorious and abominable Idols have been broken in pieces.

Again, Obs. 2.
Whatsoever it is that is subject to be broken in pieces, certainly we are not
to make it to be our God. Now all creatures in the world are subject to
breaking, your estates are in danger to be broken in pieces, therefore they are
not Gods; that is the argument of the holy Ghost here: yea it may be many of
your estates are broken in pieces already, Oh what poor Gods were those that
you made to your selves before, and so any creature whatsoever? therefore Oh
let us trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. Isa. 26. 4.

The last note from hence is this, Obs. 3.
That the putting too much upon a creature, the bringing a creature too near to
God, and Deifying of it makes way for the destruction of that creature. The
Calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces because it was made an Idol: If you
will make use of your estates as a servant to you, to fit you for Gods service
you might keep it, but if you would set it up in Gods place, it is just with
God it should be broken in pieces: Whatsoever you set your hearts upon and make
a God unto you, it is just with God it should be broken in pieces; if you set
your husband, your wife, your child, your friend, in the place of God, it is the
only way to undo them, to undo them in respect of you at best. England.
Many great Instruments of God, God has been fain to break them to pieces,
because that men have set them up in the place of God, and made even Gods of
them. It follows.

VER. 7.
For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind.
SOwing is a laborious work; and this Idolatrous people Obs. 1. Idolaters are
laborious.
Those that sow they must be abroad in the cold and wind; Idolaters were
willing to take pains and go through many difficulties for the furtherance of
their false worship. Use.
Let not us be sluggish then in the true Worship of our God, let us be willing
to pass through many difficulties to further the service of our God.

Secondly, Sowing is a labor without any present profit coming the benefit of
the labor it lies in expectation for the future.

Idolaters are content to sow though they gain nothing by their labor, Obs. 2.
yet in expectation of somewhat hereafter. Idolaters sow in hope
We are presently weary of a little labor except we find somewhat coming in
presently, we cannot wait for the blessing of the former and latter rain upon
our endeavors, we must be always reaping or else we are wearied and
discouraged; Idolaters would work hard though they get nothing for the present,
how much more should we labor for God in expectation of the harvest that God
has provided?

Obs. 3.
Sowing it is a work for the maintaining of the succession of provision for one
Generation to another. Idolaters they labor to keep up their false worship for
the posterity that is coming after; Idolaters lay ground for succession.
they are not content to enjoy it themselves all the while they live, but they
take a course to have those they leave behind them to enjoy it when they are
gone. Use
Thus we should do, and great reason we have to do thus, in the true Worship of
God, not think it enough to enjoy it our selves, but to take al ways that
possibly we can that we may leave our posterity to enjoy it, that we may sow
for posterity as well as for our selves, that we may leave a stock of provision
for our children afterward. Through Gods mercy our forefathers did so, and we
have reapt the harvest of their seed, and through their endeavors we have
enjoyed much of this Worship of God, and the Truths of God, let us likewise sow
for those that are coming after.

Sowing is a work that must be done in its season or it is in vain. Obs. 4.
Idolaters they will observe their seasons, their fit times for the furtherance
of their false worship; Idolaters observe their season.
much more should we do for the Worship of God. We have had a fair season, and
we have seemed to be very busy, the Lord grant we do not sow the wind, as it
follows in the next words, They have sown to the wind: This is a proverbial
speech that signifies, the taking a great deal of pains to little purpose: As a
man that should go abroad in the fields, simile
and spread his hands about and take pains, and yet has nothing but air in his
hands. Wind.
The Wind is an empty creature in respect of things that are sollid, therefore
the Scripture does often make use of this creature to signify the vanity of
the labors, the hopes, and endeavors of wicked men; you shall find these
several expressions in Scripture tending to this purpose: as the Laboring for
the wind, Eccles. 5. 16. Secondly, to ^eed upon the wind, Hos. 12. 1. Thirdly,
to bring forth the wind, Isa. 26. 18. And fourthly, to inherit the wind, Prove.
11. 29. And fifthly, here in the text, sowing to the wind.

Many people do nothing all their lives time but sow the wind, Obs. Many sows
the wind.
they labor and toil, but what comes of it? it is no good account that we can
give to God of our time, to say, that we have taken a great deal of pains; we
may take pains and yet sow the wind.

Who are those that sow the wind? Quest.


First, Who sow to the wind. Some studients.
Men that spend their thoughts and strength about things those sow the wind;
those that do with a great deal of earnestness, do just nothing, or what they
do is but a trifle; many Scholars study night and day, they tire themselves
with reading, and musing, and writing, and yet they are no way useful; either
their studies have been in useless things, ^aking among rubbish and lumber, or
else they know not how to make use of their reading and learning; and indeed it
is a pitiful object to behold, to behold one that has been all his days a
great Studient, and has beat his brains, and rose early, and gone to bed late,
grutch'd the very time of his meat, and yet he is a useless man in the place
where he is, he has no use at all of all his studies, he is of no service to
Church or Commonwealth: Here Is a man that has all his days sown to the wind.

Secondly, All those who take pains and are at great cost in Idolaters*
superstitious worship, all their intentions that they have to They sow the
wind* Scope of the Text.
All Idolatrous worshippers that take much pains and are at great cost they do
but sow the wind: Papists.
How many Papists have we that dares not for their lives but rise at their
hours that they have vowed, to rise at midnight to their beads, or very early,
spend many hours every day at their beads, wear out their bodies by their
fasting, by their watching, deny themselves the use of the creatures, wear
sackcloath, lie very hard, tire their bodies by pilgrimage, forsake their
revenues, that that their progeniters had left them, vow perpetual virginity,
shut themselves up in Cloisters, what a deal of labor and toil is here to the
flesh, and all this with conscienciousness, all this with a desire to honor
God, and to afflict themselves for their sins? And yet this not having warrant
from God being a will worship, all this is but sowing the wind, they lose al
their labor, cost, and charge, and all their thoughts, and devotions they are
all lost.

Formalists
Such as are formal in the true Worship of God, as content themselves in the
outward part of Gods Worship, having no power nor life of godliness in their
service they perform: You have many that do things out of custom, content
themselves in the deed done, dare not for their lives neglect Prayer, not one
morning nor evening, nor at other times, and are often with Gods People in
fasting, or coming to hear the Word; but yet all this while being but formal,
they not having the life and power of godliness in these duties, they do but
sow the wind, they lose all their labor, and when they shall come upon their
sick-beds, and deathbeds, and desire comfort from what they have done, they
shall find nothing but the wind to feed upon, all will be turned into wind, and
they will have no sollid comfort for their souls to feed upon in the day of
their distress.

The vainglorious.
Those men sow the wind, who do all that they do out of vain glory, in
hypocrisy, to set up themselves among others, spend a long time in prayer,
has admirable gifts in prayer, Prayer.
sweat and spend their strength in prayer, but yet a principle of vain glory
acting of them all this while; they have been sowing the wind all this time.
Men that are public parted and do abundance of good in the Church of God, and
in the Commonwealth, but yet having a principle of self and vain glory that
acts them, they lose all, they sow the wind all this while.

A fifth sort that sows the wind, Carnal politicians.
are such, as leaves the rule thinking to do great things by the fetches, and
reaches they have that way. Your Carnal Politicians that have the Word and
Worship of God as things under their feet, but that which their deep reaches
are after, are some higher things; they sow the wind. And thus the people here
at this time, it was carnal policy that carried them in that way they were in,
and God calls it all, but sowing the wind; they thought they had framed to
themselves a notable piece of work, but says God, It is but sowing the wind.

Sixthly, That serve themselves of sin.
Such as seek to shift for themselves by sinful when they are in any straits,
such as go out of any lawful courses to help themselves out of trouble, these
are they that sow the wind to themselves, there will nothing come of all the
labor they take.

Now first, Use 1. Comforts for the Church.
here the Church of God may have much comfort in this thing, That all
Idolaters, that all false worshipers, that al carnal polititions that are
working against them, in all they do, they do but sow the wind, they can never
prevail, be not afraid of them. The seed-time of our life is a seed-time for
Eternity: Life, the seed-time for eternity.
It Is an evil and dangerous thing therefore now to sow the wind, to lose this
seed-time, and to have nothing for our souls to seed upon to all eternity, Oh!
how sad will it be when we are entering in upon Eternity, then to see that we
have all our lifetime sown the wind? Did men consider of their actions, that
their actions were seeds for Eternity, certainly they would take more heed what
they do. simile.
Men are very careful of their seed; What Husbandman that is to sow his
ground, would go into a Merket to buy Chaff, to buy blasted stuff to be his
seed; no, he would buy the greatest and plumpest Corn of all to be his Seed. So
should we be careful of all our actions, for they are such seed as must bring
forth an harvest of eternal happiness, or else eternal sorrow; and especially
we had need look to our Seed when God gives us a fair opportunity of sowing.
All Hypocrites and Formalists, and False-worshipers, they sow the wind, their
actions are but as the wind: but the Servants of God whose works come from
Faith, and are indeed godly, they sow to immortallity and glory, their Seed
will bring forth a glorious harvest. I remember Luther, though he were a man
that seemed to beat down works very much, yet he has this passage concerning
works: Take works out of the cause of Justification, and no man can too
magnificiently commend good works that come from faith. And speaking of a good
work that comes from faith, good works
It is more precious (says he) any one good works, it is a more precious thing
than Heaven and Earth: yea, he himself that is no Merit-monger yet he lifts up
good works that come from faith, and says, the whole world is not sufficient
reward for one good work that comes from faith: Indeed the works of the Saints
have a great deal of excellency in them, how excellent
one gracious work has more of the glory of God in it than all the creation of
Heaven and Earth besides; I say, the whole frame of Heaven and Earth has not so
much of the Glory of God in it as one good work that comes from the Grace of
God in the hearts of the Saints; and my reason is this, because a good work
that comes from the Grace of God in the hearts of the Saints, Why?
it is a reflection of spiritual life that is the very life of God, the
Scripture calls it, The Life of God, and the Divine Nature; Now, an action of
spiritual life does more set out the Glory of God than any Glory that God has
passively; as the Glory that he has in the frame of the Heavens and Earth it
is but a passive glory, but here the very glory of God is reflected upon his
own face, it is a glory of spiritual life: A man does not account one so much
honored in an Image that is drawn of him, as when he sees his child to act as
he himself does act, simile.
when his child shall present himself in doing that which he himself does do.
Now all the frame of Heaven and Earth it is not so much as a picture, it is but
as the footsteps of God, and the back-parts of God; but in one gracious action
of the Saints there God sees his child act as himself does, he sees the
workings of his own holiness and his own virtues; we show forth the virtues of
him that has called us out of darkness into his mervailous light. 1 Pet. 2. 9
Ministers of all men they had need take heed they sow not the wind, Ministers
must beware of sowing the wind.
God has made them Seeds-men of that eternal Seed of his Word, if they then
either because they are loath to take pains, or to be at the charge for good
Seed, they sow husks and chaff, How 1.
and bring merely empty words unto their people; or if they do take pains
enough, 2.
but bring their own fancies and counsels instead of the precious immortal Seed
of the Word, they do but sow the wind. The Seventy translate this that we have
here: (...).
Sow the wind: Thus; They sow those things that are corrupted by the wind;
those actions that pride corrupts, Corrupta vento. 70.
will never bring forth good fruit. It follows.

And they shall reap the whirlwind.
As we sow, so shall we reap. The word in the Hebrew (Tremelius upon this place
notes) has a syllable added more than ordinary; Turbo (...) here it is (...)
and that says he is to increase the signification of it: To note, that this
is not only a whirlwind, but a most terrible whirlwind. And mark: he does not
say they sow the wind, and they shall reap the wind; no, there is more in the
Harvest than in the Seed; if men will sow the wind, they must expect to reap
the whirlwind. If thou have but a little pleasure in thy sinful ways, thou
must expect a great deal of miseries in the fruit of thy ways. Their labor
shall not only be in vain, but much evil shall come, sudden and violent
destruction shall come of their labors. All sinful actions are like unto the
sowing of the wind in the earth: Now we know if windy vapors be got into the
earth, they cause Earthquakes, they break forth into whirlwinds, into violence:
and so wicked actions they break forth into violence and irresistible evils,
and will cause heart-quakes at last. Great is the power of the whirlwind, the
Scripture sets it out as very great in 1 Kings, 19. 11. Whirlwinds.
A strong wind th^^ rent the mountains and tore in pieces the rocks, overturned
the mountains by the roots. Job, 28. 9. this it is that breaks the Ceders.
Sabelicos reports that upon a time, Cambyse's Soldiers being at dinner in a
sandy place, there rises up a whirlwind and drives the sand upon them so that
it covered them and choaks them al: And yet, what is the wind, but many vapors
being put together? and yet, Oh the mighty strength that there is in them! By
the way this meditation may be raised here: What, shall the addition of many
such weak things as vapors are come, Gods Almighty power.
to such a mighty strength? Oh then, what is the strength of the infinite God
unto which nothing can be added? Ad many vapors together and it causes strong
winds that rends up the Mountains by the roots; if many weak things put
together (I say) come to that strength, what is the strength of an infinite God
unto which no strength can be added?

But observe out of the words, Obs. 1.
Just with God it is, that those that sow the wind (in all the former regards,
those six particulars that were named) that they should reap the whirlwind;
should be brought into trouble and vexation, miserable and unremedable
distresses: you that spend your time about trifles when as God sets you in the
world upon work of great consequence, it is just with God that you should have
horror upon your spirits hereafter, 1. Tri^lers
when God shall make you to see how you have spent that time upon which
eternity depended, 2. Superstitious.
upon sowing the wind all your days: And you that spend your time in false
worship and so think to put off God in your false worship, it is just with God
that you should reap the whirlwind. 3. Formalists.
And so you that spend your strength and time in formality of worship and never
sanctifying the Name of God, it were just with God that horror and distress and
trouble should fill your souls. 4. Hypocrites.
And so you that aim at your own ends and vain glory, when as you should set up
the Name of God in your ways, it is just with God that miserable horror should
possess you: How many have lain upon their sickbeds and death beds and cried
out, Oh I have done all in hypocrisy! and so horror of conscience has been as
a whirlwind unto their souls. 5. Carnal Politicians
And so carnal politicians that have left God and sought to provide for
themselves and others, that by sinful courses have sought to deliver themselves
out of straights, the Lord many times brings them into most dreadful straights
and the worm of conscience gnawing upon them, and they have found by experience
that they have reapt the whirlwind. England.
And indeed we have begun of late to corrupt the Worship of God, and were
carried on by wicked devilish carnal policy, How did we sow the wind? and the
Lord has now made us in great measure to reap the whirlwind. Job says the
whirlwind comes from the South; but indeed the truth is, we have had whirlwinds
coming from the North and West, and may yet have whirlwinds coming from all
parts of the Kingdom, For what has the Land done of late but sown the
whirlwind? Let us not wonder though God does at this day speak unto us out of
the whirlwind, as once he did to Job.

Yea, but many they say, That that we have sown it has some substance in it,
it is not only the wind, for we see that it comes to a blade, it comes forth.

Yea, but says God here, It shall not bring forth a stalk.

I beseech you observe the words that follow, Gradation of the text
It shall not bring forth a stalk: But it may be a stalk may come forth: I but
says God, It shall be crushed before it comes to the bud. But what if it does
bud, it shall be blasted, it shall not come to the meal. I but what if it come
to the meal? Then strangers shall devour it says God; so it follows, They sow
the wind, and reap the whirlwind; it shall not grow to a stalk, or to the bud,
or there shall be no meal, or strangers shall devour it. A most elegant
expression it is to show Gods watching over an apostatizing people for evil,
and to show that in whatsoever they may seem to prosper for a while, yet at the
last the Curse of God will be their ruin.

Obs. First, Obs. 2.
Though sometimes Gods Curse is upon wicked actions, so that nothing comes of
them; yet at other times they may be suffered to seem to prosper, to have some
degrees of growth, God may let them come to a stalk, or to the bud, or to the
meal; this notes the possibility. It may come to the stalk, possibly to the
bud, possibly to the meal, but then all shall come to nothing.

My brethren we have found it so by experience, England.
as it was here in this people, for it was spoken of their wicked Idolatry, and
their carnal policy. And has it not been so with our Adversaries? some of
their actions God has crushed them presently, and then they have grown up to a
blade, and they have seemed to have meal in them, but then the Curse of God
has come upon them: Oh! the uncertainty and the vanity of the comforts of
ungodly men! When can they bless themselves in any one project? When it comes
up to the blade? No says God, it shall not come to a stalk: God watches there
that it seldom comes so far. Well, but then, will they bless themselves if it
has gotten up to a stalk? No, not then neither, God curses them. But if it
bud, now may they not bless themselves? Oh! our projects begin to bud, and they
thrive bravely, may they not bless themselves now? No, God watches them there,
and curses them in the very bud. I but what if it comes to meal, that it is
ready now to come to a full issue, and ready even to come to be eaten, now that
they come to feed upon their projects, and they think all is sure? No, the
curse of God is upon them there, strangers shall devour it. Blessed be that God
who has followed our Adversaries this way, How often have they blessed
themselves, and when they have had one design, this will do it, Oh how finely
it works! and perhaps they get the very advantage that they themselves desire,
and think all is well, and then Gods Curse comes upon them. We are my brethren
too unbeleeving, we are ready to fear if we hear but of any thriving of any
plot and project of our Adversaries, if any stalk does appear, and especially
if they begin to bud, Oh! then we think they ripen; and we do not look up to
the great God who does take delight in blasting the projects of the
Adversaries; as the Blessing of God is upon the good actions of his people, so
the Curse of God is upon the wicked projects of his enemies. God may seem many
times to leave many a good action, but God does carry it through at length,
though it seems to have many things that would crush it in the very bud, yet
God carries good projects through many difficulties, and God crushes wicked
projects through much prosperity.

Lastly, Obs. 3.
To have the satisfying of our desires to go on a while, and to have them cut
off before we enjoy them, is a great judgment; but just with God it should be
so: for ordinarily we are thus in our obedience, that usually withers before it
comes to any ripeness; if it get up to the stalk it may be it comes not to a
bud; if to meal, some strange lust or other comes in and devours it; Oh how
many times does our strange lusts devour our good actions that comes forth a
good way? Young professors.
How many in their young years, we had thought very gracious seed began to
sprout forth, and we had thought that the seed grew to a stalk, and when they
came to be for themselves, we had thought they had begun to bud in gracious
actions, we had thought it came to be meal, to their middle age; but to their
old age strange lusts has come and devoured all. It Is great judgment for
strangers to devour our estates when we have scraped a deal together; truly,
for strange lusts to come to devour thy hopeful beginnings, it is a greater
judgment than for strangers to devour thy estate, that thou have gotten by a
great deal of labor: Many men have labored all their lives, and taken pains,
and that which they have done has seemed to come to something; and the truth
is, in the conclusion the Devil has had the advantage of all.

And God seems to be out against us in some degree, England.
even in the ways of his judgments at this day; thus as many of the
Adversaries projects, so many of ours the Lord has blasted before they come to
a stalk, and when they have been budded the Lord has blasted them, by
unfaithfulness of some or others; when we have had our greatest thoughts, the
Lord has seemed to blast us, and what God will do with us we know not, only
let us make sure that our seed be good, and though this does not prosper or the
other does not, yet at last God will bring the greater Harvest upon us.

VER. 8.
Israel is swallowed up: now they shall be among the Gentiles as a vessel
wherein there is no pleasure.
ISRAEL, they had made so many Leagues among other People, til they were even
swallowed up by them. And truly my Brethren, if there be not a great care had,
there is much danger in making Leagues with other Nations, lest upon the need
they see we have of them they should incroach upon us, and at length even have
Laws given to us by them: Foreign Leagues.
It was so with the people of Israel, that by their League with other people
they were so incroacht upon by them, as at length they gave them Laws and
swallowed them up. Churches mixtures with the world dangerous.
And thus many of the People of God, yea, of the Churches of God, by mingling
themselves with the world are even swallowed up, so as they lose their beauty;
and there is no difference appears between them and the men of the world. It Is
one thing for wicked men to creep into the Church unawares, (and certainly
there is none can expect that any Church in the world can continue but wicked
men and hypocrites will mingle themselves) but it is one thing when they creep
in unawares, and another thing when the fence is broken down, so as it is very
hard to see any face of a Church among them: thus it was with Israel.

But now shall they be among the Gentiles, as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.
By these words, Vessel of no pleasure, is meant, a vessel that is for the
carrying up and down of excrements; only the Scripture when it mentions such
vile things, speaks in a modest way; but that is the meaning of the word: as if
he should say, Even my people shall be in a vile contemptible condition among
the Gentiles, as a vessel that is fit for nothing but excrements. Jehoiakim is
threatened in Jer. 22. 18. though a great man, yet he is threatened to be as a
vessel wherein is no pleasure, they had wasted their substance in seeking help
from the Egyptians and Assyrians, and these made a prey of them; so long as
they had any thing of value continued, then they made much of them, but their
estates being once wasted, and they swallowed up in their very estates, Wicked
men first serve their turns of the Godly, and then scorn them
they look now upon them as vile and contemptible in their eyes. And this is
the way of wicked men, while wicked men are serving their own turns upon any,
they will hug them and make much of them, but if that be done, then they scorn
them and contemn them; non are more scorned and contemned than Professors of
Religion who have basely crouched to wicked men, and sought to shelter
themselves under them, when their estates are once consumed and gone, they are
more scorned by those that served themselves of them than any; and therefore
let us learn wisdom, and how far we venture to make use of men, and do not
please our selves in this, that they hug and commend us, if it be but to serve
their own turns, when they have gotten what they would have, they will then
scorn you, and look upon you as base people, and kick you out.

Again, (...) 70. Vas inutile.
A vessel wherein is no pleasure. The Seventy translate it, an unprofitable
vessel. But there is more intended certainly in this expression; a vessel
employed in base and contemptible uses; Israel shall be so employed; and
thereby he shall know a difference between my service, and the service of their
enemies: Isreal's prerogatives.
Oh it is a sad expression, what Israel! a vessel employed and received to
empty out excrements! Isa. 43. 4. [2. An holy people unto the Deuteronomy. 14. 2. [3.
They were Gods peculier People above Deuteronomy. 32. 9. [5. Gods Inheritance, Isa.
19. 25. Exodus 19. 5. [7. Gods Glory, Isa. 46. 13* [8. Gods Delig^^^ Isa. 62. 4.
[9. Israel were Jer. 12. 7. and yet now Sparta that being taken by Antigonus
and sold for a slave, ^^l the while that he that brought him did employ him in
any thing that did stand with ingenuity he did it, but when he bid him go and
empty a vessel wherein is no pleasure, no says he, I will not serve you now in
such a thing, and his Master being angry with him he gets up to the top of the
house and falls down and breaks his neck rather than he would empty such a
vessel. A sinner is the vessel where into the Devil empties his excrements.
And certainly there is nothing that is so beneath the excelleney of an
Immortal soul as sin is, for hereby though thou be, high in thine own
thoughts thou come to be a vessel for the very Devil to empty his excrements
into: and that is lower than to be a Scavenger to go up and down to take the
filth of the street: in being employed in the service of the Devil thou do
more deba^e thy self than if thou were a Scavenger to carry dung and filth in a
Dung-Cart; but as if thou were judged to such a kind of life and employment,
that thou should go from morning to night to carry away the filth in thy
very hands and mouth. Some men are vessels of mercy, they are chosen vessels,
Gods free grace to the vessels of mercy.
vessels of honor fitted for the Masters use: and it is an infinite mercy of
God to us when as we have deserved to be cast out as vessels wherein there is
no pleasure, that God should employ any of us to be vessels of His Sanctuary,
that God should take us out of the common lump, such vessels; whereas others
are vessels of wrath employed only in base services that are beneath the
excellency of an immortal Soul.

Yea, Lapsed Ministers.
Some there are who have been eminent in the Church heretofore, who have been
vessels filled with the Gifts of the holy Ghost (I do not say Graces) now they
are vessels in which there is no pleasure; many of the Saints heretofore have
been refreshed by them, from those Gifts of the holy Ghost that have been in
them, but now their Gifts are gone, they are fit for no pleasure, but for Pot
or Pipe: Now idle drones that are fit for nothing but to set in the Ki^^^in,
and (it may be) to scum the pot, yea some of them filled with poison, vessels
wherein neither God nor man can take pleasure, And Professors.
yea and some very forward professors of Religion that once were as the
pollished Saphirs and are now become more black than the coal, turned
Apostates; they were as golden vessels in the House of God, and now are become
vessels wherein is no pleasure. It was a speech that once Demosthenes had to
the Athenians, Demosthenes.
he desired them that they would not make an Urinal of a Wine pot; for to
employ those men in base services that had been eminent, even those men that
God Himself has heretofore made use of for great services in Church and
Commonwealth, the Lord has left them to be vessels of no pleasure. Oh!
remember al you from whence you are fallen, thy heart is now exercised upon
such low things, thy work (it may be) now is only to further the wicked designs
and desperate malice of other men; And do thou think to be a vessel of
glory, to stand before the presence of the holy God, and join with Saints and
Angels in the eternal praises of His Name? Oh! remember from whence thou art
fallen, and be not at quiet till the Lord has been pleased to purge thee and
make thee fit for thy Masters use, and to become a vessel of honor in thy
Masters house.

VER. 9.
For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild Ass alone by himself; Ephraim has
hired Lovers.
THE Lord by the Prophet proceeds on in his charge against the ten Tribes here.

They are gone up to Assyria for help.
They are gone up] The vileness of diffidence in God.
they look not up to the high God for their help, but they are gone up to
Assyria, Assyria is higher in their eyes than the God of Heaven is. How vile a
thing is it to forsake confidence in God out of suspicious thoughts of him; for
so it was here, they retained suspicious thoughts of God, as if He would leave
them in their extremity, and out of those suspicious thoughts of him, they
forsake him and seek help else where; they expect more good, more faithfulness,
more love, not only from the creature than from God, but from the very Enemies
of God than from God Himfelf; yea, and that people that professed Interest in
God, that would seem to bless themselves in this, That God was their God, even
this People, looked to have more good and to find more faithfulness in the very
enemies of God than in God Himself; let the Heavens be astonished at this
wickedness: and yet this evil is in the hearts of the children of men.

A wild Ass, alone by himself.
This creature the Scripture mentions in diverse places for one of the most
unruly, and untamable, and fierce creature in the world. Such a creature as
cannot be brought to be serviceable, it will not be brought to live with men,
no, it cannot be brought to live long with other beasts, no nor to keep company
with their own kind, so fierce and savage it is, but runs up and down in the
wilderness alone. In Job, 11. 12. we have mention of this creature. For vain in
an would be wise, though man be born like a wild Asses Colt. And in Job, 39. 5.
Who has sent out the wild Ass free? or who has loosed the bands of the wild
Ass? And in Jer. 2. 24. to name no more. A wild Ass used to the wilderness that
snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away?
all they that seek her will not weary themselves, in her month they shall find
her. Ier. 2. 24. illustrated
In her occasion when he has a mind unto the foemale, she snuffeth up the
wind, as the Historians say of her, they go up to Mountains and there they seek
to have the sent of the foemale, or the male, so they snuff up the wind even
for the sent of her. Pliny
And so the Naturalists that write the nature of this Creature, Pliny. in his
eighth Book and forty Chapter: Those that are Scholars that desire to know
more of the nature of this beast may find diverse things there. But now we are
only to speak of it as the Scripture speaks of it here.

Why does God compare Ephraim amd the ten Tribes to the wild Ass? Quest.


For two Reasons. Answ.
1. To show the extreme stubbornness and fierceness of this people. Why the ten
Tribes compared to a wild Asses colt.
Wicked men that have forsaken God, and are left to themselves, do not only
become like unto savage creatures, but the very worst of all savage creatures,
they run up and down satisfying the lusts of their own hearts irresistably and
bear down all before them, Wicked men wild upon their lusts.
they stamp, and rage, and are mad when at any time they are opposed in their
wicked way, this is the scope of the holy Ghost here: thus Ephraim was when he
was opposed. Do you not find many so, that are in a violent way set upon
wickedness and ungodliness that they will hear nothing, they snuff at the wind
and all that is said against them, and run violently upon wicked ways, and
upon their own ruin: In their month, what?
It may be in their month you shall find them; that has reference unto the
very last month which the wild Ass goes when it is with young, then when it is
so big, and till then there is no dealing with them. Some Historians say that
the wild Asses are so fierce, that they will tare asunder Armor of proof, but
only in the very month when they are so big that they cannot weld themselves,
then you shall find them. So, though sinners be never so stubborn, yet God has
his month, and perhaps then you shall find them. When at any time you find your
children, or servants, or others to be stubborn and stout against whatsoever is
said to them, and even rage in their madness for the satisfying of their wicked
wills, you may remember this text and creature: they are as wild Asses that are
alone by themselves; and among all wicked men Idolaters are the most stubborn
and stout in their wicked ways, their hearts are set upon their Idols, yea as
the phrase of Scripture is in Jer. 5. 38, They are mad upon their Idols.
There Is nothing that can be said to those whose hearts are taken with false
worship, nothing will prevail with them without an infinite power of God put
forth, and there is no sinners more bold, more untamable and fierce in their
ways, then those that are superstitious, and that is their reason that if they
be opposed in their way of false worship, you know there will be such
tumultuousness of people flinging of stones against windows where God is truly
worshipped, any thing in the world though they know not what they do, yet
because they think themselves condemned in their sinful ways, therefore they
run like wild beasts in a furious manner even against those that worship God
better than themselves.

Secondly, 2. Wicked men contemptible.
God compares the ten Tribes to the wild Ass in way of contempt of them. As in
the former place of Job, 11. 12. Vain man would be wise; though man be born
like a wild Asses Colt: he would fain think himself somebody, yet he is a most
base and vile creature. And if any of you be not so fierce in your wicked ways
as some others are, if God has tamed your spirits by His Word and Spirit,
bless God for it, for all men are born like a wild Asses Colt, they are mad
upon their wicked ways to ruin themselves. Stubbornness the fruit of pride.
But because there is no men that think higher of themselves than stubborn
spirits; for stoutness and stubborness does evermore proceed from pride,
because they think it such a dishonor for their wills to be crossed in any thing,
therefore the Scripture casts the more contempt upon them, and calls such,
proud, stout fools, wild Asses; and indeed there are none more contemptible in
the eyes of God than stout sinners. It follows.

A wild Ass, alone, by himself.
Alone.] The reason of this expression is, to show, that Ephraim and the ten
Tribes they would be at their own hands, they would have their own wills*
alone: There Is these two things expressed in it.

First, That they would be under no government, but alone by themselves, Alone.
and have liberty to frisk up and down, 1. Under no government.
and do what they list alone, acknowledging no Commander; and so the Chalde
Paraphrase has it, Because that they would walk in the evil of their own
lusts, Eo quod ambularunt in voluntate animae suae.
and would acknowledge no Comander. And thus many at this day, they love to be
alone, that is, to live at their own hand, to be from under Government. Though
it is here, he was alone in the Wilderness, he would rather be in the
Wilderness alone, so be it he may acknowledge no Commander, than in the best
pastors under any command. Thus it is with many, they love to be alone, that
is, they are loath to come under any Government, they had rather be in the
wilderness and suffer never so great straights than come under any Government;
Servants at their own hand,
It is true of diverse sorts of people, even the lowest sort, many that love to
live at their own hand, servants that are not able to provide for themselves
that if they have but a little sickness are ready to starve, yet that they
might live without any command, not under any Government, they will choose
rather to endure abundance of hardship that they may live alone; Especially
Maidens.
many times it is so, especially in the foemale sex, which ought to be under
Government and some Protection, yet they love to be alone at their own hand; I
say, and merely because they cannot endure to come under any kind of Government
whatsoever.

And in the wilderness.] Their lives indeed are as in the wilderness, when they
are in any straights and distresses they have no body to look after them and
regard them because they loved their liberties so much before. So, many had
rather be without all Ordinances in the Church, or many Ordinances, Christians
without ordinances
only that they might live as they list, at their own wills, that they may not
be under the Government of Christ, they had rather live in the wilderness of
the world so that they might have liberty, rather than be in Gods Vinyard under
the Government of Christ. These come under the reproof here that Ephraim did in
this place.

Secondly, Alone by himself, as unfit for Society, they were so furious and
fierce in their way: Some are of such untoward and perverse dispositions that
they can agree with no body, so that they are only fit to live in the
wilderness: I suppose you have met with in your families that are so extremely
perverse in their ways, and they are of such untoward and crooked dispositions
that they are fit to live in no Society but alone in the Wilderness: and this
reproof of Ephraim comes likewise upon those.

Ephraim has hired Lovers. (...)

The Assyrians and Egyptians, and others; the words signify Loves. Before they
put their confidence in the Assyrians, and now they make them their loves. The
thing I note is this.

That where we place our confidence, Obs. 1.
there our love should be placed. If God be the confidence of our hearts, let
our love be placed there, yea let God be our Loves, in the plural number, for
so it is here, they hired Lovers; she would fain have the Assyrians to love
her. When God is forsaken, when we have lost our Interest in Gods love, no
mervail though there be such a seeking after the Creatures love; men that
forsake God they seek to make up what they have not in God in the Creature:
simile.
as a dog when he has lost his Master he is ready to follow every one he meets
with. Again,

He has hired Loves.] Those that have nothing lovely in themselves, will use
unworthy means to purchase it.
Because they had nothing lovely in themselves therefore they hire the love of
others to them, they seek even to hyre love, though the truth is, Love cannot
be hired nor purchased, although men may fawn and glaver, and flatter, and
crouch that they may gain the love of some other, yet if there be no loveliness
in themselves to gain love, although those whom they fawn on, and flatter may
use them for their own turn, and serve themselves upon them, Love cannot be
bought.
yet the truth is they will despise them in their hearts, and so often they
will discover to their intimate friends how they scorn and contemn them;
therefore if others would have love, there must be some excellency and
loveliness in us; for love cannot be hired. But,

Ephraim has hired Lovers.] This shows the shamelessness of the ten Tribes in
seeking after their false worship. Other Harlots they are hired to commit
uncleanness; but Ephraim will be at charge for their Idols: Many Harlots count
it a great dishonor for to seek after Loves, to seek after Whoremasters, though
they can embrace them when they come unto them, but yet they will rather have a
hyre than they will hyre them; but mark, those that are superstitions they
think not upon their honor, but they will hyre, to the commission of spiritual
whordom they will go to hyre Lovers and be at a great deal of charges, in Ezekiel.
16. 33, 34. They give gifts to all Whores; but thou give thy gifts to all thy
Lovers. And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whordoms, whereas
none follows thee to commit whordoms, and in that thou give a reward, and
no reward is given unto thee; therefore thou art contrary. As if God should
say, you are more vile and base in your uncleanness than any in the world
besides; for other Whores they receive rewards, but you are so set upon your
filthy lusts that you will give rewards that you might commit uncleanness.

From hence the Note is, Obs. 3.
That Idolaters will not stand upon terms if they may have their Idols, any
way: they care not how they debase themselves, they will not stand upon honor
and respect, but let them have their false worship they will submit to any
thing. Oh! why should we stand upon our terms thus in the matters of the honor
of our God, when public good lies at the stake? An exhortation to the godly
why should not we be willing to suffer shame and disgrace, any thing rather
than the public good should not go on, than the service of God should be
hindered? If others will not seek to us, yet if good may be done, let us seek
to them, if God may have Glory: Though others be never so vile in their
carriage toward us, yet let us do what we can to win and convince them, let us
be willing to lie under their feet that God may be glorified: If others will
not join in a good work except they may have the honor of it, let them have it
so be it the work may go on, let us reason so, Why should I put forth my self
and others go away with all the glory? let the work go on, and if they will
s^and for the glory let them have it: An apt simile.
so God may be lifted up let us be willing not to be seen: This is that which
does hinder thee the promoting of his Causes. But men stand upon terms and they
will not go on in a good cause but break off if others be preferred before them.
If there be two carrying a piece of timber through a narrow passage, and if
these two men that are carrying a long piece of timber and they must carry it
through a narrow passage, if they should stand striving who should go foremost,
one says I will go first, the other says, nay but I will go first, they can
never carry the timber, If one have one end and the other the other end and
they cannot agree which should go first, and he that goes after thinks himself
dishonored because his fellow goes before him, they can never carry it through
but they must lay it down. So it is many times with a good cause, it is like a
piece of timber upon two men's shoulders, and it must go through a narrow
passage, and one says, why should not I have the glory of it? and the other
says, why should not I have the glory of it? and the while men stand wrangling
who should have the greatest glory, in the mean time the public cause is
exceedingly hindered; let us be willing to submit and debase our selves any way
so be it the true Worship of God may go on.

Further, He has hired Lovers.] It Is an evil thing to be selves from the
greatest affliction: but now, for a man or woman to seek after the ways of
sin, to be at cost that they might have their lusts, this is more vile; for a
Whore to prostrate her ^elf for money, this is base and abominable though she
should have never so much money, but to give money, Paulina.
this is more base and abominable. Josephus reports of one Decius Mundus which
was a Noble man, Josephus lib. 18. cap. 4.
that to one Paulina, a Lady in Rome, he offered as much as came to six
thousand pounds for to satisfy his lusts but one night, and yet was refused.
So certainly uncleanness should be cast off with indignation though it be
tempted unto with never so much gain; but for one to be set upon uncleanness so
as to seek after it, and to spend their Husbands estates that they might have
the free way for the satisfying of their lusts, this is a most abominable thing
indeed, and yet thus, many are guilty both in regard of bodily and spiritual
adultry. It follows.

VER. 10.
Yea, though they have hired among the Nations; now will I gather them, and
they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the King of Princes.
THESE words in the reading of them seem to be dark, and yet we have much of
the mind of God in them, and much concerning our selves.

Yea, though they have hired among the Nations.
This God still takes ill that they should go to the Nations for help,
Explicati^.
when God had made their condition so much above the Nations, for in their
going to them they did as it were say, that all the love and mercy, and
protection from the great God it was no more toward them than the Nations had,
they did (as it were) hold forth to the world that the Nations were rather in a
better condition than themselves, in that they would go to the Nations for
their help; and this went very near to the heart of God, for God had laid out
the very strength of his love, and the riches of his mercy upon this people,
and after he had done so much for them yet that they (because they were in some
little afflictions for the present, that they) should go to the Nations that
did for the present prosper somewhat outwardly better than themselves Oh! this
was exceeding grievous to the heart of God: and thence the Note is this.

That it is a very great evil, Obs. 4.
when wicked men seem to prosper a little in their outward condition more than
Gods People; for those that are the people of God to begin to think that
therefore those wicked ones are in a better condition than themselves, this is
an evil that does go very much to the heart of God; Admonition to Saints.
and very ordinarily it is in some degree or other among the People of God, I
appeal to your consciences in this very thing, though at some time your souls
have had sweet refreshing from the Lord in the enjoyment of communion with him,
but yet when Gods hand has been out against you, when you looked upon others
though you knew them to be wicked and ungodly yet they have prospered, their
Ships came home safely and richly, and their trading goes on; Do you not
sometimes find such rising of your thoughts within you as if so be that these
men were in a ^etter condition than your selves? Oh! if you have but the least
thought rising that way, know it is that which does exceedingly grieve the
Spirit of God by which you are sealed, that because they have a few loaves more
than you, though you have all the riches of God and Christ, though you have the
inheritance of Saints, yet that you should think them in a better condition
than you are in: simile.
As a child, if he sees some stranger have a bit of meat better than he has,
he should think presently that his father loves the stranger better than him;
this the father takes ill. How ordinary is it upon this ground for those that
have professed themselves to be godly rather to withdraw themselves from the
afflicted Saints, and seek correspondence with wicked men that prosper. God
would have his people see an al sufficiency in himself in their sadest
condition, so as they need not go out from him for help, but still wait upon
him and keep his way; the Lord by his Prophet rebukes Jehoshaphat in 2 Chronicles.
19. 2. for loving the ungodly and helping them that hate the Lord. And is there
not as great an evil to seek the love of the wicked and ungodly and help from
them that hate the the Lord? certainly the evil is very great, it argues very
little love that we have to God, it charges God of unfaithfulness, as if though
he has engaged himself to his people, yet he would leave them in the lurch;
this encourages the wicked in their wicked ways, and it charges God with that
which is accounted one of the most vile things among men. What is accounted one
of the vilest things among men, that a man should set another men about his
work, and then leave them in the lurch when they meet with troubles in their
work? It is as vile a thing as any is among men, and we should look upon such
men as should employ others in any service and then leave them to shift for
themselves in their straights, we should look upon them as vile men, unworthy
to be dealt withal. Now what would we but charge God with this, even that which
makes men to be most vile?

And this besides is a most desperaee folly so to do, for when thou art
thinking to provide for thy self by correspondence with ungodly men, it may be
thou were just at the very point of deliverance at that very time; it is Gods
usual way to come to help his people when they are in the greatest straights;
and therefore it is the greatest folly that when we are in straights then to
think of shifting courses, so that then we must forsake our own mercy in
thinking of shifting courses; in straights above all times Christians should
take heed of thinking of shifting courses, because then above all times those
are the times for God to show his mercy, and just then: Will thou then be
forsaking him? Oh! it is that which should lie near to your hearts, if any of
you have been guilty of this, let but the Word of God bring this upon your
spirits this day, Oh! how do I know but at that very time when I took such a
shifting course, that was the very time that God was about to do my soul good
and of doing good for my body, and yet then I deprived my self of good, that
goodness and mercy of God? It follows yet,

Now will I gather them.
This gathering among Interpreters has reference either to the Nations whom
they sought unto, Explicat.
or to themselves. I will gather them; that is, That Nation; or, I will gather
you. If to the Nation, then the scope is thus:

Notwithstanding you hire the Nations, yet I will gather

Many times when we think to provide best for our own peace, Obs. 1.
we make the greatest provision for our own ruin: God many times makes people
work their own woe and ruin themselves, and there is no means that does more
fully and directly tend to undo them than what they do themselves; and thus God
over rules the counsels and thoughts of men.

What a vain thing is it to plot against God, when God can turn men's Arrows
against themselves? No men are greater instruments of Gods wrath (many times)
against us than we are our selves, yea, and than those are that we seek most to
correspond withal; and it is just with God it should be so, that if we will
leave him, to seek correspondence with wicked men, it is just with God that of
all men in the world those should be the men that should be made the
Executioners of Gods wrath upon us.

But now, Explic. 2. (...) colligore.
if it be to Israel, I will gather them among the Nations. Then the word here
gathered is sometimes used for gathering dead corpse in an Army when they are
slain in Battle. You go and think to have the Nations, but you shall be as a
company of dead corpse in an Army, and lie in heaps there. But I find Calvin
has a further Note upon it, and takes it as having reference to the former
verse. This people are wild, and run up and down, this way and that way to
shift for themselves, Calvin in loc. Colliga^ eos, retinebo eos.
but I will gather them; that is, I will keep the^ in; so the words likewise
may signify, I will keep them in, I will gather-in their spirits, there shall
be some work of prudence or other to keep them in, I will keep them from those
ways wherein they would presently have ruined themselves.

People run many times headily on in evil ways that would certainly ruin them;
Obs. 2.
but when Gods time for the execution of his wrath is not yet come, the Lord
restrains them and keeps them in from such ways; though their hearts be set
upon such ways of undoing themselves, yet they shall not go on in them, I will
pity them who cannot pity themselves. But then it follows (in which the
greatest difficulty of the verse is.)

And they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the King of Princes.
This has more darkness in it, Explic. in 5. parti^ulars.
and yet upon the searching into it, we shall see it clear, and many excellent
Truths cleared from it. There are these Five Things to be enquired after for
the opening of these words.

First, Who is this King of Princes that is here meant.

Secondly, What was this burden of the King of Princes.

Thirdly, Why does he call this the burden? Or rather thirdly thus, When was
this threat fulfilled, that they should sorrow for the burden of the King of
Princes.

Fourthly, Why does he call it the burden of the King of

Fifthly, What Is meant by sorrowing a little.

These five things will clear the text. Indeed we cannot see the full meaning
of the holy Ghost without understanding somewhat of these five.

First, King of Princes, i.e. The King of Assyria.
Who is meant by the King of Princes. We are here to understand the King of
Assyria, because he was a great King whose Nobles were Princes, and we find
this both by Scripture and likewise by humane Story; in 2 King. 18. 24. How
then will thou turn away the face of one Captain of the least of my Masters
Servants. And in Isa. 36. 13. Hear the word of the great King, the King of
Assyria. And how will thou turn away the face of the Captains of the least of
my Masters Servants. His Captains and Nobles were as Princes. Joseph. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Antiq. a Princip.
And so Josephus in his 1. Book, 10. Chapter, as I remember says, That at the
time before Sodoms destruction, the Assyrians were Lords of All Asia, so that
the Assyrian was a great King, and here called the King of Princes.

Thus God suffers his enemies to grow great in the world, Obs. 3.
an Assyrian, a dog, a wicked wretch under the curse of God, and yet is he the
great King, even the King of Princes; as Luther has such an expression
concerning the Empire of Turkey, Luther*
it is (says he) but one crum that the great Master of the family does cast to
dogs. What are your estates then? Certainly though you be never so great in the
world, what is any of your estates to the whole Turkish Empire? and if that be
but a crum that the great Master of the family casts to a dog, you should never
then bless your selves in the enjoyment of a little of the world. But though
the Assyrian may be called the King of Princes in regard of his power over some
great men, Jesus Christ the true King of Princes.
yet most properly our Lord Jesus Christ he is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: in Revel. 19. 16. and he has on his Vesture, and on his Thigh a name
written, Revel. 16. 19. opened
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

Why was it written upon his Vesture, and why upon his Thigh? 1. Openly.
Upon his Vesture, That is, he will appear openly to be the King of Kings;
there was a time when Christ seemed to be (as it were) a servant under the
dominion of Antichrist, 2. Church militant.
but now his name shall be upon his Vesture, openly; and then upon his Thigh;
that is, upon his lower parts, his Church Militant, it shall have the Kingly
power among them for its good, so as they shall be above the Nations, according
to the Prophecy in Isa. 60. 13. He will make the place of his feet glorious.
(the Church in their low condition) He does not say, Isa. 16. 13 illustrated.
he will have the name upon his Crown, but upon his Thigh, that is, upon his
lower parts, upon his people, that were in a low condition, he will make the
very place of his feet to be glorious, even there shall be written, The King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords.

But Secondly, 2. Burden.
What was this burden? This burden was those Taxes that were upon the people,
whereby they maintained their correspondence with this King of Assyria:
correspondence with wicked men it is burdensome: for the the more they are
sought to, and yielded to, ordinarily the more burdensome they are: and
whatsoever they do for you for a while, it is indeed to serve their own ends,
and this they brought upon themselves: for they would go to Assyria, and they
found the Assyrians to be burdensome to them.

When men will follow their own ways, Use. Follow not thine own ways.
and think to have more ease in their own way than in Gods, it is just they
should find those ways to be burdensome to them. I am persuaded there is not
one in this Congregation but has found the experience of this; when you think
your ways will bring more ease to you than Gods ways, have not you found your
ways burdensome?

But thirdly, When was this fulfilled? If we would know the meaning of the
Prophet we must refer to the History of the Kings, and in 2 Kings, 15. 19.
there you may find when this Prophecy was fulfilled. Phul the King of Assyria
came against the Land, and Menahem gave Phul a thousand talents of silver that
his hand might be with him to confirm the Kingdom in his hand. 2 Kings, 15. 19.
And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth,
of each man fifty sheckles of silver to give to the King of Assyria. There was
one burden. And then in the 29. ver. In the days of Pekah King of Israel, came
Tig^ath-Pile^er King of Assyria, and took Jion, and Abel-Beth maachah, and
Jauoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the Land of
Nephtalie, and carried them captive to Assyria. There was a further burden. But
yet the whole Land was not, it was only the other side of Jordan: at these two
times was this Scripture fulfilled.

Fourthly, 4. Burden of the King of Princes.
Why does the holy Ghost say, The burden of the King of Princes? In speaking of
the burden that was upon the people he does give the Assyrian such an Epithet?
Why it seems to be a dimunition of their burden rather than any aggravation;
for he speaks of sorrowing but a little, as if it should not be so great a
burden as afterward should be upon them, no^ing thus, That they were burdened
a while with Taxations from a great King, but they should afterward come under
the power, to be at the wills and lusts of al kind of base people, of the very
dregs of people: And it is not so great an evil to be under the power of men of
rank and quality, no not under their oppression, as to be under the oppression
of many people, of people that are of very mean quality and condition, the very
refuse of a Nation, to come to be under their power it is a great deal worse.

And by the way this Note it should teach us, even those that are of mean
breeding, and whose lives have been very low in the world, of mean condition,
if they be put into place of any power and Authority, to take heed how they
behave themselves, for their oppression will be the most grievous to an
ingenuous spirit that possibly can be. And there is a great deal of danger in
them to grow more oppressing than other men that were born to greatness, and
their oppression will be so intolerable as will bring the greatest confusion that
possibly can be if that be not well looked to. And therefore here when he would
lessen the burden, (says he) you shall sorrow a little for tht burden of the
King of Princes.

But what is it? You shall sorrow a little. They complained, but says God,
what do you complain of this? this is but a little burden to that which you are
like to have, there is another manner of burden a coming for you than this; and
from hence the Notes are these.

First, Obs. 1.
When sinners have brought trouble upon themselves they will complain much,
exceedingly troubled; but when they complain they are to consider, that what
they feel it is but a little to what is coming after. There are burdens upon
you, and you are complaining of these burdens, as if so be that they were the
greatest that ever were upon people, Use. Admonition to Engl.
Oh sinner! consider of this when you are complaining of your burdens, know,
that these burdens that are upon you may prove to be but very trifles in
comparison of what is like to come upon you afterward, for that is the scope of
the holy Ghost here, They shall sorrow a little for this burden, as if he
should say, There is other manner of sorrow coming after, and so it did, for
afterward the Assyrians carried them all away captives, and the basest of all
the people came even to set their feet upon them, and therefore says the holy
Ghost, This is but a little: I speak to those that make not up their peace with
God; and do not upon those burdens that are upon them return to God. As the
mercies of God to his Saints, that which now they have is but a little, they
may be said to rejoice a little for the mercy that now they have. And so the
burdens upon the ungodly they are but a little, but if they return not to God
upon what they feel, God has greater burdens than those are that they so vex
and fret under.

Secondly, Obs. 2
Taxes and Impositions upon men's estates are but a little burden in comparison
of being brought under the power of the Enemy.

Though there be sore Taxes upon you, Use.
as here there was fifty shekels of silver laid upon every man that was able,
but those Taxes are but little burdens in comparison of being given up to the
power of the Enemy, they would lay burdens indeed upon us, burdens upon our
Consciences, all our Estates, all our Lives, all our Liberties, whatsoever we
are or have must be under their mercy; now we are troubled, but then their
little finger will be more heavy than the loins that now we find to be upon us;
although we dare not say but some may find burdens very sore upon them for the
present.

A third Note, Obs. 3.
is this; That, as Taxes are a burden, but a little in comparison, so the
carrying of our Brethren into captivity: Though we enjoy our Estates our
selves, yet if God lays his hand upon any of our Brethren though in remote
parts of the Kingdom, Oh we should account this to be a burden. As not only
their Taxations was a burden, but the carrying away of their Brethren that were
beyond the River.

If there were no other sin among us, it were just with God to bring the Enemy
upon us, and then we should find that there were other manner of burdens.

But there is another burden that we are not sensible enough of, and that is
the captivity of our Brethren in the remote parts of this Land. Oh! how little
sensible are we of it because we feel it not our selves?

The fourth Note from hence is this, Obs. 4
That it is Gods mercy when we are running on to our utter ruin, not to suffer
us to plung our selves irrecoverably into misery, but to bring lesser evils
upon us that by them we may come to bethink our selves, and if it be possible
to prevent greater. You shall sorrow a little, I will not undo you presently;
but return to me, or else you are utterly undone, but this is my Mercy, I will
bring afflictions upon you by piecemeal, [in that generality that they were
carried away]
and if you do not return to me, then you shall be utterly lost; for so this
people were, they were carried away captive and never returned to this very
day. Oh! does God come to you in your family, or person, or estate? Oh! let us
consider of this.

And this is the last note from it: Obs. 5
The consideration of little burdens which is upon us to what might be, should
cause us to turn to God; it should break our hearts, and cause us to seek the
face of God, that we may prevent greater evils, that otherwise will certainly
come; the Lord in his dealing toward us seems as if he were loath to lose us,
and that this Nation should perish, Oh that this might work kindly upon our
hearts to prevent greater evils, that we might not be made a spectacle of the
wrath of God to all the Nations that are round about us.

And yet further, ab (...) incipiam a (...) exalto signif.
The words translated, They shall sorrow a little, are by some translated, They
have begun a little for the burden of the King of Princes: And so in Deuteronomy. 2.
25. there is the word that comes from the same root, That that they have felt,
it is but the beginning of what is like to come, my wrath is let out upon them
in some degree already, Deuteronomy. 2. 25.
and do not you see it, how it is begun to burn upon them? and that which was
lately before your eyes, by that you may come to believe my threatenings.

Gods judgments against wicked men, Obs. 1
are the beginnings of further judgments. In Deuteronomy. 32. 42. I will make my
Arrows drunk with blood (and my sword shall devour flesh) and that with the
blood of the slain, Deuteronomy. 32. 42. illustrated.
and of the captives, from the beginning of revenge upon the enemy. All this is
but from the beginning of revenges, when I come so terribly upon them, it is
but the beginning of revenges. We are ready to think if there be miserable
slaughters, Surely God has been revenged enough upon this people. No, all this
may prove but the beginning of revenges. Use for England.
I may say so concerning our selves, Though the Lord many times has made the
sword drunk with blood, yet it may prove to be but the beginning of revenges;
truly we cannot say that from the time that these Judgments have been upon us,
that we have begun scarce to come in to turn to God, yea, the ^^ate of the
Kingdom is far worse than it was at the beginning of this heavy stroke that is
upon us. In Matthew. 24. 7, 8. Ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, and
Nation should rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall
be famines and pestilences, and earthquakes: all these should be but the
beginning of sorrows.

Secondly, God expects from men, Obs. 2.
that though they be not sensible of his threats, yet when he begins with them
in way of execution of his wrath, they should begin a little. Oh! it were well
with us if we did prevent Gods heavy wrath by our repentance. Numbers. 16. 46.
Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer, and put fire therein from off the Altar,
and put on Incense, and go quickly to the Congregation, and make an atonement
for them; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. Oh!
how should we all make have? we cannot say only, the plague is begun (the
plague of Civil War, which is the greatest of all kind of plagues) but it has
gone on a great way.

But to proceed.

VER. 11.
Because Ephraim has made many Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin.
IT was the Charge of God in Scripture, That there should be but one Altar for
Sacrifice, and there was another Altar that afterward was made for Incense,
and no further, in Deuteronomy. 12. 3. and 5. ver. There we have the Charge of God
that there should be none other made, You shall overthrow their Altars, and
break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and you shall hew down
the graven Images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that
place etc. And then, Take heed to thy self that thou offer not thy burnt
offering in every place that thou see, but in the place which the Lord shall
choose etc. And in Deuteronomy. 27. 5. Thou shall build an Altar to the Lord thy God,
an Altar of stones: thou shall not lift up an Iron tool upon them. And
according to which Joshua did, in Joshua, 8. 30. and hence in Joshua, 22. 11.
Now for the Altar of God, I shall first show you a little the meaning of them,
and then the reason why God would have but this one Altar, in Exodus 20. 24.
there is an injunction of God for the Altar of Sacrifice; The Altar 1. of earth.
An Altar of earth thou shall make unto me, and shall sacrifice thereon thy
burnt offering etc. Here observe that, That when God would have an Altar made
for sacrifice it must be but an Altar of earth, but if it should be of stone,
2. of ston, no tool on it.
Take heed that thou liftest not up a tool upon it. Why, one would think that
to carve and paint the stones and do any thing to make it brave would do
better, than to have the stones rough; No says God, whatsoever you may think
that to make my Altar brave, by carving of it and painting it, If you do but
lift up a tool upon it, you polute my Altar; all man's devices in the worship of
God though they be never so pompous they do but polute Gods Worship: 3. no
steps. High Altars.
And they must not go up upon steps (quite contrary to our high Altars) that
their nakedness be not discovered therein: Noting that when we come into the
presence of God we should take heed of our spiritual nakedness, and the pride
and vanity of our spirits in prayer; God would have them make an Altar so as
they might not go up upon steps, lest their nakedness should be discovered. But
now in Exodus 27. 1, 2. there you shall find an Altar of Shittim wood overlaid
with Brass; Altar of brass.
you will say, Why was the first with earth and the other with brass? The
reason was, because that the one was to be made when they were in an unsettled
condition, and the other to be made afterward when they were in a more stated
condition than formerly, and that it might endure a long time. But mark, it
must be according to Gods direction, except God does reveal that it should be
of Shittim wood and overlaid with brass they were not to do it.

And then, Altar of Incense.
the second Altar was the Altar of burnt Incense, and that you have in Exodus
30. 1, 2, 3. verses, and that was to be overlaid with pure Gold: that of brass
it was, because there was sin offerings to be offered upon it; but now the
Altar of Incense it was the Altar that was just before the Vail against the
Mercy-seat, where there was only Incense offered, which was to signify the
Intercession of Jesus Christ presenting his Merits, and the Prayers of all his
people to the Father: the prayers of the Saints are compared to Incense, and
there is many things observable about the Altar of God, Rev. 9. 13 opened.
it is said that there should be four horns, and in Revel. chap. 9. ver. 13. I
heard a voice from the four horns of the Golden Altar which is before God. Now
Saint John speaks of aftertimes that should be, he heard a voice from the four
horns of the Altar, that is, from all the prayers of the Saints that were in
the four corners of the earth, there came a voice from them all and did sound,
and did great things in the world. Certainly my Brethren, the prayers of Gods
Saints in all the corners of the world is that that makes the world ring. It
was a Speech of a learned man, If there be but one sigh come from a gracious
heart, it fills the ears of God so that God hears nothing else; Rev. 8 3.
nay, that is observable in Revel. 8. 3. about this Altar of Incense, And
another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there
was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of
all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne. Thus we see that
in our time we are to make use of this golden Altar that is before the Throne,
all our prayers are to be offered up upon that which was a Type of Jesus
Christ, and our prayers except they be mingled with the Incense which Christ
did offer himself upon the golden Altar, cannot be accepted, and likewise
that is very observable about it that we read in Exodus 30. 3. Exodus 30. 3
that there was a Crown of Gold round about it, to typifie the Intercession of
Christ, and the prayers of the Saints; you may see by this that Christ's
Intercession, and the prayers of the Saints that came from faithful hearts, are
accounted the very glory of Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ accounts it his dignity
and glory, to make Intercession for his People, and to take the poor prayers of
his People and present them to his Father; he makes account that his Crown is
set upon his head, when you exercise your faith upon Jesus Christ that Christ
might present your prayers with his Intercession to the Father, then you set
the Crown upon Jesus Christ's head; but when you think to be heard your selves,
and do not exercise your faith upon Christ, you do (as it were) take off the
Crown from the head of Jesus Christ. And that is very observable, the difference
between this Altar that was here enjoined to be made by Moses, and so was
afterward made, and the Altar that we read of should be in the times of the
Gospel.

Heb. 13. 10. Heb. 13. 10.
We have an Altar that those have no right to eat of it, that serve a^ the
Tabernacle; that is, such men as shall pertinaciously still stick to the
Ceremonies of the Law, they have no right to partake of Jesus Christ.

Ezekiel. 41. 22. The Altar that was in the Law, the text says, it was to be a
cubit long, and a cubit broad; but that which must be in the time of the
Gospel, must be three cubits high, and two cubits long: and this notes thus
much, That there shall be a larger extent of the service of God in the time of
the Gospel, than in the time of the Law; that place in Malachi, Mal. 1. 11
does much open this, 1. 11. For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going
down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place
Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name shall
be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of hosts.

Another thing observable is, It was set before the Vail by the Ark of the
Testimony, before the Mercy-seat. It was to stand in the holy of holiest, but
just before the Vail, right against the Mercy-seat; and by this you must be
helped to understand that Scripture in Heb. 9. 4. Heb. 9. 4.
which (as some understand it) seems to have some variety from this, Calvin.
it is said that the holiest of all had the golden Censer, by which they
understand the golden Altar, in which the Censer was; but we shall find that
the golden Altar did not stand in the holy of holiest, for we read in Exodus
30. 6. And thou shall put it before the Vail that is by the Ark of the
Testimony, before the Mercy-seat; that is, over the Testimony. And therefore
Interpreters reconcile it thus: it is not said here that the golden Censer or
Altar (if we so take it) was in it, but it had it, that is, it was for the use
of the holy of holiest, See Beza, not Major
and it stood just before the holy of holiest, and just against the Mercy-seat,
so that the high Priest when he was to enter into the holy of holiest he was to
take a Censer and Incense from this Altar, and so go into the holiest of all.

But this is the Note, in that the Altar of Incense stands just against the
Mercy-seat, and yet there is a Vail between the Mercy-seat and it. So when we
are to offer up our Incense upon the Merits of Christ and his Intercession,
though we cannot by the eye of our bodies see the Mercy-seat, yet we must act
our faith upon the Mercy-seat; and then that is observable, that the Incense
must be burnt upon this Altar at that very time when the Lamps were to be
trimmed and lighted, so you shall observe it in Exodus 30. 7. and that was to
note thus much to us: That we are to join the Word with our Prayers, and not to
come ignorantly to God, but labor to enlighten our souls with the Lamp of his
Word, when we come to offer up our Incense to God.

Further, There is a command that no strange Incense shall be offered upon it.
This is to teach us thus much: That we must take heed of bringing any thing to
God to offer him in Prayer, but what comes from the Spirit of God, only Gods
own Incense; Take heed (I say) of bringing unsanctified parts, or any thing but
that which is from the Spirit of God.

Lastly, Once a year an atonement was made upon the horns of the Altar, with
the blood of the Sin-offering; though the Sin offering was not offered upon it,
yet once a year an atonement was made upon it with the blood of the
Sin-offering. This is to note thus much: That even by our Incense we defile the
Altar what in us lies. And thus I have a little digrest, and yet it is still
for opening of Scripture to you, to show unto you the meaning of Gods Altars.

But why would God have no other Altars, Quest.
but accounted it so heinous a crime to make any other Altars but those? Why
but one Altar.


The Reasons are these. Reas. 1


First, 1. The Altar typified Christ's only sacrifice.
Because these Altars did typifie these two things.

The Altar of burnt-offerings did typifie this: That Christ was to be the only
Sacrifice; there should be no other sacrifice to pacify Gods wrath but only
Jesus Christ, who was both the Sacrifice indeed, and the Altar its self, for
his human Nature was offered to God upon the Merits, as it were upon the
worthiness of his divine Nature: Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of
Jesus Christ who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God
etc. This Altar did signify the offering of Jesus Christ. As if God should
say, Know that what endeavors you do or can use to satisfy my Justice, and my
wrath it is to no purpose, there is nothing but only my Son and that offering
that shall satisfy my wrath: and now for them to make more Altars, it was to
deny that great point of Religion that there was only the Sacrifice of Christ
to satisfy God. 2. No acceptance but by him


Secondly, This signified, That in Christ only our services which are our
spiritual sacrifices are accepted of God; there must be no Altar, but this for
the sacrifice, and the other for Incense; God would have this Doctrine kept
pure from that time and so ever after, that none of our spiritual sacrifices
can be accepted any other way but only as they have reference to Jesus Christ
that Altar that the Lord has appointed.

And then another reason why the Lord would have only thi^ Altar for Sacrifice,
Reas. 2.
and the other for Incense, and that all the people should come to these
Altars, Vinculum unitati Ecclesiae.
it was; That it might be the bond of the Church; because the people of the
Jews were a National Church, therefore there was to be a National Worship, for
that all the Nation was to join not only in the same likeness of Worship, but
in the very same individual Worship; No National Church now.
and this was the bond of their National Church. Now for my part, I know none
living that holds a National Church in these days in this sense, that is to be
of Divine Institution, and joined in one, by Gods commanding any National
Worship for them. yet in some sense.
Where there are in Nations a great many of the Saints of God, that they may be
called a National Church we despute not against that; but people when they talk
of a National Church, do not conceive the meaning of it; Certainly this was a
special end why God would have them come to this one Altar, it was to be the
bond of the National Church, that they should have such a worship wherein they
were all of them to join in one, and this it was that made them a National
Church: It is not enough to have the same kind of worship; as now, we al pray,
and read the Word in all Congregations, we have all the same Sacraments, but
they must join in one individual worship. If the Nation of the Jews had
worshipped the same God after the same manner, in diverse Temples, and upon
diverse Altars, this had not been a National bond to them; but by coming up to
the same Temple, and offering upon the same Altars, and when the Sacrifice and
Incense was offered for them all, they were joined in the very act, all of them
in that one thing, this was the thing that did unite them into a Church-union
in another manner than any Church-union can be in this world, til we have such
a kind of Institution as they had. We have no Institution for worship but where
people may personally join together: but for thousands of Congregations to be
bound by Institution to join in the very same bond of worship, in the very same
individual act, such an union we have not in these days, and without the
understanding of this aright, we understand not the scope why they had but one
Altar for burnt offerings, and one Altar for Incense.

But now it may be said, Obj. 1.
That it does not seem to be such a sin to erect Altars, for that is the sin
charged upon Ephraim, That they did erect many other Altars; for the Scripture
speaks of many Altars that were Gods Altars, 1 King. 19
1 King, 19. you know it is the complaint of Elias that they had cast down Gods
Altars, They have cast down thine Altars; now this was spoken after the time of
the Law when there was but only two Altars appointed by God, and the Prophet
did not mean them, the Altar for burnt offerings and Incense.

Therefore the Answers that Divines give to this is; Answ, 1. of others.
That this is spoken of those Altars that the Patriarks and others had built
for the honor of God to sacrifice upon, before the time that the Law was given
by Moses, for that one only Altar of sacrifice, (and here he complains they had
cast down those Altars) for it was Lawful before the command was given to build
diverse Altars, but after the command was given, it was not.

Yea, Obj. 2.
but still the Objection will be, How could it be a sin to cast down those
Altars when they were of no further Religious use? for after the Command of God
for that one Altar, then the other were to be demolished; Was it not commended
in the godly Kings that they cast down high Places, and cut down Groves? though
some of them formerly were for the true Worship of God, yet after God had
appointed a peculiar place for His Worship and those other places were abused
to superstition, then they were to be cast down; and so there is no question to
be made but all other Altars that were built for Religious uses were to be cast
down, after Gods own Altars were made.

The Answer to it therefore is this; 2. The Authors Ans.
That the evil that Elijah complains of, it was the profaneness of the people,
their casting off all fear and reverence of God; because they did not cast down
those Altars out of love to God, and his Worship, upon this Principle, that
they would not suffer any thing that might be dangerous to superstition, that
was not the Principle whereby they were acted in casting them down, but they
cast them down as led thereunto by malice and rage against Religion, and to
satisfy their lusts; and thus if men oppose that which is indeed
superstitious, yet if it be not out of a true love to God and his Honor, A good
act in Religion may be evil in the doer.
if it be not out of a desire to set up and to maintain the true Worship of
God, but in a bitterness and rage, merely out of self ends to please themselves
in a way of revenge, or through any distemper, though (I say) the thing be evil
that these men do oppose, yet God will not own it as any service to him, it is
a sin in them to cast down that which should be cast down, if they do not cast
it down out of a right and gracious Principle; Then what evil is it for men in
bitterness of spirit to oppose that which is in its self good, if God account
it sin to oppose that which which should be opposed, if it be through
bitterness of spirit, and not through gracious Principles.

They have made many Altars.
Whatsoever is made by man in a Religious Worship it is rejected of God, Obs.
there must be nothing of man's making in Divine Worship; Man's inventions in the
Worship of God rejected.
the very spirit and life of the second Commandment it consists in this, Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image. That's one instance in the matter
of Worship, but by that we are to understand any thing in Divine Worship, we
must not make to our selves; (I say) there lies the very life, and the very
spirit of the second Commandment the making to our selves; if God will appoint
Ceremonies significant to put us in mind of Heavenly things, The 2d
Commandment.
and stir up our hearts on high, we are to use them with reverence and respect;
but if we will presume to do things as God has done; that is the ground of all
superstitious Ceremonies, because they find God makes some, they think that
they may presume to make others to imitate God; now it is a sin against the
second Commandment for us to presume to make any thing in matters of Divine
Worship.

Further, They have made many.
There Is no stop (that is the Note) in superstitious Worship, Obs. 1.
if men leave the rule they know not where to stay: hence is the multiplying of
things thus among the Papists, five hundred Altars in some one Temple. Aust.
Epist. 19. ad Ianuarin omnia in Ecclesia presumptionibus plena.
And Austin in his 19th Epistle complains of the multitude of Ceremonies that
were in the Church in his time. What complaints would he have now? All things
in the Church were full of presumptions, they did multiply one thing after
another; and indeed let but the right way once be left and there is no limits.
Oh let us take heed how we multiply in Gods Worship; there is much controversy
between the Papists and us, about multiplying in the Worship of God.

We would have but one MEDIATOR, Controversy between us and the Papists about
multiplying.
they would have many; We would have but one rule of Faith, but they will give
power to Pope, and Church to make Articles of faith; we would have but one
object of Worship, they would have many; we would have but one Sacrifice, they
would have many Oblations for the quick and dead; we would have but one
Satisfaction, they would have many; we would have but one Merit, they would
have many: And thus by multiplying, the unity of the Church is divided: but we
must keep to the unity that we find in the Scriptures.

And then further, They have made many Altars.
In the opening what a sin it was to make any other Altar but that God has
appointed, Josh. 22. 11.
I showed out of Joshua, how their Progenitors was so provoked when there was
made another Altar, they did rise against them and made account to destroy them
every one, because of making any other Altar besides Gods; but now they make
many Altars. Their Fathers were careful to keep themselves to one Altar, but
their successors they make many.

Hence note that, Obser.
We are ready to imitate our forefathers in that which is evil, but not in that
which is good. Their forefathers were great enemies and were mightily incensed
against adding but one Altar to Gods Altars, but they will not imitate their
forefathers in this good thing, in standing for that one true Worship of God;
ordinarily when any thing is evil there we will imitate our forefathers, but we
leave them in that which is good.

If you would ask the reason why it came to pass that their Progenitors were so
zealous for Gods own Altar, and yet now their children after them make many
Altars, the reason may be this, which will afford a Note of very great use unto
us, When their Progenitors came first into the Land af Canaan, and Joshua
as soon as they came in he did according to the Commandment of God by Moses,
set up an Altar, and they seeing upon their first coming into the Land the
goodness of God toward them, they were much taken with this; but now after
they had enjoyed the Land a while, after they begun to be settled, to be warm in
their nests, and to prosper in the Land, then they ventured upon this way of
corrup^ing of Gods Worship, and multiplying Altars; and when they had once
ventured, and escaped unpunished, then they thought they were sure: and so by
degrees they come to this excess in superstitious Worship*

The Note is this, Obser.
We must take heed to make any distance of time from the Commandment given, or
the Threatening denounced to make us to fear the breach of the Commandment
less: They were afraid of the breach of the Commandment soon after it was
given; but when there was a distance of time from the Commandementt, and when
they were settled in a way of prosperity, then they ventured: so that (I say)
from hence our Note is, That we must take heed that the distance of time, or
our settling in a prosperous condition does not make us to fear the commandment
less than we did fear it at first when we were not in such a settled way. And
for this you have a most excellent Scripture in Deuteronomy. 4. 25. says the text
there, Deuteronomy. 4. 25.
When thou shall beget children, and childrens children, and shall have
remained long in the Land, and shall corrupt your selves, and make a graven
image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord
thy God to provoke him to anger. When thou shall beget children, and childrens
children, and shall remain long in the Land, then thou shall make graven
images: There was not so much fear that when they came first into the Land,
that they should make graven images when they first were delivered out of their
bondage, and God had made known his glorious Word unto them, their hearts were
a little warm, but after they had lived long in the Land, then they began to
forget God and make graven images. Just so it is with us for all the world,
when we are newly come out of afflictions, then our hearts are kept a little
warm, and then we would serve God according to his own way; Applicat.
but after we have continued long in the Land, and been a while in a prosperous
condition and pretty well nessel'd, and find all things pretty well about us,
Oh! then we begin to be cool and for get the Lord in his way. It has been
always so, and it is so, not only in particular persons and Nations, but
Churches too, ordinarily when people are delivered from superstitious vanities
and come to worship God in his own way, at first when they come to enjoy the
Ordinances of God in the purity of them, Oh! how glad are they, and they bless
God, and their hearts are warmed and enlarged, and their hearts do close one
with another, and what sweet union is there together at first! but after they
have lived a while in the Land, after they have lived a while in the way of God
and enjoyed him a little, they begin to grow more cool, and dead, and begin to
fall to wrangling and contending, and so all that spiritualness and that
heavenly heat that they had before it vanishes and comes to nothing: I beseech
you remember this text, Deuteronomy. 4. 25. to be remembered.
Deuteronomy. 4. 25. Take heed after you have abode a while in such a condition; you
thought when you came first into it you would never forget God, Oh you blessed
God, and rejoiced in Gods Worship; well, your hearts are taken at first, but
look to your selves, for after you have continued any long time it may prove to
be otherwise with you.

Again further, Ephraim has made many Altars: has multiplied Altars,
Multiplicavit.
so Hierom. So the Seventy has gone on in way of multiplication. Hierom. (...)
70.
They had some Altars at first, and their forefathers made some, and they
afterward made more, and so still every generation did multiply their Altars.

From thence the Note is this: Observe.
That Idolatry and False-worship does not only continue in succession, but in
every age there will be an addition. Oh my Brethren! let the True Worship of
God then, not only continue, but multiply. Idolaters they will make this no
argument, Why should we be wiser than our forefathers? No, they will go beyond
their forefathers in way of false Worship, And yet, how many among us will be
pleading against Reformation with this argument, Why should not we content our
selves with what our forefathers did? our forefathers knew not of such new
ways of Worship as you tell us of. But now my Brethren, if our forefathers
reformed a little, let us bless God for what they did, but let us add more, to
raise up the Worship of God yet higher and higher, as in Psalm. 71. 14. Ps. 71.
14.
But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more. The words
may be read thus: I will ad unto thy praise, ^llustrated.
O Lord: Thou have had praise, indeed formerly thou had praise from others;
Oh! but I will do something to add to thy praise, I will praise thee more and
more: so every generation should strive to praise God more and more, to add to
Gods praise, to find out more of Gods Truths, to add to the purity of Gods
Worship, and to cast out superstition more than our forefathers have done: it
was an argument of a great deal of praise in our forefathers to do what they
did, and (I say) we are to bless God for them, More expected of us than of our
Ancesters.
that the Lord put such a spirit into them, but know that that which was
accepted of from our forefathers, will not be accepted of from us, God expects
that we should add to the praise of God. Men desires to ad more and more to the
States of their Progenitors, As in outward estates.
and so your Children they will add a little to the estates that you leave
them; and so men account it their ambition to raise their families. Holy
Ambition.
My Brethren, we should have an holy Ambition by practice of Religion more and
more in every age, as Jehu said in 2 King. 10. 18. Ahab served Baal a little,
but Jehu shall serve him much: So others; as he said of false worship, though
in a fained way; we should say of the true Worship of God, we have served the
Lord a little, but we will serve him more; we have more mercies than they had,
more light than they had, if they served God a little, we will serve him more.

And then, Ephraim has made many Altars to sin.
God still remembers the first and the chief Actors in sin [Ephraim] he speaks
to the ten Tribes, and yet only names Ephraim, Obs. 1.
because the Governors were of that Tribe. The chief in a family, by whom the
whole family is corrupted, and the chief in a Town or Country, God has an eye
upon them, and though others escape they shall not, Ephraim has multiplied
Altars to sin; they intended not to sin, it was not their intention when they
made Altars that they might sin, they thought they pleased God, but God
accounts it ^n, and a provocation to him:

And from thence the Note is only this; Obs. 2.
That whatsoever names we may give to things, yet (it may be) God will give
other names and titles to them; we may say, that it is devotion, God will say,
it is superstition; we may say, it is good intention, but God may say, it is
presumption; we may say, it is prudence, and wisdom, but God may give it
another name, and say it is temporising, it is time-serving, God does use to
give other names to things than we do; Isa. 44. 9.
in the Scripture they call their Images their, Ezekiel. 37. 23.
delectable things: God calls them detestable things. No question if you would
ask them why they built Altars they would say, to the honor of God; but says
God, You built Altars to sin.

And then, Altars shall be unto him to sin.
Shall be to him.] That Is thus; Seeing they will have them, they shall have
them, they shall have enough of them, let them go on in their way, let them
multiply their sin.

When men's hearts are set upon false ways of worship it is just with God to let
them have their desires to the full; Obs. 3.
They shall have their way that they do contend for: they keep a great deal of
stir for it, and have it they must, they refuse to see the light, they are
prejudiced against the way of Gods Worship, let them have what they would have;
says God, 1. Governors for it.
they shall have Governors to establish what they would have by their
Authority, and they shall have their Teachers that shall defend by subtle
Arguments those things to be lawful, 2 Teachers
they multiply Altars to sin and they shall be to sin, even to harden them; and
so the Seventy seem to take the meaning of these words by their translation of
them; (...). 70.
whereas you have it, They shall be to sin, their Altars shall be to love,
their hearts are set upon them and they will have them, and love them, and they
shall be hardened in them: and this is the heavy judgment of God to give unto
men their hearts desires in what is evil; and as it shall be to them for sin,
so it shall be to them for their misery for the fruit of sin, for sin i.e. for
punishment for sin.
for so sin is taken very frequently in Scripture for the fruit of sin, they
will have them to sin, and they shall find the fruit of sin by what they are so
eagerly set upon them. And thus much for the eleventh verse. It follows.

VER. 12.
I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a
strange thing.
THIS Verse in the reading of it appears a greatness in the very sound of it,
and there is as much in it as the sound does import, This Verse especially to
be considered.
and therefore though we pass over other things more briefly, yet because there
is very much of Gods mind in this, and we should wrong the Scripture if we
should pass over this too slightly.

I have written to him the great things of my Law.
This is made an aggravation of their sin, they multiply Altars to sin, Expicat.
and yet says God, I have written to them the great things of my Law: they
find no such things in my Law written to them, this was against the very
written Word of God, and what that written Word of God against those many
Altars was, that you had the last day, but in that from this connection that
these are made sins because they were against the written Word of God: from
thence the Note is,

That whatsoever is urged to us, Obs.
or practiced by us in matters of Worship, it must have Warrant out of the
written Word of God. It was sin, Why? because I have written to them (says he)
the great things of my Law, and they counted it a strong thing; though that
which they did had a great deal of seeming devotion in it, yet it was otherwise
than that they found written in my Law.

This Question should be put to any that tender to us any way of Worship, Use.
or Doctrine of Religion under any specious show whatsoever; Where is it
written? To the Law, and to the Testimony, (Isaiah. 8. 20.) If they speak not
according to this Word, it is, because they have no light in them; Oh they seem
to be very judicious and wise, but if they speak not according to this Word
they have no light in them, not only to the Law and Testimonies, but to the
written Law and Testimonies, this must be the Standard at which all Doctrines
and ways of Worship must be tried: Many may put fair colors upon their ways,
that it is for Common Peace, and a great deal of good may be done by it, 1.
Policy.
and the like; But is it written? Did I ever command it says God? 2. Reason.
Policy may say it is fit, Reason may say it is comely, 3. Experience may be one
way; and yet,
and Experience may say it is useful, But does the written Law say it should be?
Nay, it is not enough to say, That we cannot say it is forbidden, But where is
it written? 4. Religion and the written Word another.
In matters of Worship this is a certain rule. Says Tertullian about the
Crowning of the Soldier with Baies; If it be said, It is lawful, because the
Scripture does not forbid it; it may equally be retorted, It is therefore not
lawful, because the Scripture does not command it. No matter what the thing be
(says Luther) in matters of Religion, Luther*
but who it is that bids it, who it is that commands it, we must look to that;
Never argue thus in any point of Religion (I beseech you consider, it is a
point that has been, is, and may yet further prove to be of great use to us)
never argue thus, Why, what hurt is there in it? is it not very comely? I
cannot think but it may do a great deal of good, these arguments are weak
arguments in matters of Worship: but to all these Arguments we must answer, Is
it written? As Christ answered the Devil and his temptations, it was enough to
say, it was written thus and thus: So if you can but bring a word written
against it, and if you can put them unto it to show what they would have you to
do, Exodus 39. 43. explained.
let them show it where it is written; in Exodus 39. we find in that chapter at
least ten times it is said, they did according to what the Lord had commanded
Moses, and in the conclusion of the chapter Moses blessed the people; the
people are blessed when in the matters of Worship they keep unto what is
commanded.

And again, As we must not make what we think the rule for worship, so neither
the Opinions of the Learned, nor Custom nor Antiquity the Rule of Wors^ip, but
the written Word only
Opinions of Learned men, nor Custom, nor Ant^quity, must be the rule of our
Worship, but what is written? I have written to them the great things of my Law,
they must keep to that; whatsoever use we may make now of the Opinions of
Ancients and the like, yet if the Ancients themselves were alive they would
abhor the use that many make of their quotations; Cyprian in one of his
Epistles says, We must not look what this man, or that man that were before us
(he speaks of his predecessors)* what he did, or what he taught, but what he
that was before all, namely Christ, who alone is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life. And so Nobis no^ liceat salua honori^^cent^a quae illis debitur, aliquid
in eorum Scriptis reprobare atque respuere? talis ego sum in scriptis aliorum
tabesque volo esse intellectores meorum. August.
Augustine has another Speech to the same effect, speaking of the Ancients, of
learned men, saving all due respect that is due to them, yet for us to think
that we may not cast out, even reject from their writings some things, because
they were learned men, this must not be admitted, for (says he) such a one
I Will be in respect of the writings of other men, and such a one would I have
those that understand my writings to be to me, I will not think of the writings
of any other men before, that there should be nothing cast out nor mended,
neither would I have any body think so of my writings. Ambrose
And so Ambrose, Where the Scripture is silent we must not speak. Thus we see
that those men for the maintaining of that which is evil they will make use of
Quotation^ and Antiquities, yet we see the Ancients did abhor this, Christ and
his Apostles they quoted none of the Learned men before them, but Moses and the
Prophets.

But you will say, Object.
Though we must not take that which other men write to be the Rule, yet that
which other men write may help us to understand the Scripture.

Now I remember Luther has such a Speech, Answ.
That Scripture should rather help us to understand men's writings, Luther.
than men's writings to understand the Scripture; Many men they will make men's
writings to be as a judge, and to be the rule of understanding Scriptures, not
the Judge of Truth, but the rule of understanding Scripture, whereas (says he)
the Scripture should rather be the rule of understanding them.

And so Hilary, (says he) for the sense of Scripture and understanding them,
He is the best Interpreter, that rather takes the sense from out of Scripture,
and by comparing one Scripture with another, than bring any new sense;
therefore the understanding of Scripture is more by Scripture than by the
Writings of any man living. And yet still no question we may make use of the
gifts of God in others, but so as to keep us close to the written Word for the
Rule, yea, and for the meaning of the Rule; they may help us to see whether the
Scripture will justify this Truth, or this sense, for there lies the mistake;
Most people in the world will think this indeed, That whatsoever any man
writes, if it be contrary to the Word, The Scripture is both 1 the Rule, 2 the
exposi or to show the meaning of the Rule.
we may not receive it, but we must understand the Word in what sense they take
it; now we must not go so far; For the Scripture written, is not only that we
might know what the Rule is, but it is written, that we might understand the
meaning of the Rule, and we must fetch out the meaning of Scriptures by
Scripture: Now so far as the Writings of men will help us to fetch out the
meaning of Scripture by Scripture, so far we may make use of them; but we
cannot say, this is the meaning, because it is the judgment of such and such
Learned men; How men's writings may help us to understand Scripture.
but such and such Learned men will give you Reasons, and compare one Scripture
with another, to show why it is the meaning of it, and they will show you the
History of the time, and show you how to compare old and new Testament one with
another; and this is the use of Writers for understanding the Scriptures. Then
you will say, Why do we make use of Writers so much? Why thus, they show how one
Scripture looks toward another, and to compare one Scripture with another, and
show the coherence of things.

The sense of things is to be resolved in the Scripture its self, and therefore
we must keep our selves very close to what is written.

Written: It was not so at first, it was delivered but from hand to hand, The
written Word a singular blessing.
but afterward when the Church began to multiply, then the Word was written.
And this is a mighty blessing of God, that we may have the mind of God written,
so as we may look into it, and search to know the mind of God, by reading it
over and over again, and taking it into our hands, when we are lying upon our
beds, if we light a Candle in the night, we may be reading and looking into the
mind of God; If we should only hear of such a Book that were in the world, that
were in China in the uttermost parts of the habitable world, if we should hear
that there were such a Book, that God had written, or that God had used men to
write by an inspiration of His own Spirit, a Book that was certainly indicted by
the holy Ghost every word of it, wherein the Lord had revealed the great
Counsels of his Will concerning Man's eternal estate, if we should hear that
there came such a Book down even from Heaven, and this was in the uttermost
parts of the earth, Oh! what a longing desire should we have to see that Book?
What man or woman but would give their whole estate to have a week, or a
fortnights time to see and read in such a Book as that is; if one could, he
would be willing to travel to the end of the world to have the use of such a
Book as that is. No man need say, Shall I go to the u^^^rmost parts of the
earth? for it is in your hands, it is in your houses, there is the Book wherein
the great God has written his mind, has written all things unto you which
concerns you Eternal Salvation, has written there whatsoever he would have you
to know and believe to Eternal Life; this it is that you have in your hands:
however we prize it now, heretofore it has been prized at an high rate; How
many of the Martyrs would venture their lives to keep but a few Leaves of
Scripture in their houses? But how vile is it then for us to neglect the
reading of this written Word? Theodores. Physician.
I have read of one Theodorus a Physician at Constantinople, that he sent to
Gregory the great, a great sum of money for the redeeming of Captives, and
Gregory he commends his Liberality; but though he was so liberal and bountiful
to redeem Captives, yet he writ back again to him in way of reprehending him
for not reading Scripture, and uses this expression to him, The Emperor of
Heaven, the Lord of the Angels and Men, has sent to you, that which concerns
your life, and will you neglect to read them with a fervent, with a zealous
spirit? He would not but blame him even at that time when he sent such gifts to
him, it did grieve him to think that such a one so bountiful to the poor should
so neglect the reading of Scripture. Many men and women that have excellent
parts and yet for all that they find but little savor in the Scripture. There Is
no books that are written that should take us off from this written Word;
although we have cause to bless God abundantly for what is written, for those
excellent helps which we have written, yet we must take heed that there be no
written book in the world take us off from this written Word of God. Luther
Luther therefore has such a speech, I even hate mine own Books, and I often
times even wish that they were burnt, that they might perish, Why? because I
fear lest they should be any way of hinderance to men, or withdraw them from
reading the Scriptures: and so he falls a comending the Scriptures: It is the
only fountain of all wisdom; and further says he* I am even terrified, I
tremble at the example of the former age, upon this, Because (says he) many
Divines spent so much time in reading of Aristotle and Averres and other
Writers and spent so little time in reading Scripture. And the truth is it was
that which brought so much ignorance into the world in the time of the
Schoolmen which was a time of great learning and yet the time of the greatest
ignorance in the Mysteries, Schoolmen.
of godliness, because they minded Scripture very little, but only turned things
into Questions, and Disputes that tended not according to Scripture; though we
may make use of the labors and gifts of other men, yet look we especially to
the written Word, and let not other writings take us off from them, hence we
say, the Scripture in way of excellency we must keep our selves to the written
Word, and therefore take heed of being led aside by any traditions of men;
that is a most detestable derrogation from the written Word: but we find in the
Counsel of Trent, speaking of the Scriptures, says one of the Cannons of the
Counsel of Trent, We (says he) do receive Scripture, Synodus pari pietatis
affectu and reverentia recipit ac reveratur.
and reverence Scripture, but (says he) moreover we receive and reverence
traditions with the same affection of piety and reverence as we do the
Scripture. Those are the very words that all Papists are bound to hold, and for
them to deny any counsel there were death unto them; It argues men to be in the
dark, Council. Trid. sess. 4. decret prim.
to mind Traditions so: As the Jews, that is the reason that they vanish so in
their thoughts, and understand the Scripture so little, because they mind
traditions as much as Scripture, and more; for so they say, that divide a man's
life into three parts, one part mnst be spent in reading Scripture, and two
parts more in the two several parts of their Talmond, which is their
traditions; and some of them say that this is one tradition among them, that
Moses did study the Scripture in the day time, and those Talmoduical traditions
that they have they were studied in the night; and indeed it is night-work, and
it is a sign that the world is so much in darkness because they look so much at
Traditions; the written Word of God which we must look at more than if one came
from the dead, or if an Angel from Heaven came and preached to us:

But you will say, Quest.
That we must not look to it more than if God should reveal any thing to us,
suppose it were a voice of God from Heaven.

We have warrant to have regard to the written Word of God more than the voice
of God from Heaven, Answ.
2 Peter, 1. 19. there it is spoken of the voice that came down upon the
transfiguration at the Mountain, 2 Pet. 1. 19. illustrated.
but says the Apostle there, We have a more sure word of Prophecy, more, more
even than that was; (...)* more sure than revelation.
that is, it is more sure to us, and there is not so easy a way to be deceived
by resting upon the written Word, as if we look for Revelations from God, we
have a more sure word of Prophecy, therefore it is not so much after
Revelations that we are to look (especially in such times as these are) but to
the written Word of God. There is a Generation of men rising now, if not risen,
that begin to have vile thoughts of the written Word of God, and think to
understand the mind of God otherwise, they finding the written Word of God to
keep their hearts too close and lay too strong bonds upon them, but because
they would fain be loose they would feign and imagine to themselves other ways
of Gods mind, The danger of revelations beside the Word*
but when they are rotten, and it may be when their souls are perished
eternally in Hell, the written Word of God shall stand and be honorable in the
eyes of his Saints.

I have written.
The Prophet does not say, he has written; but he brings in God, saying I have
written. And that first upon these two reasons.

First, To put the greater emphasis upon it, for it is more for God himself to
come and say, I have written; as if a Father or Master say to his Child or
Servant, I command you to do such a thing, it is more than if a Brother or
Fellow Servants should say, my Father has bidden, or my Master has bidden you
to do such a thing.

Secondly, Whosoever were the Penmen of the Word, it is I that write it, I
take it upon my self. The Word is so much his that God claims not only the
truths that are in the Word, but the very ordering for the words; and in 2 Pet.
1. 21. it is said of holy men, they spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost:
they were carried on with a kind of violence as the word signifies, (...).
and not only moved, but carried on with a kind of violence to write what they
did, both in their speaking and in their writing, I have written.

And I have written to him the great things of my Law.
From this manner of Phrase, first we are to note this,

That we should look upon the Scripture as concerning our selves. Obs. 1.
Here Is a letter written to you, and you, and you, every man and woman,
therefore it is in the singular number, every man and woman must look upon the
Scripture as written to him, or her particularly; God writes to thee, he has
written a letter to thee that thou should not commit Adultry, nor swear, nor
steal, and that thou should keep the Sabbath, and that thou should not
lie, and that thou should reverence him, and love him, and fear him, and all
such kind of rules that God from Heaven has written to thee, and it is a
mervailous help to obedience and to awaken men's consciences when they apprehend
them written to them. Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, Psalm.
119. 105. illustrated.
and a light unto my paths. It is not a light that I see at a distanc a great
way off, but as a light that is held to my feet that I make use of for the
ordering of mine own steps.

Many there are that seem to rejoice in the Word of God as a light to reveal
Truths unto them for matter of discourse, Use.
but they make it not as a light to their feet, and a lanthorn to their steps,
as applying it to themselves, and it follows, And Verse. 106.
I have sworn and will perform it, That I will keep thy righteous judgments: I
have looked upon thy Word as a Lanthorn to my feet, as a thing merely
concerning me; and then I have sworn and I will perform, I have sworn that I
will keep thy righteous judgments. It Is a mighty means to stir up a man's
spirit, and quicken him up to obedience, to look upon the Word as written to
himself: As thus, when you come to hear out of Gods Word and God directs the
Minister so that you apprehend it as spoken to you, it will stir and awaken
you, Oh me thought this day every word the Minister spoke it was to me. And so
every word in the Scripture that concerns thee, God writes to thee and conceive
it so and it will be a mighty means to stir thee up to obedience. As if a man
be asleep a great noise will not waken him so soon, as if you call him by his
name, An apt simile.
John, Thomas etc. So when the Word of God comes as to our selves in particular
it is a mighty means to stir the heart.

Again, I have written to him.
To those that were the People of God, Exp^s.
though the Word concerns all men, yet it is written to the Church in a more
especial manner. As you find in the Revelations all the Epistles were written
to the Churches, and indeed all the Word of God is in a more peculiar manner
written to the Church, there are some things concerning all mankind, but that
which God Aims at in a more especial manner it is to the Church, first to the
Church of the Jews, they had that great privilege that the Orracles of God were
committed to them in Romans 3. 2. when the Apostle had taken them off from
resting in many of their outward privileges, he brings an Objection: But then
may some say, What advantage has the Jew? He answers, much every way, chiefly,
because to them were committed the Oracles of God: in this thing they had much
advantage of all people in the world, that to them were committed the Oracles
of God, God gave Jacob his Law, it was the Inheritance of his people; it is
written to them, to them is committed the Oracles of God: and this is a great
honor which God puts upon his Saints, God makes his Church to be the Keeper of
his Records, the Court of Rolls as it were, the Church is as it were the Court
of Rolls, and the great Records of Heaven, God commits to his Church, and
therefore they should look to it that it be kept faithfully, that there be no
corrupting it, for then they do falsify their trust, She has the keeping of
Scripture but gives no Authority to Scripture; in John, 5. 47. says Christ
there, If ye believe not Moses writings, how can ye believe my words? Mark,
Christ would have the Authority of his words much to be strengthened by the
writings that were before in Scripture, If ye believe not his writings, how can
ye believe my words? But now the Papists will say, If ye believe not our words,
how can ye believe their writings? quite the other way, they will take upon
them more than Christ; Christ says, If ye believe not his writings, how can ye
believe my words? Say they, If ye believe not our words, how can ye believe
their writings? For they take the Authority of the writing of Scripture to
depend upon their words; It is written to the Church, and committed to the
Church, but the Authority comes not from the Church. It follows.

I have written the great things of my Law.
By Law here we are to understand ^he whole Word of God, Law, what 1. the whole
word, of (...) docuit.
and not in way of distinction of Law and Gospel, but the whole Word of God, and
so the word signifies, it comes from one signifying teaching; the Law is a
Doctrine that is taught, and so though sometimes it may be distinguished from
some other parts of Scripture, yet now we are to understand the whole mind of
God in his Word; when you read in Psalm. 119. how David loved Gods Law, it is
not the ten Commandments, but the mind of God revealed in his Word.

The great things of my Law] The Old Latin has it the many Laws, Multiplices
Leges.
and the words in the Hebrew seems a little to favor, Scribitur (...)
the multiplicity of my Laws. And then it should argue these two things.

First, Legitur. (...)
That the Word is full and perfect; that we have rules for every thing that
concerns the ordination of our lives to God in his Word, there is a multiplicity
of Laws and Rules for all our ways.

Secondly, That there are manifold excellencies in Gods Law; as the manifold
wisdom of God is in Christ, so the manifold excellencies of God are kept up
together in the Word of God. (...). 70.
The Seventy translates the word, the Fullness, or Multitude, and according to
that Tertullian has an expression, I adore the fullness of the Scripture; Adoro
plenitudinem scripturaru^ Tertul.
Oh the multitude of excellent things there are there! and the fullness that
there is there! I find diverse turn this word by many words that have excellent
significations in them, and indeed the Hebrew word will bear many expressions of
it. Some the Precious thing, the Magnificent thing; the Excellent thing; the
Honorable things of my Law; (...).
as in Acts, 2. 11. they spoke the wonderful things of God, it is more than the
great things, the magnificent great things of God. Now the things of the Word
they are glorious and honorable and very great, they are to be looked upon as
great things, the things of Gods Word; That Is the first.

And then especially, The things that concern Gods Worship are to be looked
upon as great things, for so it has reference to them, but the expression aims
at that which is more general, the great things of my Law, the honorable,
magnificent, and glorious things. Now the things of the Law are great things.

First, Because they are from the great God, and they have the stamp of the
Authority of the great God upon them, there is a dreadful Authority in every
Truth, in every thing that is written in Gods Law, (I say) there is a dreadful
Authority of the great God, that binds Kings and Princes in chains, that lays
bonds upon the conscience that no created power can, yet this does; when we
come to hear the Word, we come either as to a Sovereign to receive Laws from,
or as to a Judge to receive the sentence of death, it has the dreadful
Authority of the great God in it, and therefore every thing that is in the Word
is to be looked upon as a great thing; simile
a piece of Parchment and a little Wax, and a few Lines in it what are they?
but having the Authority of the great Seal of England, such a piece is to be
looked upon as a great thing: The things of Gods Law are great things, for they
have great Authority which goes along with them.

They are great things because of the luster of the great God that shines in
them. Take all the Creatures that ever God made in Heaven and Earth, and (I
say) there is not so much glory of God in Sun, Moon, Stars, Sea, and Plants,
and al things in the world, as there is in some few sentences of holy
Scripture, therefore they are great things: Psalm. 138. 2. Ps. 138. 2 illustrated.
Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name. The Name of God appears in
his great work of Creation, and of Providence. We are to look upon Gods Name as
very great; yet thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name; it is more than
al Gods Names besides: It may be when there are some extraordinary works of God
in the world, Thundering, and Lightning etc. we are ready to be afraid, and oh!
the great God that does appear in these great works! Were our hearts (...) they
ought to be when we read the WORD, we would tremble at that more than at any
manifestation of God since the world began in all his Works; and if so be thou
do not see more glory of God in his Word than in his Works, it is because
thou have little light in thee; and therefore let the world think of the things
of Gods Law that are written, as they will, yet they are the great things of his
Law.

Thirdly, They are the great Mysteries of Gods Will, the great Prove. 8. 6. it
is said of Wisdom, Hear, and I will speak of excellent things. The Word of God
speaks of excellent things, right excellent things, such great Mysteries of
Gods Wisdom as should take up our thoughts, yea, and does take up the Angels,
and shall take up the Angels and Saints to all Eternity, to be prying into the
great things which are revealed in Gods Word: Psalm. 119. 27. Psalm. 119. 27.
opened*
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous
Works. Mark how these are joined together: Make me to understand the way of thy
precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works: Why David, could not thou
see the wondrous works of God in the book of the creature, in Heaven and
Earth? Oh no, Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, and then shall I
talk of thy wondrous Works. We many times talk about vain and slight things,
because we have nothing else to talk of; but did we understand the way of Gods
precepts, we should be furnished with discourse of the wondrous works of God.

And then, It Is a great WORD, because that they are of great concernment; The
things of Gods Law are of great concernment for all our present good or evil
depends upon the things of Gods Law, Prove. 3. 22. They are life unto thy soul,
and grace unt^ (...) neck. So says Moses in Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Set your hearts unto
all the words which I testify unto you this day, for it is not a vain thing,
it is your life, they are of great concernment there is a curse annexed to the
breach of every thing in Gods Law, Cursed be every one that abides not in
every thing that is written in the book of the Law: Is it not a great matter
then? Certainly there is nothing in the Law that is to be looked upon as a
little matter, because the Curse of God is annexed to the breath of every thing
that is written in Gods Law, and there we have the casting of our souls for
eternity, and is not that a great matter? Did we come to hear the Word, or did
we read the Word as the Word by which we must be cast for our eternal estates,
we would look upon it as a great Word.

The things are great things in Gods Law, in regard of the great power and
efficacy that they have upon the hearts and consciences of men; when God sets
home the things of his Law they will bring down the proudest heart and the
stoutest stomach that is, they will enlighten the blindest mind, and convert
the hardest heart that is in the world, the Law has a mighty power upon the
soul, and therefore it is great.

They are great things, because they make all those great that do receive them;
they make them great even because they have but the keeping of them* much more
than if they receive them; in Deuteronomy. 4. 8. What Nation is there so great, that
has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law that I set before you
this day? Deuteronomy. 4. 8. applied.
What Nation so great as you are? why, wherein are we greater than other
people? Wherein? In this: What Nation is so great that has Statutes and
Judgments so righteous as all this Law which I set before you this day? This
was that which made the People of Israel a great Nation beyond all the Nations
in the world; they were not great in multitude, but in that they had the Law of
God, and the great things of his Law revealed to them, in this they became a
great Nation. The Lord honors a Nation highly but to reveal the things, of His
Law to them; But how great then does a soul come to be, that does embrace those
things, that has all those great and good things revealed in the Law made to
it as its own privilege? Surely that soul is in an high and honorable condition
indeed.

Further, The things of Gods Law are great in Gods esteem; Mat. 5. 18 explained.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of my Word shall
pass away. As if Christ should say, The Lord will rather withdraw his power
from the upholding of Heaven and Earth, than from making good any one jot or
tittle of his Law; you may think it a little matter to break Gods Law, but God
thinks it a great matter, and God would have us to make a great matter of every
thing that is written in Gods Law. I am the willinger to enlarge my self in
this, because I know it is the ground of all the wickedness in men's hearts and
lives, because they look upon the Law as a little matter, well though they dare
sin against Gods Law for the getting of a groat or six pence, but God says I
will rather lose Heaven and Earth than one jot or tittle of my Law shall fall,
and he will make it appear one day that the things of his Law are great things,
Isa. 42. 21 noted.
in Isa. 42. 21. He will magnify the Law and make it honorable. You may
vilify it; a company of wanton spirits we have that consider not what they
say, or what they do, running away with the very word of the Law, they think to
vilify it, What have we to do with the Law? Contemners of the Law Antinomians
and under that word (not understanding what they mean) they think to cast a
vile esteem upon the Law; let them do what they will, yet God will magnify his
Law; and as it is great in the thoughts of God, so it is and shall be for ever
great in the thoughts of the Saints, the Lord will have his people to the end
of the world have high thoughts of his Law; the Saints they look upon the Law
of God so great, as they had rather suffer all the miseries and torments that
any man in the world, Saints prize the Law.
any Tyrant can devise, than willingly to break the Law in any one thing;
surely they account it a great matter, when a man shall be willing rather to
lose his estate, and liberty, yea, and life, to suffer tortures and torments,
and all because he will not offend the Law of God in any one thing, though he
might escape all if he would; nay, says a gracious heart, Let all go rather
than I will venture to break the Law of God in any one thing, surely he looks
upon the Law of God as very great. Men of the world think them to be fools, and
why will you be content to suffer so much, lose all your friends? what, venture
to lose your estates which have such a fair way of living as you have? what
venture a prison, and venture your life? the world thinks they are but little
things and trifles, and men are more precise than wise, and they need not
trouble themselves so much. If God would but show to you how great a thing his
Law is, and all the threatenings which are revealed therein, you would account
your estates, and lives and all your comforts as little and poor in comparison
of that Law; hence in Revel. 6. 9. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that
were slain for the Word of God, Apoc. 6. 9.
and for the testimony which they held. Wherefore were they slain? Surely it
was for some great matter that they would venture their lives, it was for the
Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held. And thus the Saints of God
have ever accounted the Law of God a great thing. I have written unto them the
great things of my Law.

Hence from what has been said we may have these Notes for Observation.

Here are Objects in the Word for men of the greatest spirits to exercise
themselves about. Obs. 1.
Many men's spirits are raised up and cannot endure to spend their thoughts and
time about small matters; and you shall have some men's spirits are so low that
they think it happiness enough if they can be employed in a gutter and get six
pence or twelve pence a day to find them bread at night; but others have great
spirits: Oh! let all those who have aspiring spirits, and great spirits, let
them exercise themselves much in the Law of God, here are objects fit for great
spirits, that will greaten our spirits: And indeed there are no men in the
world have great spirits, but the Saints they have great spirits, for they
exercise themselves in the great counsels of God. We account those men to be
men of the greatest spirits that are employed in State Affairs: now the Saints
they are lifted up above all things in the world, and they look at all these
things as little and mean, and they are exercised in the great affairs of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ; Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. illustrated.
hence it is that the Lord would have Kings to have the book of the Law
written, and the Judges; and it is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon that
in the midst of all his great affairs of his Kingdom, Alphonsus King of Aragon.
he read over the Scriptures fourteen times with Commentaries upon them. How
many have we, men of great estates, and seem to be of great spirits that scarce
mind the Law of God, they look upon the Law of God as under them; it may be if
they can have a book of History and Wars, they will be reading over that, but
for the Scripture it is a thing that has little in it.

Another Note, Obs. 2.
It is a special means of obedience to have high thoughts of Gods Law, to
convince and humble them for their disobedience: for that is the reason why the
Prophet here speaks thus: I have written to him the great things of my Law, but
they were accounted as a strange thing. As if he should say, If they had had
the things of my Law to have been high in their thoughts, they would never have
done as they have done, Psa. 119. 129. illustrated.
Psalm. 119. 129. Thy Testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep
them: I have high thoughts of thy Testimonies, I look upon them as glorious
things, I see much of thy self in thy Testimonies, and therefore does my soul
keep them. He does not say, therefore do I keep them; but therefore does my
soul keep them, Oh my very soul is in this, in keeping thy Testimonies, for I
look upon them as wonderful things. It Is a good sign of the Spirit of the great
God in a man when it does raise him above other things, to look upon the things
of his Word as the only great things that are in the world. Isa. 40. 6.
illustrated.
All flesh is grass (says the Scripture) but the Word of God endures for ever;
there is a vanity in all things of the world, but in that which the Word
reveals, Oh! there is an eternity there; we should therefore admire at nothing
so as at the Word, and we should greatly delight in Gods Commandments, an
ordinary admiration is not sufficient for the Commands of God, for the Law of
God, nor an ordinary delight is not sufficient, but great admiration, and great
dedelight there should be in the Law of God: And all things that are taken from
Gods Law should be great arguments to prevail with you: It may be there comes
such and such temptations to draw you to such and such evils, and you say, they
are strong temptations* But that which is in the Law, that should be a greater
argument, there is that which is greater in Gods Law than there can be in any
temptation whatsoever; Therefore know, it is a dangerous thing for men and
women to look at any thing in Gods Law as a little thing, so as to despise it,
and to think it is no great matter though we do such and such things, though we
should go from the rule of the Word a little, what great matter is it? Prove.
13. 13 enlightened.
are we not all sinners? Prove. 13. 13. Who so despises the Word, shall be
destroyed. That is: looks upon any thing in Gods Word as a light thing. It was
a speech of one that should say when he was convinced of a thing that was evil,
That he must make bold with God Almighty sometimes. Do not you make bold with
Gods Word and secretly jeer at those that are so nice they cannot venture a
little? remember this text in Prove. 13. 13. Who so despises the Word shall be
destroyed; take the least thing that you think so despicable in Gods Law, and
you will veture upon it, but God will make it a great matter, for when you have
broke the Law in the least thing all the Angels in Heaven and Men in the World
cannot satisfy God for that wrong; if they should come and say, Lord, here is a
poor creature that has broken thy Law but in this one thing that he thought to
be a little matter, we are content to be ten thousand years in torments to
satisfy for thy Law. Nay says God, this will not do it. Therefore take heed
of despising Gods Law, or despising any thing that is revealed by him, for
certainly it will prove a great matter, and when the Law has been broken let
us not think it is a little matter, that it is but a Lord have mercy upon me at
the last.

Again, The Prophet is convincing them of false worship, and upon this ground,
Because they would venture to make Altars to worship God in another way than
God revealed in his Law: from thence note,

That the Worship of God is a great matter; Obs. 3.
every thing in Gods Worship is to be looked at as a great matter: They may
think it a matter of indifferency whether they do it or no, at least in some
things; My Brethren, let us learn to know that every thing in the Worship of
God is a great matter, God looks much upon it, God does not say, that he is
jealous for any thing, but for his Worship. Vzzah he thought it a little matter
for him to go and catch the Ark, Uzza a Levite.
and especially having a good intention: It Is true, the Law of God is, that it
should be carried upon men's shoulders, but may it not as well be carried in a
cart? he thought it but a little matter, but it proved a great matter. So, that
which we think little in Gods Worship is a great matter. Uzziah a King.
So Vzziah in 2 Chronicles 26. No question he thought it no great matter to go into
the Temple and offer sacrifice, Is it not as good that a King offer it as a
Priest? it was in the Temple, and the true Worship, and Vzziah because he was a
great man he thought he might venture, for there you find that he had an Army
of three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred Soldiers; A great
Captain. Nadab and Abihu.
And Nadab and Abihu no question they thought it no great matter to go and
offer strange fire, and it has not been forbidden in Gods Word, this fire; but
it was a great matter before God, for God came with fire from Heaven to destroy
them. Hence it is that God in his Word would set out the glory of his Worship,
to that end that he might take off men's hearts from all false worship, he would
have them to think the matters of his Worship great things that so they might
not have their hearts taken with any false worship, Ezekiel 7. 20. enlightened.
Ezekiel. 7. 20. The beauty of his Ornament he set in Majesty, (and hereby God
aggravates their sin of Idolatry, Oh my Worship and Service I made it as
beautiful and glorious as could be) but they worshipped their Images, their
detestable things. So in Jer. 17. 12. A glorious high Throne from the beginning
of our Sanctuary. Ier. 17. 12 illustrated.
Mark what follows, All that forsake thee, shall be ashamed, and they that
depart from thee shall be written in the Earth: because they have forsaken the
Lord, the Fountain of living Waters. As if God should say, Oh vile hearts of
men when there is such a glorious Worship of mine that I present unto them, yet
they turn even to their own vile Inventions, and not regard that glorious
Worship of mine. I beseech you Brethren labor to look upon Gods Worship as a
glorious thing. The Reprehension.
But now the Reprehension that follows.

But they were accounted as a strange thing.
Here Is the wickedness of people, that though God shows forth his Glory in his
Word, yet they look upon it as a strange thing, as a thing that they shall get
little good by if they do obey, or little hurt by if they do disobey. We should
now have showed wherein this people did account Gods Worship a strange thing,
and what particulars of Gods Law they accounted strange things: But especially
this one among the rest they did count strange, viz. That God should so stand
upon it, that He must needs be worshipped Jerusalem at the Temple, and at no
other Altar whatsoever came of it. Now because they thought that if the people
went to Jerusalem to worship it would be very prejudicial to the State, this
was a strange thing, and that which we can see no reason for. So, people are
ready to think, if any thing be propounded for the Worship of God out of the
Word, Yea, but how can it be with peace? it will cause contention now to stand
upon such things that they conceive may breed some trouble, they account it a
strange thing that God should require such things as may produce such troubles:
first men will frame troubles in their own thoughts, and put them upon Gods
Worship, whereas indeed they do not bring such trouble, but if they be examined
they may stand well enough with the peace of States. I make no question but
this is one especial thing aimed at by the holy Ghost here, That they accounted
Gods Law, that very Law of God that reduired them to worship at Jerusalem as a
strange thing, that they could not see such reason for why they might not
venture, and especially when it was for the peace of the Civil State.

Now they accounted this (and the other particular of Gods Law) as a strange
thing in Four regards. The Word accounted strange.


First, 1. As not concerning us.
As a thing that had little or no reference to them, as a thing that did not
much concern them: They took not to heart the breaches of Gods Law, neither did
they much regard the keeping of it, it was no great matter to them, they made
account that it was [ad libitum] what they did that way, much did not depend
upon it, either good or evil: As a stranger accounts it not to concern him what
the Master commands: or as we account it no great matter what strangers do,
what clothes they wear, or what course they take, we let them pass by and not
mind them.

Secondly, 2. Strange in their apprehensions
They accounted them as a strange thing; that is: They were strange things in
their apprehension, they could see no reason: as we say of a thing that we do
not understand that we see no reason of it, it is strange (we say:) so they in
the text, that God should say thus and thus when we cannot see that any account
can be given for it, they are strange things. Strange things that they did not
apprehend the reason of, and especially among other things of Gods Law (as was
said before) the way of Gods Worship was a very strange thing to them, that God
should stand so much upon it that he must be worshipped no where in the way of
public worship but at Jerusalem, at the Temple, no sacrifices must be offered
but there, yea, that whatsover come of it though people dwelt a great way off,
though as they thought it would bring a great deal of disturbance unto the
Kingdom of Israel for to go to Jerusalem to worship, yet that God should stand
so upon it that they must go, and that the Prophets should urge it with that
fervencie as they did, that they must go to Jerusalem come of it what will,
they must venture their peace; they accounted this a strange thing. And indeed
it is very strange unto people to think, that we must look to the exact way of
Gods Worship whatsoever comes of it, whatsoever trouble or disturbance comes of
it, we must not go a hair against the way that God has set for his right
Worship: this is a strange thing to carnal hearts. Luther
And Luther upon the place seems to interpret it thus, as if this Text had
especial reference to this Note that I am now speaking of, says he, They did
condemn, and contemn the Prophets Sermons, as a Doctrine that did hurt the
Commonwealth, the Sermons that the Prophets taught had in them much anxiety,
specially this Doctrine, against going up to Jerusalem to worship, and they
thought it was hurtful to the Commonwealth, and upon that they contemned it
and damned it. What strange thoughts have carnal hearts of many parts of Gods
Law? they think them foolishness, even those very things wherein the Wisdom of
God is revealed to the children of men, those things wherein the deep Connsels
of God concerning man's eternal estate is revealed, even those are the things
which they acount foolishness.

Thirdly, 3. No sutableness between their hearts and the doctrine.
They accounted them a strange thing; that is, There was no sutableness between
their hearts and the things that the Law did reveal unto them; they did not
make the Law of God familiar to them as that which had a sutableness to their
spirits. As if a man that goes into strange company, company which are
altogether unsuitable to him, simile
yea, perhaps they speak another language, and have altogether other customs,
and diet than we have, we are weary of them, and we turn from them and are
tired in the society, for they are strange things unto us that our hearts are
not suitable unto: So when the Law of God is looked upon as unsuitable to the
dispositions of our hearts, to our ends, to our ways, our hearts turn from
those things as from strange things, whereas indeed our hearts should be
familiar with the Word of God, Gods Word and the things therein should not be
as strrnge things to our souls, but as the holy Ghost says, it should be as
our Kinswoman, and as our Delight continually, Prove. 6. 21. applied
Prove. 6. 21. Bind them continually about thy heart, and tie them about thy
neck. When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee; there should be a
familiarity between our hearts and the Commandments of God, to talk with us
when we awake, and when we are in our journey, we should take the Law of God as
our companion in our journies, we should awake with it in the night time, and
meditate on it day and night; therefore God would have his people in the Law
when they rose, to talk of those things; when they go to bed, when they rose
up, when they walked in the way, they should be conferring about the things of
Gods Law to make them familiar to them, that they might not be estranged from
them; God sees that men's hearts would quickly grow strange from his Law,
therefore Commanded that by all snch means and ways they should endeavor to
make the Law to be familiar to them.

Fourthly, 4. Use the Word as a stranger, i.e. for our own ends only.
They use the Law as a stranger, that is, they use the Law slightly, only for
their own turns: As usually men when strangers comes into their Country, (those
that have been strangers in other Countries know it) that the Natives of the
Country they use them slightly, but if they do seem to show any respect unto
them it is merely for their own turns: As they may have any advantage by them
so far they show respect to them and no further. So they accounted the Law a
strange thing, that is, they made use of the Law but merely to serve their own
turns; so far as obedience to the Law suits to their own ends, so far they
yielded to it, and no further. Now it is very observable, that those who are so
forward in their false worship, that the text says, they did multiply Altars,
and had special regard to their Altars; yet for the Law they accounted that as
a strange thing.

From whence the Note is: Obs. 1.
That superstitious people who are forward and zealous in their own way of
Worship, yet they are very slight and negligent in Gods way of Worship, little
regard that. Indeed their own Altars they were accounted great things, that way
which they appointed themselves, they did not care what cost they were at in
that way; but as for Gods way, that was as a strange thing unto them. We have
seen it very evident, and do see it in great part to this day, how those that
are very zealous in superstitious worship, are the most negligent in Gods way
of Worship; to instance: Confirmed from the late times in England
you know in late times, what a deal of stir did men make with their own forms
of Worship, with their own Ceremonies and Ways of Worship which they
appointed? how zealous were they in them, and devout were they in them? when
they came in public Congregations to bow and cring, and for other Ceremonies
that they said were only for the decency of Gods Worship, how stiff were they
in them, that the mouths of the most Godly Ministers must be stopped if they
would not conform to them? But even these men would scorn and jeer at
strictness in Gods Ways, and slight any man that would be conscientious in the
Ways of God, and they were Rebels that should not yield to a Ceremony, because
it was disobedience to Magistracy. For men to be conscientious for little
things (as they thought) in Gods Law, seemed strange, when as they would urge
men to obey to the uttermost in little things in their own. and so in another
point that falls out as full and reasonable for the time, as in the point of
their own Feastivals and Holy days, those that would persecute to the
uttermost men that should work but to get bread for their families on a
Holy Day, Holy Days
yet they could publish Books of Sports for the profanation of the Lords Day:
Sabbaths.
And thus the great things of Gods Law they were strange things, but their own
things (Holy Days) were great matters: Surely if it were such a great matter
to keep the Festival of Christ's Nativity we should have some hint of it from
the beginning of Matthew to the end of the Revelations, Christmas
but when God gives not the least hint of any such time. And mark it, those
people that stand most upon such Festivals, they stand least upon Gods
Sabbaths; and indeed you shall have many people which think it a strange thing
for men not to have regard to such Festivals, Why may not we keep the birth of
our Savior! Now that you might not think it a strange thing do but consider of
this, that when God has set apart any thing for a holy use it is no strange
thing, God not to be imitated in his worship.
but it should be strange in man to venture to imitate God in the things of his
Worship, to do that in Gods worship which God himself has done before; thus
God has set apart a holy time, viz. the Sabbath; it is set apart for to
solemnize all the work of Redemption, The Sabbath is for commemoration of all the particulars of our redemption.
both the Nativity of Christ, and his Life, and Death, and Resurrection, and
Ascension, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, all the things about man's
Redemption, (I say) God has set the Sabbath apart to that end that we might
have a Holy day to keep the remembrance of them. Now when God has set one day
apart, for man to dare to venture to set another apart, this is presumption. So
because Christ has set outward Elements and Sacraments to be a remembrance for
his body and blood; for man to say, Christ has set apart, a piece of Bread and
Wine, why may not I set some other thing apart? This you would all say were a
great presumption. Certainly the presumption is the same in the former.

Again it is observable in this expression, Obj. 2.
[They counted it as a strange thing.] It is a dangerous thing for men to have
their hearts estranged from Gods Law, and from the other Spiritual Truths that
are in Gods Word, from the knowledge of that Law which we have been educated in,
and that heretofore we have made profession of; for thus it was with this
people, they had been educated in Gods Law, and made profession of it, and
whatsoever God should reveal, they would obey; but now their hearts were
estranged from what they were educated in and made profession of. Oh! let men
take heed of this for ever.

You that have had good education, Us. of Admonition.
you have been brought up in the knowledge of Gods Law, you have had gracious
principles of Gods Law dropped into you in your youth, you have made fair
profession of Gods Law, of obedience to it, take heed now of being estranged
from those truths that heretofore have been familiar to you, that you have made
profession of, and therefore take heed of the several degrees of the
estrangement of the heart from the Law of God. The degrees of the hearts
estrangment from God.
I will but only name them, to show how the hearts of men do grow strangers
from Gods Law.

First, It fares with his heart, as it does with a man that grows to be a
stranger from his friends, A man that has a familiar friend he does not
estrange himself suddenly, 1. Less frequent.
but by degrees, it may be visit one another less than they were wont to do,
and yet there is no contention between them, but by degrees they grow to be
strange, and then at length they grow to be very enemies. And thus it is with
men's hearts, when men grow strange from the Word, that he was acquainted withal
before, first he begins to call things in question whether things be so or no,
and especially those things which most concern the mortifying of sin, and the
strictness of holiness.

Secondly, 2. His delight abats which is also the first degree
He begins upon this, (or rather I think that is the first) he begins to abate
his delight in the truths of God, he was wont to take abundance of delight to
meditate in the Word, Oh how sweet it was when he awaked in the night season,
he was wont to take a great deal of delight about conferring in Gods Word, and
when he came into any company* but now it is abated, that is the first:
Secondly, he calls those things into question that he was very confident in
before whether they be so or no.

Thirdly, 3. Takes up hard thoughts of spiritual truths.
He begins to have some hard thoughts of Gods Word: Many men that heretofore
did prize the Word, and those Truths that were the joy of their hearts, yet now
they begin to have hard thoughts of them.

Yea fourthly, 4. Wishes the things in the word were other^wise.
He begins to wish that those things which are in the Word were otherwise than
they are, he cannot see enough to persuade him that the things are true, but
his heart coming to be estranged from the Word he does desire they were not
true; as a man that comes to be estranged from another, simile.
he could wish he were further off from him.

Fifthly, 5. Harkens to contrary doctrine.
He begins to listen to those things which are against the Word; there was a
time that he would never regard any things that were said against the strictest
way of holiness; simile.
but now he can be ready to listen to Objections: As a man when he was intimate
with his friend, he could not endure to hear any thing that was said against
him, but now being estranged from him, he can drink in any thing which is said
against him.

Sixthly, 6. Will not search thoroughly into truths
When the heart is estranged from the Word it will put off thoughts, and through
examination of truths, it will not search into things as it was wont to do, but
is willing to put off and shut his eyes, and will rather search into any thing
that may make against the Truth than that which will work for it. (I beseech
you observe these workings of your hearts)

Seventhly, 7. An Engagement in some unlawful practice.
There will be an engagement in some practice not allowed by the Word. Then a
man grows further estranged from his Friend, when he does not only refrain
coming into his company, but he will engage himself into some others that are
against him.

Eighthly, 8. Former weighty arguments now weak.
It comes to have a slight esteem of what before they thought had great weight
in it; there was a time when such and such things were thought to have very
great weight in them, but now they are nothing, they are of another judgment:
simile.
Just as when a man is estranged from his friend; he thought before he had a
great deal of excellency in him, but now he esteems him not; and this is the
argument of the estrangement of his heart from him.

Lastly, 9. Become open enemies.
If men take not heed when they are by these degrees grown to be estranged from
the Truth, they will at length violently reject the Truths of the Word, they
will grow to be open enemies to the Truth: Men that have bin familiar with Gods
Word, and Truth, and made profession of them, and seemed to love them most, by
several degrees they have grown to be strangers from them, and at length to be
enemies to them. Apostates have proved to be the most desperate enemies to the
truths of God of any in the world; take heed therefore of the strangeness of
your hearts from the Truths of God lest you afterward prove to be an enemy to
God; it is an evil thing to account the Law of God a strange thing, but much
more to account it an enemy to us, Isa. 5. 24.
and our hearts to be an enemy to it. Isa. 5. 24. Therefore as the fire
devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so their root shall
be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust? why? because they have
cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the holy One
of Israel. Oh! let us for ever take heed of this, and therefore let our prayer
be that of the Prophet David in Psalm. 119. 18, 19. Psalm. 119. 18, 19.
Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. And then
it follows, I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy Commandments from me.
Lord I account my self a stranger here in the world, Oh! let not thy Word be a
stranger to me. I beseech you observe this; Those men and women that account
themselves strangers in the world, will never account the Law of God a strange
thing to them; but such men as account themselves to be the inhabitants of the
world, they will have Gods Law to be a stranger to them. Observe it, and you
shall find this to be a Note: When your hearts begin to close with the things
of the world you do not meditate in Gods Word so much as you did before, nor
delight to read it; but now, if you can keep your heart from the things of the
world, to use them as if you used them not, then this will be your prayer,
Lord, hide not thy Commandments from me; Oh thy Word is sweet unto me as honey
and the honey comb.

One Note more about this; Obs. 3.
They accounted this as a strange thing; Men they have a strange way now a
days to estrange the Law from them and themselves from the Law; That which
their corrupt hearts will not close withal, as for a rule of holiness, that
they will put upon Christ as if Christ had delivered them from it. This is a
strange way indeed of estranging themselves from Gods Law, Us. against
Antinomians.
many men will eestrange themselves from the Law of God by too much familiarity
in the world, but for people to have this way by their familiarity with Jesus
Christ, because they come now to know Christ more therefore they should be
greater strangers from the Law than they were before, this is a strange way of
estranging men's hearts from Gods Law; The holy Ghost foreseeing such a
generation which would be in the times of the Gospel, The Spirit of God forsaw
this generation.
that would boldly assert, that whosoever the people of God were bound to under
the old Testament, yet in the new Testament they have nothing to do with the
Law of Moses, (it is very observable) In Malac. 4. 2. 4. the very close of the
old Testament, even then when there is a Prophecy of Christ to annex the old
Testament and the new together, Mal. 4. 24. enterpreted
says the text there, Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings; to you that fear my Name shall
Christ arise, (what then?) then you shall have nothing to with the Law when
Christ arises. Mark then in the 4th verse. Remember ye the Law of Moses; almost
the last words in the old Testament, and the Conclusion; as if the holy Ghost
should say, now I have done revealing all my mind about the old Testament, and
you must never expect any more Prophets nor any further Revelations of my mind
till the time of the new Testament, but instead of the Prophets you shall have
the Sun of righteousness arise.

Well then, Object.
I hope they shall never have any thing to do with the Law of Moses more:

Nay but says the holy Ghost) Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant etc.
Answ.


VER. 13.
They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offering.
THE Jews might object: Why, how do we account the Law of God a strange thing?
do not we continue in sacrificing, do not we offer our sacrifices to God? why
do you say, we account the Law a strange thing? From the connection therefore
this Note may be observed.

That men may continue in outward profession and performances of duties of
Religion, Obs. 1.
and yet the great things of Gods Law may be a strange thing to them. They do
offer sacrifices still, and yet they accounted Gods Law as a strange thing to
them. Do not think that sufficient, that you continue in outward profession of
Religion; Nay, shall I say more? I make no qustion but a man may continue in
outward duties, Aman may continue strict in duties, and yet have committed the
sin against the holy Ghost.
and yet Apostatize from God so far as to commit the sin against the holy
Ghost, and that is evident from the example of the Scribes and Pharisees, that
Christ charges for commission of the sin against the holy Ghost, and yet they
did not forsake the Jews Religion, they continued in a great deal of outward
strictness in Religion, and yet had committed that unpardonable sin; therefore
you may Apostatize for from God, though you do not forsake the public
Ordinances of God.

They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offering.
God call all their sacrifices flesh: Expos.
that is, in contempt; as if he should say, you sacrifice, indeed I have a
little flesh from you, But do you think that is the thing that I intend in my
offering? I expect Faith and Obedience, I expect the Work of Faith relying upon
him that is Typified by all the sacrifices that you offer; but you wanting that
inward spiritual worship in your souls, I account all your sacrifices but flesh.

Most people offer nothing up unto God in all their sacrifices, Obs. 2.
but flesh; their offerings are flesh; That Is thus: even in your prayers, in
your hearing, in your receiving you offer sacrifice, but all is but flesh, God
has the outward man, and it may be you have fleshly ends in what you do, and
fleshly carnal hearts, you offer the flesh; many a man that has excellent
gifts in Prayer, Prayer.
and seems to offer up an excellent sacrifice to God, but it is nothing but
flesh, there is little of the Spirit of God, (of the sanctifying Spirit nothing
it may be) a man that perhaps may preach excellently, Preaching.
yet in fleshly wisdom, nothing but fleshly excellency; Oh my Brethren! what
are our sacrifices, if they be nothing but fleshly excellencies? you know what
the Scripture says, All flesh is grass, and as the flower of the field, but
the Word of God abides for ever; Isa. 40. 3. enterpreted
all a man's parts, all things are but flesh that are not spiritual and the
sanctifying Work of the Spirit of God by the Word, but the Word of God abides;
that is, the impression of the Word of God upon the soul by the sanctifying
Work of Gods Spirit abides for ever, but all flesh is grass. You have got a
great deal of fleshly excellency in parts, so as others admire your gifts;
Gifts and Parts.
I but this flesh is as grass, it will come to nothing, and all your esteem
will come to nothing. Oh let us take heed (my Brethren) that our sacrifices be
not flesh, for though they may glitter a while in the world, within a few years
all will be as grass and will come to nothing.

But further: Expol. 1.
They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offering.
Why God commanded them to sacrifice flesh, [For the sacrifice of mine
offering.] here seems to be an accusation, not that they sacrificed, but that
they sacrificed nothing but the outward part, flesh; do not think that that is
the main meaning, but this rather: In the burnt offering all the whole sacrifice
was tendered up to God; but now there was another offering that was the peace
offering, and there that which was offered, some part of it did belong to the
offerer, so as they should eat part of the offering, when they came to offer
that they came with their friends, because they were to have some of it; 2 The
Authors Exp.
now says God, They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offering: that
is: They change mine Ordinance, when as that I looked for burnt offerings from
from them (the whole offering) they will rather offer peace offerings wherein
they shall have part of the flesh for themselves, and that they can take
content in. Thus I find Interpreters carry it, and I verily think it to be the
meaning of the holy Ghost.

So that from hence the Note is: Obs. 3.
That if there be any thing in Gods Worship, wherein any self respects may come
in, there we are content to be forward; but yet in that we rather aim at
serving our selves then serving the Lord, and this usually does eat out all
true devotion. When there is a duty to be done, and part of that duty God
requires and we show respect to God in it, and there is another part wherein we
enjoy our selves; now such kind of duties as these are, men can be content well
enough withal: but the truth is, that part which concerns themselves does eat
out all the true devotion unto God, although the Worship of God be pretended,
yet self-respects they are that the heart is most upon; Instance in Feastivals.
and Fasts.
as for instance: In keeping of Festivals, they liked them well enough, and we
do not read so much charge for the keeping of them because there was something
agreeable to the flesh: but now for the day of their Fasts says God, whosoever
afflicts not his soul, that soul shall be cut off: they had not so much mind to
that, in the tenth day of the seventh month, therefore God threatens, that
whosoever did not afflict his soul that day, it should be cut off; and so you
shall find it. That Is the reason indeed why men are so much set upon their
Feastivals, they pretend Gods Worship, and honor to their blessed Savior and
the like, but the truth is, it is the Belly that is the thing, and their Sports,
and the license to the flesh that they aim at; Why Christmas is so zealously
kept.
I warrant you let the time (as now it falls out) be the time of a Fast, it
will not be so much regarded, and for any man to keep a Feastival when God by
his providence calls to fast, certainly that man regards his own belly rather
than God. And that by which all these Feastivals are upheld it is, because that
together with a seeming kind of Religion the belly gets so much; but now, such
duties where God is served, and Nature denied, they are great testimonies that
the Spirit of God is in our hearts in the performance of them; when we can
offer up our burnt offerings wholly to God, and our selves denied, they are
testimonies that the Spirit of God is in us, An apt simile.
as I Will give you an instance in the Story of the first of Kings the 13. you
read of the Lion that did slay the Prophet that went contrary to Gods
Commandment, 1 King. 13
now it was a special end of God that sent the Lion to slay him, and that God
would give a testimony that the Lion did not come of a chance to fall upon the
Prophet and kill him, Therefore the text observes that the Lion stood by the
carcass and did not meddle with it after it was once slain; it was the nature
of the Lion to have fed upon the carcass, but here was an argument that it was
merely from God what the Lion did. So, when any man shall perform a duty merely
for God, and in that duty shall deny himself, shall be content to part with
honors or preferment, In the present War: The Cause
that is a sign God is in it: and so in this public service, Oh! who would not
venture himself for the public Cause? I but there is a public Pay too as well
as the public Cause? The Pay.
but now if a man can venture to the uttermost though he has not that which he
expects, yet he is content to venture himself as much as he did before, God is
in this man certainly, when he can do a work, and deny himself that work: And
truly we should be willing so to do: Why? because God does not require of us
self-denial that shall do us any hurt, God would never have us deny our selves
in things that immediately concern our communion with himself, God expects
Self-denial in temporal, not in spiritual things.
and our eternal good, God expects self-denial but it is only in those things
that concern this present life; now when God is so propitious to us in
requiring duty, that he will let us sometimes enjoy our selves, and when he
requires self-denial it is in things that are more inferior, we should not much
stand upon in denying our selves in them. It follows.

But the Lord accepts them not.
As if he said: I would not have them, I was not pleased with them: Obs. 4.
Whatsoever our services be, If self be regarded, all is rejected, not only if
sin be regarded, If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear my
prayer, but if self be regarded, our services may please our selves but not
please God; and for this you have a famous Scripture in Amos, 5. 22. Amos. 5.
22.
I will not regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts; and this text in
Amos has a special reference to this very thing, and Amos was contemporary
with Hosea, Amos and Hosea contemporaries, consent in Doctrine.
and so met with the very same thing that here Hosea did, this text in Amos may
help us to understand this in Hosea, I will not accept the offering of your fat
beasts; but observe it, they are their peace offerings; he does not say, I will
not accept the burnt offerings of your fat beasts: but of your peace offerings,
because in their peace offerings they eat part of it themselves, and says God,
let your offerings be never such fa^ beasts, yet I will not accept of them: so
let your duties be never so zealous and abundant, yet if they be only in
respect of your selves, God accepts them not. It follows.

Now will I remember their iniquities.
Why they did offer their sacrifices to the end that their sins might be done
away and had they ex^^rcised faith upon Christ the true sacrifice* their sin
should have been done away, yea but they offering in regard of themselves, he
says: I will remember your sins for all this.

From thence the Note is, Obs. 5
That many men may perform great services, may exercise themselves much in holy
duties, and yet have their sins as much upon the file before God as before they
began all their services: And this is a sad thing for a man to kneel down and
pray with woeful guiltiness upon his spirit, and rise up with the same
guiltiness that he kneeled down withal, and perhaps he has gone on and prayed,
and received the Sacrament for these many years together, and every sin that
was upon him when he first began is upon him now; How to exercise Faith for
Pardon in holy Duties
whereas those that in holy duties exercise their faith upon Christ their
Mediator, and with the act of faith tender up him to the father, whatsoever
sins were upon them before, are now done away

The second thing is observable, viz. That God will remember them, and he will
remember them now.

Hence note: Obs. 6.
That, however God may forbear to come upon wicked men for their sins for a
time, yet God has his time to remember them all; to remember, that is; by his
Judgments to make it appear to them that he does remember them, when they think
that God has forgotten them. 1 Samuel 15. 20. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I
remember that which Amaleck did to Israel, 1 Samuel 15 20.
how he laid wait for him in the way when he came up from Egypt: I remember
what he did; why this was four hundred years ago that he spoke of. We may
commit a sin when we are young and feel nothing of it till we come to be old
and then God may remember it against us; Sins of youth punished in age
as many a man or woman takes a surfeit when they are young and they feel
nothing when their bones are full of marrow and their veins with blood, simile.
they feel it not for the present, but when they come to be old, Oh! then it
aches in their flesh and bones, and then they remember their licentiousness and
carelessness in their youth: and so many young people they commit sin and
conscience never troubles them for it, and they they think all is forgotten,
Oh! but many years after the sin is committed God remembers it and makes them
remember it too; Joseph's brethren had committed that sin against their
brother, and it was 22. years before we read of any remembering of that sin.
Use to young ones and others
Many things might be said to this point which I cannot now insist upon, only
this thing take with you; Let all you that are young ones, yea and others too
take heed what you do in sinning against God, for that which you do now may be
remembered against you many years after, perhaps twenty, thirty, forty years
hence, God may come upon you for what you do at this present; me thinks this
should be unto young men a mighty strong motive to take heed of wicked lives,
youth sins ages terror
Youths sins may prove to be ages terrors.

Oh! is it not a great deal better that God should remember the kindness of thy
youth, than the sins of thy youth? Ier. 2. 2.
Jer. 2. 2. Oh you that are young, begin to be godly betimes, that God may
remember the kindness of your youth. And oh the blessed condition the Saints
are in, in comparison of the wicked: You have so many expressions, that God
will remember their sins no more, that he will bury them in the bottom of the
Sea; there are at least a dozen expressions in Scripture, and I had some
thoughts to speak of them all, but I see it will be too long to speak of them
now, Of Gods casting away their sins (the sin of his People.)

But further:

Now will I remember them.] That is, in the time of their Holy Duties. Now this
is a sad thing, that God should not only remember a man's sin, but even then
when he is about to offer sacrifices to God, Heb. 10. 3 illustrated.
as in Heb 10 3. it is said, that the sacrifices of the Law did bring sins into
remembrance: that is, It was a note of their guiltiness every time they came to
offer sacrifice, and their sacrifices did not do away their sins fully, Now I
will remember them. Then when they offered sacrifices in in a careless and
ungodly way, surely these sacrifices would bring their sins into remembrance
indeed. Hence observe:

God remembers the sins of wicked men in the performance of Holy Duties in a
special manner: Obs. 7.
and that upon these two grounds.

First, Reasons.
Because we come into Gods presence. There we come simile
If a Malefactor that has committed a fact a long time since, and he thinks it
is forgotten, if he should presume to come into the Kings or Judges eye, this
brings into remembrance what such a man is. So wicked men, when they come into
Gods eyes, are bold to draw nigh to God in an impudent way although their
consciences tells them that they have not sought to do away their sins by faith
and repentance, this puts God into remembrance (to speak of God after the
manner of Men.)

Because their Holy duties are aggravations of their sin, therefore God will
remember them then rather than at any other time; as thus: for the Jews (in the
text) here to come to sacrifice for their sins: certainly the language of which
was this: Lord, I acknowledge I do deserve death my self for the sins which I
have committed, and I can only have peace with thee through the sacrifice of
thy Son that I believe is to come; now for them to come and say so and yet
continue in their sin still, this ads impudence unto their sin; it was a sin of
infirmity before, it is a sin of presumption now. So, when men shall presume to
come before God in prayer, they have lived wickedly heretofore, and now they
come before God to testify their respect that they profess they ow to God, and
yet their consciences tells them that they do wickedly depart from God in their
lives; when they come in prayer certainly they come to confess and name their
sins before God, and to tell God what sinners they are, and yet still their
hearts do close with their sins, yea what an aggravation is this? yea they came
to judge themselves for their sins and yet still to continue in them, Oh my
brethren if you did but think of the aggravation that such prayer causes of our
sins it would make our hearts quake and tremble. But I speak only to those that
are Hypocrites and live in their sins still, their Holy duties do but aggravate
their sins, and therefore no mervail though then God remember their sins in a
more special manner. We have cause to wonder that God does not come upon some
of us in his wrath while we are in the midst of our Holy duties, as Pilat came
upon the Galileans and mingled their blood with their sacrifices, and so while
we compare the lives of men with their prayers (I say) it is a mervail that God
does not mingle their blood with their sacrifice; Oh take heed any of you that
are conscious to your selves, or your hearts closing with any known sin, take
heed the next time you go into Gods presence in prayer and confess your sins,
and judge your selves, take heed that God does not then remember your sins; Now
will I remember them, even in the time of their holy duties; you think that is
the time of our greatest pleasing of God, but it may prove to be the time of
Gods remembering your iniquities against you.

And visit their sins.
God visits either in Mercies or Judgments, and in the godly visiting, it is to
be understood concerning those things that seemed before to be neglected, Genesis
21.
as in the 21. of Genesis, God visited Sarah when God seemed to have neglected
her: Exodus 4.
and so in Exodus 4. he visited the children of Israel, that is, when he seemed
wholly to have neglected them: and so, I will visit their sins, though they may
think I have neglected them yet I will visit their sins. Whence observe,

God visits men's sins when they think they are most neglected by God; Obs. 8.
God has his time to make diligent enquiry for all their sins, Exodus 32. 34.
in Exodus 32. 34. In the day when I visit, I will visit their sins upon them,
then all their sins shall come up together, and that is the reason that God is
content to bear with wicked men and wink at their sins for the present, why?
because God has a day for to visit them, this sin which they commit now, they
shall not hear of it till a great while hence, but I have a day to visit, and
then this and the other sins shall come. Days of visitation heretofore were
wont to be called days of vexation, but the day of Gods visitation will be a
day of vexation indeed to ungodly men. Micah 7. 4
Micah. 7. 4. The best of them is a bryar, the most upright is sharper than a
thorn, the day of the Watchmen and thy Visitation comes, Isa. 10. 3.
now shall be their perplexity. In Isa. 10. 3. And what will you do in the day
of Visitation, and the Dissolution which shall come from far? To whom will you
flee for help? and where will you leave your glory? So I may say to many
guilconsciences, Oh thou poor wretched sinful creature, what will thou do in
the day of Visitation? thou can tell now, thou can go home and be merry and
do what thou list, but what will thou do in the day of visitation?

It follows: They shall return (or as some translate) they will return to Egypt.

And so it notes their sin for which God will visit them, 1. It notes their sin.
and the course that they would take when God was about to visit them, They
will return to Egypt. Whither will ye flee in the day of visitation? We will
fly into Egypt say they, if the Assyrians power grow too great we will go into
Egypt for help, and this may seem to have reference to that story in the 2. of
Kings, 17. 4. 2. King. 17. 4.
The King of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea, for he had sent messengers to
So King of Egypt.

The Note from hence is this; Obs. 9.
Carnal hearts when God is visiting them for their sins they have plots in
their heads to shift this way and that way for themselves. Vain deluded soul!
thy thoughts should be, how should I make up my peace with God? how should I
seek the face of God? thou art thinking of this and the other shift, whereas
thou should only be thinking of making up thy peace with God. And thus it is
with Kingdoms, when God is visiting Kingdoms you shall have many that sit at
the Stern, that all their thoughts are about carnal helps, whereas their great
thoughts should be, how they might fall down before God, and seek to make peace
with God and the Kingdom: thus it was here, I will visit them, and they think to
return to Egypt. And if you take it as a Judgment, 2. Their judgment.
it is threatened that they should return to Egypt, Deuteronomy. 28.
in Deuteronomy. 28. at the latter end, there it is put in the close of all the former
Judgments, That they should return to Egypt.

The Note is, Obs. 10.
That it is one of the most dreadful Judgments upon a Nation, after God has
delivered them from a bondage, to deliver them to the same bondage again: And
as it was grievous to be delivered into the bondage of Egypt, so more to
deliver us into a spiritual Egypt: Applicat. to Engl.
If we should again come under the power of those that have persecuted us and
those that have oppressed us, that they should have their full power over us
again, oh our bondage would be seven fold more than it is: And yet what cause
have we to have our hearts tremble and shake when we think of our abuse of the
beginning of Deliverance that we had? but of all judgments let us pray to be
delivered from that judgment, that we may never go back again to our prisons.

But just with God it is that those who inherit their progenitors sins, Obs. 11.
they should inherit their progenitors judgments. You continue in their sins,
you shall have their Judgments also.

But were they ever carried into Egypt, Quest.
was this threat ever fulfilled?

No, They were not carried captive into Egypt, Answ.
but they fled into Egypt for Refuge, Ier. 44.
and there they lived and died miserably.

Hence observe, Obs. 12.
All places are places of misery when God forsakes a people, As all places are
comfortable when God is with a people. Many men take their course to seek to
refuge themselves, to help themselves, and perhaps they have what they would
have in part, the answering our desires, is the execution of Godswrath oftimes.
but when they have had what they would have, even the having of what they
desire proves to be the execution of the wrath of God upon them: you have a
mind to go to Egypt, you shall return to Egypt says God. It follows in the
last verse.

VER. 14.
For Israel has forgotten his Maker.
THEY have forgotten their Maker, but I Will remember them says God.

When men think least of God, Obs. 1.
then is Gods time to come upon them for their sins, when they are in the
greatest security of all: whereas if you would remember your sins God might
forget them, or if you would remember God your sins should not be remembered,
but you forgetting God, your sins are remembered. It is an abominable thing for
us to forget God by whom we had our memory, by whom we are remembered, we should
never have been thought of if God had not given us what we have, and therefore
for us not to think of God it is a vile sin. Now God is forgotten when he is
not honored, minded as our confidence, help, refuge, our only good, when he is
not obeyed; if we do but remember sin, we cannot but honor him. How many forget
what manifestations once they had of God? they are passed by from them, and
other things take up their thoughts; Oh! what an appearing was there of God to
many of your souls heretofore, and what conference between God and your souls?
what luster of Gods Spirit upon you? and you thought you should never forget
those things; but now other things are in your hearts, A sign of much wrath.
Oh! such men and women have cause to fear that they are under much wrath that
they should forget their Maker. God challenges remembrance under this title:
Eccles. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. There Is no creature but the
rational creature that can reflect upon the cause of their being, the first
cause, and therefore God would not lose the honor from this creature; Indeed
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, the beasts can take
notice of those that bring them good things; but to reflect upon the cause of
their first being, (I say) that is proper to the rational creature, and
therefore it is an honor that God expects from you, and will not lose it.

The word here Creator, their Maker, it is not now meant for Gods giving them
their being, but Gods advancing and blessing of them so as to bring them to
that happy condition that now they were in, They have forgotten their Maker, 1 Samuel 12. 6.
Oh they have forgotten that God that has advanced them. So I find the words
used in 1 Samuel 12. 6. The Lord that advanced Moses and Aaron; but the words in
the Original are, the Lord that made Moses and Aaron: that is, when God called
them to the public work, God made them. Indeed for a man to be called to
public service is a great honor that God puts upon a man, God makes a man
then; To be employed in public service is the making of a man.
as many times we use that Phrase our selves, if a man be raised to any
preferment we say, such a man is made for ever. Oh that man which God casts his
favor upon, and delights to use in public service, that man is a made-man; But
they have forgotten the Lord that made them.

That Is the Note from hence. Obs. 2
It Is Gods favor that makes a man. You have an excellent Scripture for this in
Isa. 43. 7. I have created him (says God) for my glory, Isa. 43. 7.
I have formed him, yea I have made him. Here Is these three words together. God
does not satisfy himself in this, I have given him his being, or all that he
has, but he makes use of of these three several words to signify how all our
good comes from God; I do not know such an expression we have in Scripture, I
have brought him out of nothing, then secondly I have formed him, I have put
beauty and glory upon him, yea and thirdly I have made him, I have raised him
to the height of all; God has created us all, but has he formed us? We are to
look at Gods forming as well as at his creation, how God forms and fashions us
unto his own will.

They have forgotten God their Maker.
That should have been the other Note, Obs. 2.
That the greater height of excellency God raises any man to, the more vile and
wicked is the sin of forgetting God when they are advanced. Many men will
remember God when they are low, but when God has advanced them, then they
forget him, and that is worse. But it follows.

And have built Temples.
How is God forgotten, and they build Temples to the honor of God? You accuse
us of forgetting God our Maker; What People in the world does rememember God so
as we do, when we are at such charges as we are at.

The word that is translated Temples, (...) the Church is Gods palace.
it signifies Palaces. The Church is indeed Gods Palace: but note from hence,
That when God is worshipped in any way but his own, then God is forgotten. Obs.
3.
Papists they set up Images, and they say it is to put them in mind of God; but
the truth is, they forget God in it.

Again, When men's hearts depart most desperately and furthest off from God, Obs.
4.
they are many times very forward in superstitious worship. As we know it in
the primitive times, the hearts of men did close most with the power of
godliness, and were more sincere in their worship; but afterward when they
came to have peace, in, and after Constantines time when they had Temples, then
they forgot God most and grew superstitious. When the Christians worshipped God
in Dens and Caves of the earth, they remembered God more than when they had
glorious Temples built for them. Men that have departed from God and have
guilty consciences, they must have something to satisfy their consciences.
Instanced in the late times in England.
Of late our Kingdom, how desperately was it departing from God, and setting its
self against all the power of godliness? But never more for building of
Temples, that is, more for an outward pompous and glorious Worship; but they
forsook the Temples of God and persecuted them, and the Saints of God that were
the Temples of the holy Ghost, they were neglected.

But what was their reason here (you will say) Why is it a sin to build
Temples? Quest.


I answer: Answ.
first, It was in them a sin of Hypocrisy.

Secondly, A sin of Superstition.

A sin of Hypocrisy in this, Their sin in building Temples.
In that they would persecute those that would go to worship at the true
Temple, and yet that they would bestow so much cost in building

2. It was Superstition in them, they would not go to Jerusalem, to the Temple
that God had appointed, yet they would set up Temples of their own. There are
many that hate the true Temple, and the true Church, that is, the Communion of
Saints, yet magnify the outward buildings, as if there were no other Church
but only that. So the Jews, Hag. 2. 2^ and 4. 9.
when God would have them build his own Temple there they were slack enough: in
Hag. 2. 2. and 4. 9. verse. What a deal of stir had God by his Prophet to get
them to build his Temple, but their own Temples they would build.

But wherein was the superstition for them to build Temples? How superstition
in them to build Temples.


Thus: It is superstition for any men to put holiness in any buildings of their
own. There were Three things that made the Temple at Jerusalem an holy Temple;
and none of them can be attributed to any other place in the world.

First, what made the Temple at Jerusalem Holy, and Peculiar to it.
It was set apart by God, so as it was a sin to make any other use of it but
holy.

Secondly, It did sanctify the very duties that were performed.

Thirdly, It was a type of Jesus Christ. There were These three things that
were proper to the Temple at Jerusalem. No argument therefore from thence for
the holiness of Churches
And therefore you must learn for ever from hence, that there can be no
argument drawn from the Temple at Jerusalem for the holiness of Temples now.

1. It is a superstition in any man to set apart a place so as it should be a
sin to make use of it for any common thing.

2. Which is worse, and that is, For any man to set apart a place so as to
think that the very place should sanctify the duty, because the Temple of
Jerusalem did so: Now for a man to think that his prayers are sanctified,
because they are within such a building as this is, Praying in Churches no more
accepted, unless with the holy Congregation.
is superstition: hence a company of poor ignorant people they must go behind a
pillar and pray, as if they were accepted the more because of the place. It Is
true, when we come and join with the Church, then our prayers are accepted,
because it is in a way of Ordinance. So Chrysostom cries out of this
superstition, says he, Jeremiah when he stuck in the mud could pray, and Job
when he was upon the dunghill, and Jonah when he was in the belly of the Whale,
Chrysostom.
and therefore why should we tie Gods hearing of of prayer to such and such
places? Hom. 79. ad Populum.
Besides dedication, they had enchantments: Ab auguribus in augurabantur, suis
augariis sanctiorum reddebantur, hoc nisi fieret, Templa esse non poterant
(test Varrone) sed aedes sacrae dicebantur. Men have been very profuse in
this, Some Heathens against it.
both Heathens and Christians, and yet I find in some stories that some of the
Heathens were against, they thought God too great to be worshipped in any place,
the principle it self (that God was great) was true, but that therefore he
might not be worshipped in any place that had a cover over the head they thought
it too much; (...).
so it was reported of Zeno the Philosopher, he thought that Temples must not
be built. And the Persians that worshipped the Sun, dogm. Zen The Persians.
they thought that the whole world was the Temple of the Sun, and would have no
other Temple. Xerxes magi.
And Xerxes, the wise men persuaded him to burn all the Temples of Greece,
because they would shut up God within walls, so some of the Heathens had such
thoughts of God, though ordinarily the Heathens were very abundant in building
of Temples to their false gods: And Josephus reports of Herod that he would
seem to honor God by building a glorious Temple, Josephus l. 15. c. 14.
in the fifteenth Book of his Antiquity and the fourteenth Chapter, the Temple
that was in Christ's time it was of Herod's building, says Herod, this Temple
wants sixty cubits in height of that which Solomon first built. And you know
the Scripture tells, that those which saw his Temple did weep when they saw the
second Temple which was built, Paule-work.
and says Herod because it was not so glorious as the Tem^of Solomon was,
therefore he would build it and make it as glorious as that was, and so he laid
out a great sum of money upon it in building it with white Marble stones,
twenty five cubits long, and eight cubits high, and about some twelve cubits
broad, Thus superstitious he was. And so many have been in this way, many if
they be set upon a way of their own they care not what charge they lay out, but
as for those things that concern God they are slack enough.

And Judah has multiplied fenced Cities.
Judah seeing Gods Judgments upon Israel, does not make that use of the
Judgments of God upon their brethren, so as to consider their own sins, and
fall down before the Lord and be humbled in his sight, but when they saw that
Gods hand was against the ten Tribes, all their care was to fortify
themselves; let us build strong Cities that we may be delivered from the
miseries that are come upon our brethren; This is that which carnal hearts do,
when God expects that they should be put upon humiliation and repentance, and
look to it and consider whether they have not the same sins among them that
were among their brethren, they regarded nothing but carnal means; It Is lawful
to build strong Cities, to fence our selves against enemies, Strong places to
be dedicated by prayet and reformation.
yea but we had need lay the foundation of them in humiliation and reformation,
and when they are built they may not be rested in, for says God, I will send a
fire and devour them; we must not bless our selves in any strong places as if
that could deliver us from the wrath of God. I have read of a City that fearing
their enemies, they sent to a neighbor Prince to come and help them, and
charged their Ambassadors to tell him their strength they had. A notable story.
I but says the Prince, have you got a cover to defend you from Heaven, and if
not, I will not meddle with you, for you must have something to award Gods
wrath from you, because you are so wicked a People, and except you have
something to deliver you from that I will not assist you. So though we have
strong walls, yet we must look for a cover from Heaven, which is our peace with
God through Jesus Christ.

Again, Obs. 1.
They have multiplied fenced Cities.] For outward safety men think they have
never enough, to secure themselves from poverty and from their enemies, but to
secure themselves from Gods wrath they think they have enough. In spiritual
things we are content with a little, but when it comes to our outward security
we think we can never be too safe; and indeed this will be an argument what it
is that your hearts are most upon, that that you endeavor to secure your selves
most in, that is your chiefest good, that that you would make most sure of, and
if any thing in the world could make you more sure you endeavor to do it: a
gracious heart will never say, May I not go to Heaven though I do no more? but
can there any thing more be done? does God require any thing more of his
creature? God that knows all things knows my heart is ready to do all thingt
that he has revealed to me, and if there were any thing more to do, Oh that I
knew it that I might fulfill even all righteousness.

But I Will send a fire.
Says the text, Obs. 2.
They multiplied Cities, but I will send a fire. When we bless our selves most
in our own thoughts we should consider, but what are Gods thoughts? we think we
will do thus and thus, and I Will save my self this way or the other way; poor
wretch! thou say thou will do thus and thus, yea but think, what if Gods
thoughts be otherwise at the same time? thou art plotting to save thy self, but
God is plotting to destroy thee: What if there prove to be a disjunction
between Gods thoughts and my thoughts? Wicked men have plots and devices for
themselves, but God comes with his disjunctions, I Will do thus and thus.
Englands enemies should have considerrd this.
And this we are to hope that God will deal graciously with us in regard our
enemies they are full of plots, but God has been pleased to come in with his
disjunctions, Gods thoughts has not been as their thoughts blessed be his Name.

But I Will send a fire, Expos. 1.
it may be that they think that their Forts are so strong that they cannot be
beaten down, but I Will send a fire to burn them down.

But I rather think this fire is meant metaphorically, Expos. 2.
I Will send their enemies which shall be as a fire; and so enemies are called a
fire many times in Scripture.

And I Will send a fire. Obs. 3.
By whatsoever means fire comes, Gods hand is to be looked upon in all (...);
If there has been a fire in your streets or houses, you will enquire by what
means it came: look up to God whatsoever the means was, it is God that sends
the fire.

And it shall devour their Palaces.
Brave things they are subject to Gods devouring fire, Obs. 4.
Oh let us as when the Disciples looked upon the fair buildings of the Temple
and wept, says Christ, There shall not be a stone left upon a stone; so when
we look upon our brave Palaces, Oh let us consider how quickly the fire of Gods
wrath may come and not leave a stone upon a stone. Let us look up to that place
where Christ is gone to prepare mantions for us, and to that building that is
eternal in the Heavens, made without hands. And thus through Gods mercy and
assistance we have gone through this Eighth Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
VERSE. 1.
Rejoice not, O Israel for joy as other people; for thou have gone a whoring
from thy God, thou have loved a reward upon every corn-flour.
HERE begins another Sermon of the Prophets. Gualt.
Gualter thinks this to be the sixth Sermon that the Prophet HOSEA preached to
these ten Tribes, wherein he yet goes on in the way as he did before,
convincing of sin, and threatening of wrath against Israel; The time of this
Prophecy.
and this Sermon was preached in a prosperous time, when Israel (the ten
Tribes) seemed to be in their greatest ruff of pride and jolity. It refers
according to Interpreters to one of these two times: Either to some special
time when when they prevailed against their Enemies, or to the time when they
made their League with the Assyrians.

The time when they prevailed against their Enemies, and so it is thought to
refer either to the time th^^ we read of in 2 King. 13. 15. the time of
Jehoash when he beat Benhadad three times, and recovered the Cities of Israel!

Or that time in 1 King. 14. 13. And Jehoash King of Israel, took Amaziah King
of Judah, and came to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem; and took
all the Gold and Silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of
the Lord, and in the treasures of the Kings house, and hostages, and returned
to Samaria. This certainly was a time of great jolity and mirth among the ten
Tribes, or in the time of Jeroboam 2 King. 14. 28. and so in the time of Pekah
2 of Chronicles, the 28. that was a time of great jolity and mirth to the ten
Tribes because of their prevailing, the text says, They slew in Judah an
hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all valiant men: and the children of
Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women,
sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the
spoil to Samaria. Now in this time their hearts did swell much, for in verse.
10. the Prophet Obed came to them and says, Behold, because the Lord God of
your fathers was wrath with Judah he has delivered them into your bands, and
ye have slain him in a rage that reached up unto Heaven. And now ye purpose to
keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bond women unto
you. But are there not with you, even with you sins against the Lord your God?
It seems to be almost the same expression as we have here in the text, as if he
should say, Now you purpose to keep the children of Judah and Jerusalem for
bond men and bond-women, and you insult and rejoice, and you think you have
gotten the day and you have prevailed; but are there not sins among you? just
as he says here, Rejoice not, O Israel, for you are gone a whoring from the
Lord, as if he should have said, though God has given you a victory and you
think you have matter of much joy, yet rejoice not O Israel as other people.

As other people. Expos.
Why?
First, Because the conquest you have gotten it is over your Brethren,
therefore rejoice not as other people, do not rejoice in your slaying your
Brethren as other people (the Nations about you) would rejoice in the slaying
of them.

That Is a sad War when the Conqueror has cause to be sad at the very Conquest.
Observe.
It were no great matter though if other people had gotten the victory they
should triumph, why not? though you have gotten the day, yet these Wars are
Wars that you should not triumph in, for by this means the Nation of the Jews
is grown weaker and is in more danger to be made a prey to the common enemies,
and therefore do not you rejoice as other people might rejoice in such a
Conquest. Use for England.
And Indeed such are our Wars and Victories at this day, we must not rejoice in
our Conquests as other people, not so rejoice as if French or Spaniards came
among us, or as if we were in a foreign Nation, for our Conquests weakens our
own Nation, it is the destruction of our Brethren, and therefore in this we are
not to rejoice as other people in their conquests.

Or secondly: A 3d time
according to others it does refer to that time when Menahem made a League with
the Assyrian, 2 King. 15. 9. The time helps to understand the Prophecy.
(for there is no such way to understand the meaning of the Prophets than the
reference to the time that they preached in, and that they aim at) we read
that Menahem made a League (that was the King of the ten Tribes of Israel) made
a League with the Assyrian that great King, that he might be with him to
confirm the Kingdom in his hand.

Now people use when Leagues of passification, and association are confirmed
between them and others, to triumph and rejoice by outward expressions, to
manifest their great content in them, Oh! now there is a peace made, now we
shall grow stronger than ever we were, and be delivered from many troubles that
were heretofore upon us. Israel blessed themselves in the Assyrian, in that
they had got such a rich and mighty Prince to be on their side, that now they
had made their peace with him, they thought they were safe enough, now they
were secure, and contemned all threats, and derided all that the Prophets
should say against them, Isreal's malignants.
now the Malignants they lift up their heads and insult over them that would
say, Gods Judgments would follow them if they did not join with Gods people in
the true Worship of God, they sung away care, and none thought of any danger in
regard of their sin, they could not endure to hear of any complaining of any
thing that might disturb their jolity and conceipted happiness, that they
promised to themselves the continuance of. But now says the Lord by the
Prophet, Rejoice not wi^h joy as other people, be not too confident with whom
you have made such a sure League, for they may prove to be your undoing, it may
prove to be the instruments of the greatest wrath of God against you that ever
you had, and indeed he was so, the Assyrians that they made their peace withal,
and joined in League with, and rejoiced much in he proved to be the greatest
instrument of wrath that ever the people these ten Tribes had; you have made
your peace with him, and now you rejoice; but you have not made your Peace with
God says the Prophet. What good can Passifications, can Leagues made with men,
peace struck with them do, so lokng as still ye go a whoring from your God, and
break your peace and covenant with him daily, Oh rejoice not therefore!

For observe, Obs.
Though Leagues and peace made with such as have been enemies are matter of
rejoicing, Leagues and peace wherein we much rejoice, may prove occasions of
sorrow.
but they may likewise be such as we may have little cause to rejoice in; they
have the names of peace and union a while, but suddenly they may change their
names, and be called a massacre, and ruin, and destruction to a Nation,
especially if the foundation of our peace be not laid in reformation; and still
a people goes a whoring from their God, rejoice in no peace that you can make
with any whatsoever so long as you go a whoring from the Lord. Us. Be not
greedy of peace before the time.


That Is the Note from thence, if it has reference to the time when people have
been worn out with Wars, they are greedy of any kind of peace, they care not
with whom they make it, Oh nothing but peace, let us have that, and if there be
but a peace concluded once, upon never such unsafe terms, Oh! the Bells must
ring, and Bonfires must be made. This seemed to be the condition of the people
at this time, but says God, you are deceived, this peace you have made will
prove your undoing, Rejoice not therefore as other people? for you have gone a
whoring from your God.

But those Observations that we may take from either of these two times, Obs. 1.
from the time that they got conquests over their enemies, or secondly from the
time of their peace, put them both together are such as these.

First, Carnal hearts rejoice and bless themselves in their outward present
prosperity, in their Health, Strength, Friends, as if all were well with them,
although they be under much guiltiness, though there be fearful breaches
between God and their souls, and how things are between God and them they care
not, so be it all may be well with them for outward things; this is the guize
for carnal hearts, they are presently upon the merry pin, and rejoice and
delight much if so be that thy may have but any prosperity, though but for a
while, if there be no punishment of sin upon them the guilt and polution of sin
never troubles them. Seculi laetitia, est impunita nequitia.
Says Augustine in his twelfth Tract. upon John, The joy of the world is
nothing else but their wickedness unpunished; if God do not punish them
presently then they have a great deal of joy. Aug. in John. tract. 12.
And in Amos, 6. 4. there you have the description of the people of Israel more
at large (for Amos prophesied in the same time that Hosea did) They lie upon
beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the Lambs our
of the flock, Amos 6. 4.
and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, that chaunt to the sound of the
Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of music like David, that drink
Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments; but they are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Well; have not you more reason, you
afflicted and distressed Saints, to rejoice in God without the world, than they
have to rejoice in the world without God? shall not all the wrath of God that
hangs over the heads of wicked men, and all the guilt there is upon them damp
their joy when they have but meat, and drink, and cloth, and a little outward
prosperity, and shall the loss of a few creature comforts, such as many
Reprobates have to the full, damp your joy, when you have an interest in all
there is in God, in Christ, in the World, in Heaven, in Eternity? when all this
is the matter of your joy, what an unreasonable thing is this?

A second Observation from the words; Obs. 2


Rejoice not O Israel.] When men are jolly and merry, they should consider,
Well, but would God have us to rejoice? They were jolly and frolic, I but the
Prophet comes in the Name of God and says, Oh! but God is of another opinion.
When therefore we find our selves jocund and merry, we should consider, but is
God of the same mind that we are of? Many men's rejoicing is so disagreeing to
Gods mind, as they dare not so much as consult with God or their own
consciences to know what God and conscience will tell them concerning their
rejoicing; the more men can prevail with their own consciences to be silent,
the more joy they have, yea some there are that have so much guiltinese upon
their spirits, as they can have no joy, but at such time when they can take
advantage of their own consciences, they are fain to take a time when their
consciences are asleep or else they can have no joy; Now cursed be that joy
that cannot stand with a free working of a true enlightened conscience.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
Men may be in an outward prosperous condition, and yet have little cause to
joy in it; We may prosper, and yet have no cause of joy
all outward prosperity may stand with the heavy wrath of God hanging over the
sinners head, he may be upon the very brink of destruction and yet prosper
outwardly, outward prosperity may come in wrath, the curse of God, the poison
of Gods curse may be in the Wine as well as in the Water, wicked men that are
poor have their Water poisoned, and wicked men that are rich and prosperous
have their Wine poisoned, and what difference is there between drinking
poisoned Water and poisoned Wine? the swelling of carnal hearts in their
prosperity it is a sign that it is poisoned to them. Outward prosperity as it
may come in wrath, so it may stand wi^h wrath, and make way to wrath, by it the
vessels of wrath may be fitted to destruction; God many times has a further
reach in suffering wicked men to prosper than they are aware of; as Ester, when
she invited Hamon to a banquet, he drew such a connection that he was honored
above all the Nobles in the land, and he goes away rejoicing and tells his
friends of the great honor that was put upon him; but Ester had another design
in it than Hamon thought of, it was not to honor him but to destroy him. So
many people whose estates God raises, they make other manner of connexions from
Gods dealing with them than ever God intended, they think God has blessed
them, when the truth is God is working their ruin and destruction; An ap^
simile.
As a painted face is no argument of a good complexion, so a prosperous estate
is no argument of a good condition.

Rejoice not for Joy.
Carnal hearts in their joy are set upon jolity, Obs. 1.
their spirits insult and they think of nothing that should moderate their joy,
so the words import, Rejoice not for joy; if you will rejoice, let there not be
mere joy, but some kind of mixture in it; there should be a mixture of
reverence and fear in our rejoicing, we should rejoice with trembling here in
this world.

Whatsoever blessings we have from God, yet (I say) we should rejoice with
trembling here, remembering first our unworthiness of any good we have, there
should be that put into our joy.

Secondly, Remember the afflictions of our brethren.

Thirdly, Remember the uncertain and the vanishing nature of all these things
we rejoice in.

Put these three things always into the Cup of our Joy, else it will be too
sweet and will clog the stomach.

Mix the Cup of your Joy with these three Meditations.

First, Your Unworthiness of that Mercy.

Secondly, The Meditation of the Affliction of our Brethren, of yours that have
done God more service than ever you have done, or are like to do.

Thirdly, That Meditation of the Uncertainty of al these things that your
hearts are so taken withal.

These three Ingredients will make a good Mixture, that we shall not surfeit
with our condition.

Do not rejoice: that is, Let there not be pure Joy. But the strength of this
expression lies in the other.

Rejoice not with joy as other people. Expos. 1.

First, 1. Be not taken with the worlds jolity.
Be not taken with the bravery and jolity of other people, to think them happy;
Oh! It Is a fine life to live as they do. The jolity of other people that are in
a different way from us, is many times a great temptation to draw the heart to
them, because we see they live merrily and bravely. But that does not reach yet
to the main scope of the Prophet.

Rejoice not with joy as other people.
Secondly, 2. Imitate them not in ways of rejoicing.
Therefore do not rejoice as they do in their Idolatrous Festivities. Dancing
and many ways of jolity that they had in their Idolatrous feasts; we must not
imitate Idolaters in their Triumphs. This was the sin of many in the primitive
times, because they were come new out of Heathenism, they would turn the
Heathenish feasts into Christian feasts, and Heathenish customs whereby they
were wont before to honor their Idol gods into the custom of Christians, to
honor Christ in the same way; and they thought this was very good, that whereas
before they did honor Idol gods, now they thought if they did but turn this to
honor Jesus Christ they thought this would be acceptable. No, this was a great
sin, and brought a great deal of evil into the Christian world, and we do to
this day suffer in that way; if do tender our respects to God, though it be in
the same way that Idolaters do to their Idols, we think we do well: and indeed,
here is the original of keeping this time, both of your Christmas and
New-years-day, it is but the changing of them from the keeping of the
Heathenish time, to the honor of Christ, and of the Saints. I remember this
Preached in Christmas.
time two years, through mere providence that Scripture came in our way, I will
take away their solemn feasts. And there I showed how these came instead of the
Heathenish times. Now says the holy Ghost here, Rejoice not as other people
do, do not you imitate them, they have their Idolatrous Feasts, but do not you
as they do. We must not take liberty to imitate Heathens and Idolaters in their
worship, though we think to tender our respects to God thereby.

Rejoice not as other people.
Not as A people, 3. Not as a people.
for the word other is not in the Hebrew: Do not you rejoice as if you were to
continue a people still, for you are to be carried captive and not to continue
as a people, do not you therefore rejoice as if you were in a settled condition;
you have brought your selves into such a condition as you are not to look upon
your selves as a people, Do not Rejoice, no not as a people. It Is a miserable
spectacle to see those who are ready to be destroyed to be jolly and merry as
if there were no such matter. The Dolphin.
It is said of the Dolphin, that it sports most when a storm comes: So, when
the storm of Gods wrath is arising upon a people then they are most jolly and
merry.

Again. 4. Not profanely.
Rejoice not in that manner as others do: others rejoice and scorn at the
threats of God: So Ephraim had mixed himself amongst the Nations, and so did
scorn at what was said by the Prophet. Do not rejoice profanely, do not
rejoice slightly, vainly, do not rejoice presumptuously, promising to your
selves continuance in your prosperity.

But that which I think is especially aimed at, 5. not having so much cause as
others.
is this: Rejoice not as other people, for, you have not such cause to rejoice
as other people. Why? Israel! Though you be Israel, yet there is not so much
cause for you to rejoice as other Nations have. Israel (the ten Tribes) prides
themselves in their Privileges above other people, they despised all people in
comparison of themselves. But now God tells them, that their sins had brought
them into a worse condition than other people were in, and they must not
rejoice so much as they. And from thence this profitable Note may be raised.

Many who look upon others as mean and low, Obser.
with scorn and contempt in comparison of themselves, yet even these may be in
a worse estate than those are whom they look upon so much beneath them. For
instance: It may be you may be a man of parts and of esteem, and a man employed
in high employments for Church and Commonwealth: Instanced in this Nation.
Another is in a mean low condition, is of little use, a weak-parted man, and
yet that guilt may be upon you, that you have not such cause to rejoice as this
poor man has which you so contemn as one laid by and not worth any thing: It
may be you have excellent gifts in Prayer, and are an eminent professor;
another man or woman is no body in your eyes, they are no professors at all; I,
but if all were known, you have not cause to rejoice as they have that you
contemn.

Secondly. Rejoice not as other people.
Although we enjoy the same blessings that others do, Obser.
yet we have not always the same cause to rejoice as others have, though we
enjoy the same blessings: I say, it may be others have more cause to rejoice in
a little than we have to rejoice in abundance: Do not say in your hearts,
Others are merry and cheerful, Why should not I be so too? I have as good an
estate as such a one has, and as fair a dwelling as he has, and as comely
children as he has, why should not I be merry? But it may be there is not that
breach between God and such a one as between God and thee, it may be there is
not so much guilt upon the spirits of such men as upon thy spirit, therefore
thou must not rejoice as they do; though thou have the same outward blessings
that such and such have, yet it does not follow that thou should rejoye as
such do; An apt simile.
you have cause rather to have your thoughts work thus, such and such men are
cheerful indeed, yea they may, for they have not provoked God as I have done, I
am conscious of those sins that I believe they are free from: A man that has a
sore disease about him in his body, when he sees others that are merry he
thinks with himself, yea indeed you may be merry, but if you felt that that I
do you would have little cause to be merry.

The third Note is this: Rejoice not as others.
When men have brought misery upon themselves, this is one great argument of
their misery, That they shall see others rejoicing, but all matter of joy shall
be taken from themselves. It Is not for them to rejoice as others do, that which
is the cause of the rejoicing to others you have had and abused it, Luk 13. 28.
you have abused those mercies of God, and now you must not rejoice as other
people do: That place is very notable for this in Luke, 13. 28. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: When ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out.
This is the aggravation of our misery to see others in happiness and in a
rejoicing condition, and you your selves cast out, A fit similitude.
you must not rejoice as others do. As if a man were cast into a dungeon near
the street, and there should be a day of triumph, and feastivitie and jolitie,
there should be much rejoicing, music, and bravery without in the City, and
he lying in a dark dungeon and hears the jolitie of the City: this would be a
great aggravation to his misery, yes, would he think, such that have their
liberty may rejoice, but I must not rejoice as they do; and this will be the
aggravation of the misery of the damned hereafter, when they shall see Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and themselves
cast out; it may be the Father shall see his Child in the Kingdom of God, and
himself in Hell being cast out; they shall rejoice eternally when I must be in
everlasting torments.

The reason follows: Rejoice not as other people: for thou have gone a whoring
from thy God.
The ground of joy or sorrow is the terms that are between God and us; sin has
an evil in it to damp all our joy, if we would have joy in any thing let us
take heed of defiling it by sin; of all sins, the sin of forsaking God,
forsaking or corrupting Gods Worship, that is such an evil as is enough to take
away the joy of a Nation, whatsoever a Nation has; if it has forsaken God in
matter of worship it has little cause of joy, though we should have peace and
outward prosperity, yet if there be not making up of our peace for our going a
whoring from God, let there be all the peace that can be made, yet we have
little cause to rejoice in it; but a people retaining the true Worship of God,
whatsoever it be in other respects, that people has cause to rejoice. Yea and
as a whole Nation, so any particular soul, particular men or women, Christians
that live in a Nation if their consciences can tell them that they have not
complied with the times and gone a whoring from God in ways of false worship
as others have done, they have cause to rejoice whatsoever befalls a Nation;
whereas the others that have had complying spirits, though the Nation should
prosper never so much, yet they have little cause to rejoice in that joy: let
us therefore be solicitous about nothing so much as about the true Worship of
God.

Yea but this people might say, Suppose we have some corruptions in the Worship
of God, yet we do retain more than other Nations do. Nay says God, you have
gone a whoring; and so, you are more guilty than other Nations. From whence the
Notes are:

First, Obs. 1.
That which we may think a little matter in corrupting Gods Worship, God may
call it a going a whoring from Him: it is true (might they say) we may fail in
some Circumstances, we go not up to Jerusalem to worship, but still we worship
the true God, and we observe the Law of Moses. No (says the Lord) You have
gone a whoring from Me.

I but still, Why may not we rejoice as other people, to be sure we are not
worse Idolaters than they, therefore though we may not rejoice more than
others, yet why not as others? they make Idols to be their gods, there is
nothing so vile among us as among the Nations about us? From whence therefore
the Observation is this, that God charges them more than others,

First, Obs. 2.
That a people may be free from the gross evils that there are in other people,
and may have many good things that other people have not, and yet may be in a
worse condition than other people.

You will say, Object.
How can this be?
Thus, Answ.
There may be some sins that they have among them that may have greater
aggravations than any sins that other people have, that may make their
condition (all things considered) worse. We here in this Land have much
rejoiced heretofore in this, that we have had the Doctrine of Religion so pure
among us as no people more, and certainly except it has been through some few
that of late days have sought to corrupt it, certainly that must be said, that
the Doctrine has been kept very pure, as the main things of Religion, and in
some things we have gone beyond other reformed Churches, as in the point of the
Sabbath a great deal beyond them; and so there has been here in England for
Family Duties, never had God more honor from any people in the world than he
has had from us in many respects; but yet for all this it seems by Gods
dealings with us at this day, that God is more provoked with us than with other
people, and the truth is, take these one or two things and I think that no
people upon the face of the earth can parallel our guilt, not only no people
that are now, but never any people since the world began, as that bitterness of
spirit in the hatred of the power of godliness and the opposing of it, and
persecuting of it, never was any people so guilty as we have been; in other
reformed Churches men may be as forward and zealous as they will and they are
not persecuted as they are here, and though they kept the Sabbath more loosly,
yet they never persecuted men that kept it strictly, and there was never heard
that stopping of the mouth of the faithful Ministry so generally as here in
England, if there were but any stirring Ministry in any place, presently fly
upon them; and so it may well be said to us at this day, Rejoice not as other
people. God has spit in our faces, to tell us that our condition is worse than
the condition of other people.

Yea but still, Object.
If we be Idolaters (would the ten Tribes say) they are so too.

Here was one particular aggravation upon Israel that was not among other
people, Answ, No Nation but Israel forsook their gods.
and that was this, There was no other people would forsake their gods as
Israel had forsaken theirs, Jer. 2. 10. there was never such a thing as for a
Land to change their god, Ier. 2. 10. explained.
(the worst people, for Kedar was the worst sort of people, they were a vile
people, and yet) go to Kedar and see and search diligently whether any Nation
has ever forsaken their Gods, But you have forsaken Me. And from thence there
may be this Note.

That to be constant to ill principles is not so great an evil, Obs. 3.
as to be false against good principles. (I say) God accounts it not to be so
great an evil for men to be constant to their prin^les though they be evil
principles as for men to forsake good principles; A special note.
as now if a man has been brought up all his days in superstition and thinks
verily this is the right, certainly this man is not so guilty before God as
another that has been educated in the true worship of God, and has made
profession of the contrary and yet afterward does apostatize, and backslide:
God had rather that men should keep to their principles though they be evil,
than entertain good principles and forsake them: There are none so vile in Gods
eyes as Apostates, there is not so much sordidness and baseness of spirit in
those men that will keep constant to their principles though they be evil as in
such as will betray their principles that are good.

And then the Principal Observation is this; Obs. 4.
That the sins of Gods People are the greatest sins of all: the sins of the
Saints are the greatest sins of all, and they are to mourn more than any. Amos
3. 2*
In Amos, 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore will I visit you for your iniquities; Romans 2. 9.
your sins are greater. And that in Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also the Gentile. And
we have these two excellent texts in Jer. 18. 13. Ier. 18. 13. expounded*
Ask ye now among the Heathen, who has heard such things? the Virgin of Israel
has done a very horrible thing; that is the aggravation that it is the Virgin
of Israel that has done such a horrible thing. But especially that text in
Jer. 32. 30. Ier. 32. 30. opened.
For the children of Israel, and the children of Judah have only done evil from
their youth. Now Hierom has such a Note upon this. What, the children of
Israel (says he) and Judah only done evil from their youth? What, has none
done evil but they? he gives this answer, He that has the knowledge of God and
goes from it, he alone sins in the eyes of God, as for unbeleevers they sin too
but it is as if God saw it not, and as if God minded it not, as he says in the
Acts, that he winks at the days of their ignorance, Act. 17.
but they only sin that have had the knowledge of God. We read of this
Philistims that they ventured to carry the Ark upon Carts; 1 Samuel 6. 7. with 2 Samuel 6. 3. noted.
God did not manifest himself provoked against them that carried the Ark so,
but when the Levites would presume to carry it upon carts, the Lord makes a
breach upon them and strikes Vzzah with death; he did bear with it in the
Philistines, which was a little before, and it may be they presumed and thought
the Philistines carried the Ark upon a cart, why may not we? That which God will
bear from others he will not bear from his own, their sins are against
Covenant, and that is a special thing, there has not been that solemn Covenant
between me and other people as between you and me: This is a mighty aggravation
against the sins of Gods people, more than against any people in the world,
that they are against Covenant.

Oh! remember this, you that do often covenant with God, when you are in
Prayer, Oh! how do you renew your Covenant with God? What promises do you make
with God in Prayer, and yet you grow again loose, and false, and vile
afterward? Oh! you must not rejoice as other people; you look upon a Drunkard
that reels in the streets, and hear a Swearer blaspheme the Name of God, yea,
but that may not be so great an evil as the vanity of thy spirit, And why? The
looseness of thy heart, and those secret sins thou art guilty of, because thou
have so covenanted and bound thy self to God: the Drunkard was never made
sensible of his sin and wrath of God upon his conscience; but the wrath of God
has been upon thy conscience, and thou have engaged thy self to God, if he
would show mercy, Oh! thou would walk holily and strictly before him: Now
do thou think that thy sins are as the sins of other people? They never had
such Soul-quickning Ordinances, but go up and down to Taverns and Alehouses,
and never know what a powerful Sermon meant upon their hearts, and had they
such means as thou have, then it is like it would be with them far better than
now; and the Name of God is not so much polluted by them as by thee; thou that
art a Professor of Religion the eyes of all men are upon thee, and in thy sin
thou do not only disobey God, but thou do pollute the Name of God, thou
art a stumbling block unto others, and the cause of the hardening of many
hundreds in their sins, and therefore thy sin certainly is worse than others.
This would be a great Point to show how the sins of the Professors of Religion
are worse than others, and therefore it is not enough for you to say, We are
all sinners: No, we must not excuse our selves in this, that others are guilty
as well as we, Oh! but consider what aggravations there is of thy sin more than
there is of the sins of others; It is a sign of a very carnal heart to think to
go away thus, it is true, I sin, and others sin as well as I do; yea, but a true
penitent heart will not only consider that he is a sinner, but what aggravations
are there upon his sin more than upon the sins of others? and so will lay it
upon their hearts, It Is true, such and such sin, but had they what I have had,
it would not be so with them; my sin that has broken through so many terrors
of conscience, and that God has sought by such means to keep me from my sin,
it is a sign of the violence of my spirit indeed that has broken through so
much as I have done: it is therefore an abominable thing to make our profession
in holy Duties a Medium to make our sins less, Do thou think that this is a
means to make thee escape that wrath? Certainly this is a great aggravation of
thy sins.

We have a generation of men among us, Some Antinomians noted.
that because they are Believers, therefore they need no sorrow for their sin,
they must have only joy. Now certainly thy being a Believer may aggravate thy
sin so much the more, Saints should sorrow must for sin.
and may make it so much the more vile, and may pierce thy heart so much the
more; for if thou be a Believer thou know what the pardon of thy sins
cost; therefore, certainly Gods mercies toward thee are the aggravation of thy
sins: The truth is, suppose our sins were not so great as the sins of some
other people are, yet it is not always an argument that we may rejoice as
other people.

Why so? Quest.
(you will say.)

Thus: Answ.
Suppose our sins be but equal, or less than the sins of other people, God has
liberty to damn one for a lesser sin, and save one that is guilty of a greater.
yet it is more than we know whether God will pass by our sins so much as by
the sins of others, What if God out of his Prerogative damn thee for a little
sin, and save others that have committed great sins? We have such examples in
Scripture, as in the example of Saul, the thing that God cast away Saul for, in
its self it was not so much as that which David had been guilty of, he had been
guilty of groser sins than that which God cast away Saul for, Instanced in the
examples of Saul and David.
Saul might have said, this is an offense, but is this like Murder and Adultry?
What if it be not, God will pardon David, and cast away Saul. Oh! do not you
think to rejoice as other people do; Why, may not God do with his mercy as he
pleases, it is his own; God may pardon one, and damn thee eternally: And
therefore let no sinner please himself with what others do, for he is not to do
as others do. Now it follows.

Thou have loved a reward upon every corn-flour.
Israel saw the Nations have a great deal of plenty upon their Corn flours,
Expicat.
which they attributed to the serving of their Idol gods, therefore Israel
thought to comply with them out of the love to the plenty they had, and since
the time that she had complied with the Nations about her, she prospered more
she thought, and this she loved, by this she was exceeding hardened in her ways
of Idolatry, and blessed her self in them. This is the scope. God made many
Promises for provision for Israel in his service, but they made account to get
more in following the ways of the Gentiles, than in following Gods ways: Like
Harlots, though they have liberal provision from their husbands, yet they
hoping to get more by others, they love braverie, and jolitie, and they see
that other Harlots they live more merrily, and go finer in clothes, and can be
whole nights in chambering and wantonness, and have good cheer, and they love
this, and though they have allowance enough at home, yet they leave their
husbands and follow whoremasters. Just thus it was with Israel, though she
might have Gods care over her, and provision for her in the ways of his
Worship, yet she beholding the Gentiles living more bravely she would follow
after them: At first (as you heard) she hired Lovers her self, but now she
loves a reward upon every Corn-flour, now she expects greater advantage; this
indeed was the matter that put her on, the loving a reward upon every
corn-flour; she might have many pretenses, Why she did not see but that she
might do such and such things, and they were not directly contrary to Gods
Word, but whatsoever she did pretend in the altering the way of Gods Worship,
yet this was the great matter that prevailed with her heart, it was, The loving
a reward upon every corn flour: Applicat.
And thus it is with very many that are superstitious, come and speak to them
of their ways, they will have very many fair pretenses, they think that they
have this and that warrant out of the Scripture for it, but all the the while
there is a pad in the straw, there is their living, and trading, and estates,
and friends that they have an eye upon, and it is that which byasses their
hearts and spirits. But diverse things have been spoken to the same purpose of
this, that we met withal before, only this one Note,

Idolaters do love their Corn and outward prosperity, Observe.
because it is a reward of their service to their Idols: So the sweetness of
our comfort should be in this, because they come from God as a reward of our
faithfulness. Shall Idolaters when they look upon their plenty and attribute it
to their Idol gods, shall it be so much the sweeter to them? let all our
comforts be so much the sweeter to us when we look upon them as coming from God
as a reward of our faithfulness. In Psalm. 119. 56. (says David) This I had,
because I kept thy Statutes. You will say, Can we look upon any thing as a
reward of our righteousness? Free Grace, and the Gospel-reward may stand
together, God may reward according to our works, though not for our works, and
God is pleased to call it so for the encouragement of his people. It is very
sweet to those that keep close with God when they prosper outwardly, that
outward prosperity if it follow our keeping close with God is very sweet,
simile*
as the Cipher when it does follow the figure it does ad to the Number though
it be nothing in its self.

But now we come to the second Verse.

VER. 2.
The flour and the wine press shall not feed them, and the new Wine shall fail
in her.
AS when a Father sees his admonitions not regarded by a stubborn Child he does
withdraw his allowance from him; simile.
and sometimes you will deal so with your little children as they shall go to
bed without their suppers, to show your displeasure against them; so God deals
here, you have had many admonitions, now I will withdraw your allowance.

The flour and the Wine-press*] He does not say, the Field but the Flour,
Explic.
I will let them bring their Corn to the flour; and he does not say, the Vine,
but the Wine Press; the Notes are these.

God often lets wicked men come near the enjoyment of a mercy, Obs. 1.
and them cuts it off: as many times the Saints comes near afflictions, and
when they are at the very brink of afflictions then deliverance comes to them.

Secondly, Obs. 2*
God does use to strike wicked men in those things that their hearts are most
set upon. They would have their flour and Wine Press to afford unto them
plenty, in that thing God strikes them. Now observe it, whether in Gods ways
that are against you God does not strike you especially in that which your
hearts are most set upon, if he does, know there is the finger of God, and God
would have you take special notice of it.

The new Wine shall fail.
The words are in the Hebrew, It shall ^e unto them. The like word we have in
Hab. 3. 17. The labor of the Olive shall fail: in the Hebrew shall lie, (that
is) it shall not perform what it seems to promise to you;

We are ready to promise to our selves great matters from the creature, Obs. 3.
or rather think that the creature promises much to us, but we shall find all
but a lie; let us learn to promise nothing to us but from the Word that will
never lie. Whatsoever you promise to your selves (I say) let it be grounded
upon the Word, but if you promise to your selves great matters from any
creature, you will find a lie in the Conclusion. We often lie to God in not
answering our good beginnings, and it is just with God that the creature should
even lie to us, and not accomplish what they seem to promise to us.

Lastly, Obs. 4
That which men think to get in a way of sin, they shall fail in at last; The
way of the wicked shall deceive them, they shall not find what they expected in
the ways of sin. The Saints they shall find more than ever they expected from
God, but the wicked shall find less than that which they expected from the
Creature. But there is not much difficulty in this Verse, therefore we pass it
over briefly.

VER. 3.
They shall not dwell in the Lords Land.
BEfore God was to them as a father taking maintenance away from them, leaving
them to suffer want; but here his anger increases, and here he puts them out of
his house; simile*
as a Father, first he withdraws allowance from his stout Son, and when that
will not do, then he thrusts him out of his house: So does God here, The
wine press and the flour shall not feed them. And not only so, says God, but,
They shall not dwell in the Lords Land. I will cast them out of my house, cast
them out of my Land, I will not suffer Ephraim to dwell any longer there.

Levit. 18. 26. Levit. 18. 26.
as if he had said, you are Tenants and hold the Land by this Tenure, we read
in Levit. 25. 23. of an Ordinance that God made there that no Land in Canaan
should be sold for ever, Levit. 25. 23.
but only to the year of Jubilee, the richest man that was that bought never so
much Land they could not buy it for ever, he could not have such a Tenure as
runs amongst us, To have and to hold for ever. But you will say, what is the
reason? it is given in the 23. verse. The Land shall not be sold for ever: Why?
For the Land is mine: for ye are strangers and sojourners with me; I have
brought you to the Land, and ye are but sojourners with me in my Land. God may
dispose of all as he pleases. It Is a good meditation for us to work upon our
hearts thus, That we are Gods Stewards, the Lord is the great Landlord of all
the world. A meditation in our walking into the Fields.
When you go abroad into the fields, now you that are godly you may see more
Land than is your own, but you cannot see more Land than is your Fathers.

The Lords Land.
It may be said of all the Land in the world, he that is thy Father is the
great Landlord of the world; howsoever men respect their Landlords and are
afraid to displease them, but how little respect is given to this great
Landlord of the world! Canaan the Lords Land in a special manner.
The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; well, but though all the world
be the Lords Land, yet this Land was the Lords Land in a peculiar manner, the
Land of Canaan it was the Lords Land more peculiarly in many respects:

First, Reas. 1.
It was a Land that God had espied out for his People. In Ezekiel. 20. 6. as a
special place. God was over looking all the world; where should I have a good
Land (or Country) to set my People, and the text says, God had espied it out.

Secondly, It was the Land of Promise, therefore the Heb. 11. 9. By faith he
sojourned in the Land of Promise as in a strange Country. No Land in Scripture
is called the Land of Promise but only this.

Thirdly, The Lords Land, it was a Land given by Oath Genesis 24. 7.

Fourthly, It was a Land which the Lord brought Ezekiel. 20. 6. etc.

Fifthly, It was a Land divided by Lot, and so the

Sixthly, It was a Land wherein God dwelt himself, a Here will I rest for ever,
Psalm. 132. and God swear unto them that hardened their hearts in the
wilderness, that they should not enter into his Rest, that is, that they should
not enter into the Land of Cana^n. It was the Land wherein there was the
Ordinances of God, and the Worship of God, and his Honor dwelt there, and so it
had a peculiar blessing upon it above all the Land that was upon the face of
the earth.

Seventhly, It was a Land over which Gods eye was in a more special manner;
there is a most excellent Scripture for that in Deuteronomy. 11. 12. A Land which the
Lord thy God ^areth for, the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even to the end thereof.

Psalms, Psa. 95. 7.
That he swore in his wrath, Heb. 3. 7. etc. 4. 1.
that they should not enter in his Rest. The Apostle in Heb. 3. 7. seems to
apply it unto the Rest of the Church of Heaven, 1 Chronicles. 16. 15.
and in 1 Chronicles. 16. 15. Be ye mindful always of his Covenant, the word which
he commanded to a thousand generations, even of the Covenant which he made with
Abraham, and of his Oath unto Isaac, and has confirmed the same to Jacob for a
Law, and to Israel for an everlasting Covenant; saying, Unto thee will I give
the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance. Mark; that he would give unto
them the Land of Canaan: This must be remembered to a thousand generations, and
it must be a Law to Israel afterward. Certainly this notes that God aimed at
more by the Land of Canaan than merely to possess them of so much ground.

Holy Land in Zach. 2. 12. and it is called a good Land in Numb. 14. 7. that
which is translated in your books exceeding good, is, very very good: it is a
pleasant Land in Ezekiel. 7. ult. a garden of Eden in Joel, 2. 3. a glorious Land
in Dan. 11. 16. and 41. verses. and the glory of all Lands, Ezekiel. 20. 15. and a
goodly heritage Jer. 3. 19. Now (says my text) They shall not abide in the
Lords Land. Now from all these Titles we are not only to take notice of this:
That it should be a great Judgment of God to drive them out of such a good Land.

And observe, Obser.
It is a great judgment of God, for God through the sins of a people, to drive
them out of a good Land. Truly some times, I suppose when you travel abroad
where there are fair prospects, you cannot but have such a meditation, Oh! how
vile are the sins of this Land, that should provoke God to cast us out of such
a good Land as this is? And most of the Titles, England another Cana^.
though not all, they may be given to our Land that was given to the Land of
Canaan; and certainly if God should proceed in his wrath to cast us out, it
would be a heavy judgment to consider of, They laid the pleasant Land desolate.
Howsoever wicked men may cry out of Gods servants that they are the cause of
the trouble of the Land, yet certainly it is the wicked and ungodly that are
false in the Worship of God, Corruptors of Gods worship the ruin of the Land.
they are wicked men that lay the Land desolate. Also we might here observe
that, To be cast out of those mercies that God by an extraordinary providence
has brought to us, is a sore and a grievous evil.

But now the main end that I name all these Epithites, Obser.
it is this: To show unto you, the Excellency of the state of the Church of
God. The Rest of Canaan was a type of the Rest that God has in his Church, and
all those that are Members of the true Church of God they have a share in it,
to rejoice in; to enjoy God in his Ordinances, it is to enjoy that which is
typified by all this.

Thou who art a Believer, Use. 1.
have a good Land, the Garden of Eden, The happiness of Believers.
a glorious Land, and that Land which is the glory of all Lands, there are
abundance of excellent privileges that do belong to the Church of God; and as
it is a jugment to be cast out of such a Land as this was, so it sets out the
great judgment to be cast out from the Church of God, or for God to deny to
give unto us the bless^^g of his Church; you know what a great affliction it
was to Moses to think that he should not come into that good Land, Use. 2.
Oh! how did he pray to God that he might come into Canaan? Certainly it is
that which we should pray for, that we might live to come into Canaan that God
is a bringing his People into: now let us not murmur as they did in the
Wilderness, and their carcasses did fall in it, but let us go on and be as
Caleb and Joshua, of another spirit, and not fear our Adversaries, but go on in
Gods way, and the Lord will bring us into the good Land; it is true, we have
deserved to be cut off in the wilderness, but certainly God has a Canaan for
his People, a Canaan yet to come for his People, the Lord has great things to
do for his Church, and there are many expressions upon which some think that
God even will make use of this Canaan yet for to be the place of his chief
Majesty and glory that shall appear in this world; but however that be, yet
the Lord has a Canaan for his people that we may confide in. It follows.

But they shall Return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.
For the returning to that we have had before. But besides that, they shall be
brought to that poverty and misery to eat unclean poluted bread, whereas before
they had abundance: Peter would eat nothing that was unclean till God warned
him, but the Assyrians would bring them unclean meat and bid them eat, they
would say, We cannot, this is against our Religion, and against our
Consciences. Your Consciences! what do we care for them, eat it or starve, so
they were forced to eat. Whence observe,

That it is a great misery to be brought under those men that will have no
care, no regard of the consciences of men.

But that which is especially aimed at here, God would take away all notes of
distinction between them and the Heathen, this was a means to keep them from
mixing with the Heathen, but now says God, All is gone, let them go (says
God) and eat unclean things, as for the Covenant with me it is wholly
abolished, I will own them no more than the very impure Heathen, they would
make Leagues with the Assyrians, well, they shall partake with them and be filthy
and unclean as he; and they defiled Gods Worship by mixing heathenish polutions
with it, now God gives them up to all Heathenish uncleanness, as they were like
the Heathens in inward uncleanness, so let them be (says God) in outward
uncleanness. There is these two Notes.

First, Obs. 1.
Those that will make Leagues with wicked men, it is just with God that
afterward they should come and be inthrall'd in all the wickedness and
abominations of those wicked men. They were indeed at a distance from them
before, but when once the peace is made, they come now to be all one with them.

But the main is this, Obs. 2.
That, when men are inwardly unclean, God does not care for their outward
cleanness. Thus many professors of Religion defiling their consciences, and
becoming like the wicked in inward sins, at length God leaves them up to
themselves that there should be no difference between them and the wicked in
their outward abominations. Have you not known some examples in this kind?

Lastly, Obs. 3.
If it be such a judgment to eat unclean things with the Gentiles, even meat to
satisfy their hunger, Certainly then it is a fearful evil for any of the
Saints to partake with ungodly men in unclean wicked worship. There might be as
much excuse for this as one could imagine, why Lord (they might say) shall we
starve? True, they might no question eat that which was unclean rather than
starve, but yet it was a great misery that they were in, that they could have
nothing to eat but that which was unclean: but now the other is, not only an
affliction, but sin, and indeed the moral of it is to show the great evil that
there is in joining with any way of false worship; to join false worship it is
a great evil, and an argument that when God leaves us to this, he disclaimes
us. Cyprian dehorts Christians from communicating with wicked Ministers, from
this place: Ne sibi plebs in hoc ^^andiat^r, and cum pro Hoseam Prophetam
comminetur and dicat censura Divina, etc. I do not speak of not joining in
Worship, if there be unclean ones there, Ministers, or People. And I am
persuaded if it be thoroughly weighed, there will no body be found to be of that
mind; for it is impossible that any Church in the world but in time there will
be some that are wicked which will be present: but this is not that that causes
many to forbear, (not the presence of wicked men) but find the uncleanness of
the Worship, some things that was done actually there, that their consciences
told them to be sin.

Secondly, Because they could not do their duty as they should, but if they can
have liberty to do their duty, and the Worship be not polluted, I think upon
serious consideration there can be no question made: although there should be
some that are unclean admitted, yet if there be in the Church any order and
government, that the unclean may be cast out, and liberty that every one may
discharge his duty, as to go and admonish, and take two or three and then tell
the Church, and so to deliver his own soul, no doubt but they may communicate.

VER. 4.
They shall not offer Wine-offerings to the Lord; neither shall they be pleasing
unto him.
THE Prophet in the Name of God proceeds to further threatening of Israel; and
this in the 4th verse is a very dreadful one: They shall not offer Wine
offerings to the Lord; Wine and Oil in sacrifice, what it signified.
neither shall they be pleasing unto him.

In their offerings there was wont to be Wine and Oil; to note cheerfulness in
Gods service: thus in Numb. 15. 5. The fourth part of an Hyn of Wine for a
drink offering shall thou prepare, and for a meat offering thou shall prepare
two deals of flowr mingled with the third part of an hyn of Oil. But now al joy
shall be taken away, there shall be nothing but sadness and sinking of spirit
under their misery, no Wine offering.

Hence note, Obs. 1.
That, those who abuse their joy to their lusts when they have it, it is just
with God it should be taken from them, that they should have none to give to
God though they would never so fain.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
This makes an affliction to be bitter and grievous indeed, That all joy and
comfort in Gods service is gone; for that is the scope, They shall offer no Wine
offerings, all their joy in the service of God shall be gone; they shall not
only have sorrow in their outward afflictions that are upon them, but every
time they come to think of any service of God their hearts shall be dejected,
all their joy in the service of God shall be taken away: there was a time when
some of you were wont to offer Wine offerings to the Lord, that is, to have
much joy and comfort in the service of God, but is not all gone? where is your
Wine offerings to the Lord? you can now perform duties, but your hearts are
heavy and dull in the performance of them, there is no sweetness, there is no
enlargement of spirit in holy duties, all the Worship of God is a burden now
unto you. Now there is no burden of affliction so great a burden as when the
duties of Gods Worship comes to be a burden. The Saints, so long as they have a
Wine offering for the Lord in holy duties, so long as their spirits in holy
duties can be free and joyful, their afflictions are not very burdensome, they
are well enough, this is more delightful to them than all the Wine in the
world, for they can say of Gods love, They love is better than Wine; so they
can say of their love to God again, That our love unto him is more comfortable
to us than any Wine in the world; Now though they be in afflictions, their
estates are gone, that they have no Wine to drink themselves, yet they have a
Wine offering to offer unto the Lord. It Is no great matter though we have not
Wine as we were wont to have at our Tables, but when we go to worship God, we
have a Wine offering for him at any time; and this makes glad the hearts of the
Saints more than the hearts of all the men in the world can be glad when their
Corn, and Wine, and Oil increases.

They shall offer no Wine offerings; neither shall they be pleasing unto him;
they shall not be sweet to him, whatsoever their offerings be. Now that they
offer to the Lord, God will take no delight in them, they will be but sour
things unto the palate of God, the offerings of the Saints in Gods way they do
cheer the very heart of God; And hence is the reason of that phrase that we
have, Judge. 9. 13 enlightened*
That Wine does cheer the heart of God and man, it cheered Gods heart to have
offerings offered in a holy manner to him, the greatest joy that God has in
the world is in the offerings of the Saints, which should be the greatest
encouragement to them; men by their Wine and good Cheer may make themselves
merry, may make their friends merry, but by their holy offerings they do cheer
the heart of God, they are as sweetmeats to God, all the Wine and delightful
things in the world they are as sweet (I say) to God, as all the Wine and
delightful things in the world are for men. Thou have a cup of Wine for thy
friend to cheer him, but have thou a cup of Wine for God to cheer his heart?
that is a gracious holy offering unto God: Surely that which is most sweet to
the Soul of God should be most sweet to our souls: Duties of Religion, a Saints
recreation.
You would wonder to hear a man say that he takes as much delight, and he can
recreate himself as much in reading, in praying, in hearing Sermons, in holy
conference as you can do in all your good cheer, in playing and drinking of
Wine in bowls; you think that men are mad to say, that they have as much
pleasure in those things, as playing at Cards, and merriment, and music, and
good cheer: you call upon them to play at Cards with you, or be merry, you say
to them, why should you be dumpish and never be merry? they tell you again,
That they can be as merry and as cheerful in hearing the Word, and praying, and
reading, as you in all your playing, and all that that you account delightful.
You say to them, That they have no recreation. They tell you, That those things
that are your burdens, are their recreation; you think it strange. Why should
you wonder? Surely that that sweetens and joys the heart of God, that must
needs be the rejoicing of the hearts of those that have the Spirit of God in
them; you have joy and mirth in such and such things; these are sweet to you,
yea, but do these things rejoice God, are they sweet to God?

But now, this is the threatening here, They shall not be sweet now to him:
nothing that is tendered to God from them shall be pleasing to him; no says
God, now I will have other ways to glorify my self in upon you, not by your
offerings, I Will rather glorify my self in your miseries, and they shall be
sweet and delightful to me. If an Hypocri^e has never so great enlargements in
duties, these would not be pleasing to God, Gods palate is more delicate than
to taste such sour and sapless things, than those are that comes from them.
Delicatares est spiritm sanctus. Tert.
Says Tertullian, The Spirit of God is a most delicate thing, it has a
delicate palate, and such swill that has such mixtures of filth as your
services have, how can they be sweet to the delicate palate of the Spirit of
God? you are Hypocrites, your lives are naught and filthy and unclean,
therefore none of your offerings can be sweet, they are but swill unto that
palate of mine.

It follows.

Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners.
The Hebrew may be taken substantively, or adjectively, as thus: For the bread
of mourning, or the bread of mourners, either of both two may be taken
according to the original, Now by the bread of mourners is here meant unclean
bread.

for so it is interpreted afterward, It shall be unclean.

But why the bread of mourners unclean? This Text has reference to what you
read in Numb. 19. 11. and 14. Number 19. 11. 14.
verses, you may read there, that the dead body of a man it did defile
whatsoever touched it, yea, whatsoever came near it, and all those that were at
Funerals that did mourn for the dead, that came to the place where the dead
body was, to mourn with the friends for the dead, they became unclean by the
dead body: The dead carcass of a beast did not so much defile, as the carcass of
a dead man.
And that is observable, that the dead body of a beast did not make men so
unclean (by legal uncleanness) as the dead body of a man did. The dead body of
a beast made one unclean but only till the evening, in Numb. 11. 31. but the
dead body of a man made a man unclean seven days. So you shall find in the
former chap. of Numbers, that they must be seven days before they could be
cleansed; Numb. 11. 31.
and this was to note: That there were more remarkable expressions of the anger
of God upon the sin of man in the dead body of a man, What this signified.
than in the dead body of a beast; Why a dead body defiled.
one made unclean but till evening, and the other seven days. But the reason
why there was this uncleanness from the dead body, was:



Secondly, Funeral mournings*
It was to show, how little pleasing to God Funeral mournings are, for they
were made unclean by them: they were made unclean by their Funeral mournings,
for this bread of mourners is the bread that they eat in their Funerals. The
Gentiles did mourn for their dead in an inordinate manner, exceedingly; and God
would have a difference between his peoples mourning for the dead, and their
mourning, Why, if imo^derate; not pleasing to God*
because that he would keep up his people faith, and the hope of resurection
from the dead, whereas had they had liberty to mourn so excessively as the
Heathens did, by this means the very faith and hope of resurrection from the
dead might in time even almost have been extinguished, therefore God would have
them take heed of that, and therefore he did so ordain in the Ceremonial Law,
Why they were to be so long unclean that mourned for the dead.
that all the mourners for the dead they should be unclean for so long a time.
As for any that does give liberty in their natural affections, and does not
hold the reins of them in their mourning for the dead, I would apply to them
that Scripture, in Jer. 31. 15, 16. Thus says the Lord, A voice was heard in
Ramah, Lamentation, and bitter weeping, RACHEL weeping for her CHILDREN,
refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not. But now, Thus
says the Lord, Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, thy
work shall be rewarded, and thy children shall come back again. So it followed
afterward. Do not weep as others, let us not mourn as others that have no
hope, remember that the mourners for the dead in the Law they were to be
unclean for seven days.

Thirdly, it was to note this, That God would have cheerfulness in his service,
and therefore the bread of mourners is accounted polluted. Levit. 10. 19.
Levit. 10. 19. we read of Aaron when there was such an occasion of mourning
as ever was (almost for a man, for the death of his children that were so
eminent in office, and were destroyed so with such a visible hand of God (fire
from Heaven) when Moses was angry that the Priests had not eat of the sin
offering, says Aaron, If I had eaten of the sin offering to day, enlightened*
should it have been accepted? It would have been but as the bread of mourners.
I that have bin struck this day, and am in such a dreadful condition, Would God
have regarded the sin offering? God required joy in his services in Deuteronomy. 1^.
7. 18. verses, and hence that profession was required in Deuteronomy. 26. 13, 14.
verses, Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 12. 7. 18.
I have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house, Chap. 26. 13, 14.
and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the Stranger, to the
Fatherless, and to the Widow, according to all the Commandments which thou
have commanded me, illustrated.
I have not transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them. And
then in the 14. verse. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning etc.

They were to profess this to God, That they had not eaten thereof in their
mourning; this was to show, that sacrifices offered with a sinking heart in
sorrow, is not pleasing to God, Even sorrow for sin must not bumpish,
God loves a cheerful giver. We must not pine away in our iniquities,
sullenness and dumpishness even in sorrow for sin it sowres our spirits and
services, and makes them unacceptable to God; (I say) a sullen, dumpishness of
spirit, though it be in sorrow for sin, it sowres our spirits and makes our
services unacceptable to God. There is a groaning and a sighing one to another*
or rather, against one another: that is condemned in Scripture in Jam. 5. 9.
Iam. 5. 9. (...).
the words in your books are thus, Grudge nor one against another, but in the
Original, Sigh not, or groan not one against another; you shall have many that
in company with others have a pensive dumpish spirit, sighing and groaning, A
cheerful spirit in company.
and making their society to be burdensome to others. Says the holy Ghost, do
not sigh and groan one unto another, there is a sullen dumpish sighing of
spirit and dejection of soul that is as unpleasing to God as it is unto men, it
polutes the heart, and pollutes duty.

But (you will say) Is all mourning forbidden? that here the holy Ghost should
say, Their offerings should be as the bread of Mourners. Christ says, blessed
are the Mourners, and the Sacrifice of God is a contrite heart.

It Is true, an evangelical sorrow is accepted, but that has sweetness in it,
it is not bitter, that is not a dejected spirit, it is not a mourning that causes
dejection or sullenness, or straightness of spirit, but that mourning does
enlarge the heart and makes it active for God; Ezra. 9. 5.
hence in Ezra, 9. 5. although we read before that Ezra was astonished at the
sin of the people, yet says he, at the 5. verse, I arose from my heaviness at
the evening sacrifice, when the time came that I should sacrifice unto God my
heaviness did not hinder me in holy duties. But how many are there that sink
down in their heaviness, and when God calls upon them for any duty, they cannot
arise, they are so over-burdened with heavy spirits? There they sink down in a
sullen way, much pride of times in dejection. as in Satan*
and shall God accept of such a service as this is? You may please your selves
in it and think it is humiliation, but there may be much pride in dejection;
there is none so proud a spirit as the Devil is, and yet no spirit so dejected
as the Devil is. simile*
Lead we know it melts soonest, but it consumes in the melting: and many times
there may be such a spirit that may be ready to sorrow upon any occasion, and
to melt, but it is such a melting as consumes the strength of it that it is
unfit for any service that God calls for, now such services as you in such a
mourning way tender up to God are not accepted of him, Remember this text,
Their offering shall be as the bread of mourning.

Gualter has a Note from this: God would not accept of the offering of
Mourners, they were unclean, yet (says he) there are many that seek to get
their greatest gain from Funeral mournings, and fall of enveighing against them
that get gain that way; as their Priests and Officers that use to tend upon
Funerals for gain, he calls them Vultur^ and Crows that do flock to dead
bodies, and Sepulchers Dogs, (those are his words) that seek to get advantage
by Funerals. The gain of funer^ls formerly, made some rejoice, when others
mourned.
And we know heretofore what abundance of advantage there was gotten by
Funerals, scarce could you bury a child under three or four pounds, such kind
of fees there were, and made them even rejoice when others did mourn, and
getting a great part of of their livelihood from the bread of Mourners.

And Theophylact has another Note from this place, The bread of Mourners.
Theophylact. in loc.
That is, those things offered to God gotten by oppression, as thus; suppose a
man or woman gets an estate, and gets it in an oppressing way, it may be they
are at home and merry, but it may be the poor children or widow is mourning
for those morsels that thou art rejoicing in, but it is the first Note that is
the most according to the mind of the holy Ghost, the mourning that has
respect to the funerals, and so especially at the dejection of spirit in holy
duties. It follows,

The bread for their soul shall not come into the House of the Lord. Expos. 1.

The bread for their soul.] That is; When they are seeking God even for their
very lives. By Bread, is to be understood, their oblations more generally, Mal.
1. 7.
not only Bread, but their Oblations, As Malac. 1. 7. Ye offer polluted bread
upon mine Altar: it is taken generally for all kind of offerings upon Gods
Altar. So, The bread for their souls, that is, those offerings that they did
offer for their very lives.

Now from thence the Note is this: Observe.
That it is a sad thing when a creature would seek to God for his very life, yet
then God rejects him and his offering too. Before these people they did reject
the voice of the Lord at the Temple, and they kept others from going to the
House of the Lord, they thought sacrifices elsewhere would serve the turn as
well; but now they shall be far enough from bringing any sactifices to the
House of the Lord though they should desire to do it for their very souls. Thus
many who in the time of their prosperity do neglect the Worship of God and
slight it, and think there is no great matter in it, Applicat.
but afterward when they see their very lives, their souls lie at the mercy of
God, then they would fain seek God for their lives, they see they are undone if
God be not merciful to them, yet then God rejects them, their offerings then
for their souls shall not come into the House of the Lord, that is; will not be
accepted of God. When a man is crying for an Alms, but for a piece of bread, to
be rejected is something; but when a man is crying for his soul, then to be
rejected, and by God himself, this is more grievous.

Secondly, The bread for their soul, that is, The bread they have to maintain
their lives withal, if they would offer that to the Lord, it should not come
into the house of the Lord to be accepted; Soul put for Life.
for by bread for their souls, may be meant, the bread that they have to
maintain their lives, for so we find the Scripture calls the soul, Mat. 6. 24.
(...).
the life of a man, in Mat. 6. 24. Is not the life more worth than meat? the
words in the original are, Is not the Soul of man? It is here the bread for the
soul, that is, the very bread that they have to maintain their lives, their
necessary bread that they have to live on; although they should be willing to
offer that to the Lord, it shall not come unto him. Now this is as if the
Prophet should say to them, Expos. 2.
Now you cannot be brought to them to offer your superfluity to God, but your
condition shall be such as if you would offer the necessary bread you have to
preserve your lives, if you would offer that to God, God will not accept of it:
As if a man were so poor that he were ready to starve, and yet for all that
such a man would say, Well, though I starve, yet I will offer this I have to live
on, and I would offer this to God rather than have it my self, now you would
think this should be an argument of a great deal of devotion. But the case
shall be now, that though you would seek God with such earnestness, yet the
heart of God shall be so hardened against you as they will not be accepted.

Those who in time of prosperity are loath to deny their ease, Obser.
and loath to lay out any thing of their superfluity for God, but time may come
that though they should be willing to bite off their very nails, and pluck out
their eyes, and tear their very flesh in indignation for their sin in respect
unto God any way, yet this God shall not vouchsafe to have regard unto. Use.
Therefore this learn by it, to seek God while he may be found, and not to
stand upon your own terms with God in the day of your prosperity, and to say, I
cannot spare this and that for him; but if we deny God now what is his due,
though we would give to him hereafter that that our lives lay upon, yet it
shall not be accepted.

3. Bread for their souls: Expos. 3.
that is, they shall have no more bread than will serve for their very life
from hand to mouth, they shall have nothing to bring to the House of the Lord,
they shall be so put to it, when they are in captivity, they shall be kept so
strictly, as to have nothing but bread and water, nothing but from hand to
mouth; they shall be far enough from having any thing to offer to the Lord, to
be accepted of him; if they should think of bringing any thing to the House of
the Lord, alas! what have they? nothing but a little bread for their soul.

From whence the Note is this, Obser.
To have no estate to offer to God in his service, in the ways of his public
worship is a great affliction. It follows.

VER. 5.
What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the Lord?
NOW they shall remember their solemn days, their feasts, and see themselves
cut off from any further enjoying of them, Explic. 1*
it must needs be a great sadning unto their spirits to think what days once
they had, Oh what solemn times and feasts that they did keep to God; for any to
sit down in times of affliction and say, I remember what days of joy in the
service of God I once had, but now they are gone, Oh! the days that I was wont
to have, how sweet were they? but all is now past and we must sit down in
sorrow and affliction. There was a time (says God by the Prophet) that you
would not suffer any to go up to the feast, but now you shall be far enough
from Jerusalem or any other place of Worship, and the very remembrance of those
solemn days shall be grievous to you, Oh! what will you do in those solemn
days? Those solemn days were days of joy, in Numb. 10. 10. Thus I think some
carry it, they make those feasts to be the feasts that they should have gone up
to Jerusalem in; Explic. 2.
but I take not this to be the scope of the holy Ghost here, but rather thus;
by the solemn Days and Feasts of the Lord is here meant, the solemn day of
Gods wrath and vengeance upon them; now for the making out of that I shall show
first, that in Scripture the day of Gods wrath is called the solemn day, and
the day of Gods feast is the day of his wrath, a day wherein God feasts.

First, The solemn day it is the day of Gods wrath, in Lament. 2. 22. Thou have
called as in a solemn day, Lam. 2. 22*
my terrors round about, so that in the day of the Lords Anger none escaped. So
that the solemn day is the day of the Lords anger there.

And Secondly, The day of Gods Feast, that time when God does execute his wrath
upon wicked men is the day of a feast to God. Revel. 12. 17, 18.
In Revel. 19. 17, 18. verses, (besides other texts) An Angel cried with a loud
voice to all the fowls that fly in the Heavens, Come, and gather your selves
together to the supper of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh of Kings,
and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of Mighty men, and the flesh of
Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men both free and
bond, both small and great: it is the day of the Lords feast. Now it is a solemn
day, Why so called.
a day of the execution of Gods wrath, because now God executes wrath publicly
and brings much wrath together. Thou have called as in a solemn day my terrors
round about. You know that in the day of a petty Sessions there may be some
justice done, but more privately: But in a day of solemn Assizes, when there is
a full Goal delivery, then judgment is done publicly; so God executes justice
sometimes upon men particularly, but God has his solemn day to execute his
judgments publicly before all, and then the Lord feasts.

The day of execution of Gods wrath upon wicked men is a day of feast, Why a
day^ of Feast to^ God.
upon this ground.

First, Because the day of their feasts were days of slaying sacrifices, so
they should now be slain, and God would for this great feast of his, Isa. 34. 6.
In Isa. 34. 6. The Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in
the Land of Idumea. And in Zeph. 1. 7. Zeph. 1. 7.
The day of the Lord is at hand, the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has
bid his guests. And then it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords
sacrifice, that I will punish the Princes, and the Kings Children etc. He has
bid his guests; so here is the feast of God, and the slaughter of great men are
here, the dishes as it were of sacrifice that God would have at this his feast,
Soldiers Gods Priests.
the Executioners of Gods wrath are now his Priests to kill his sacrifices.
Soldiers and Executioners they are turned the Priests of God for to kill his
sacrifice for this his feast. Ier. 6. 4.
Hence in Jer. 6. 4. Prepare ye War against her, (...)*
it is in the Original, Sanctify the War; and in another Scripture, those that
were the executioners of Gods wrath, were called Gods Sanctified ones.

And then further, Sanctificate super ea^ bellum.
A day of Feasting is, a day of Rejoicing; this day of the execution of Gods
wrath upon sinners, especially great sinners that do escape men's hands, it is a
day of Rejoicing to God, as in a day of Feast: And this word that is translated
Feast, (...)*
it signifies Dancing, it is a day wherein the Lords heart does as it were leap
within him because of joy, Gods wrath why called Wine.
God rejoices in the execution of his righteous judgments upon them; therefore
Gods wrath in Scripture is called Wine, They shall drink of the Wine of his
wrath: Ps. 75. 8.
the Lord at length when sinners continue impenitent is as much delighted in
the execution of his Justice, Rev. 14. 10*
as men can be in drinking of Wine. Explic.
In Deuteronomy. 28. 63. As the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, Deuteronomy. 28. 63.
so the Lord will rejoice over you for evil. And in Ezekiel. 5. 13. Thus shall
mine anger be accomplished, Ezekiel. 5. 13.
and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted. (It Is a
very strange expression.) Oh! let us, my Brethren, take heed how we rejoice in
sin, God may rejoice in the execution of his Judgments upon us due to our sin.
Men have their days in joy and mirth in sin; and God has his days of joy and
mirth in the execution of his wrath; Oh! how sad is the condition of a creature
when the infinite merciful God shall rejoice in his ruin! Surely then, if God
does so rejoice in the exceution of his wrath upon wicked men, then the Saints
also may rejoice; the Saints rejoice in Gods vengeance.
in Psalm. 58. 10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked: Taken from the custom of those
Countries, that were wont after their travels to wash their feet with cold
water, Ps. 58. 10 illustrated*
and that did refesh them: so the blood of the wicked should be refreshment to
the righteous. Now this is not an insulting joy over them, Yet not an insulting
joy.
but rejoicing in the honor that God has, and in the good that does come to
the Church by the execution of such men, both unto God and to his people. Ps.
58. 11*
So that it follows in Psalm. 58. 11. Verily there is a reward for the
righteous; verily there is a God that Judges in the earth. but joined with
pity.
The Saints may look upon wicked men when they see them executed and pity them
as men; but they may rejoice in this, because they see such a spectacle before
them as makes this Scripture to be good, Verily there a reward for the
righteous; verily there is a God that judges in the earth. And in Psalm. 52. 6.
The Righteous shall see, And mixed with fear.
and fear, and laugh: Mark, though he may rejoice, Psa. 52. 6.
yet he must have fear mixed with it, he shall see, and fear, and laugh. And
note, that Scripture is spoken of a great Courtier, of Doeg, one that was a
most desperate enemy to Gods people, one that watched all the ways he could to
do mischief, and especially to do mischief to David, and he was the man that
came and stirred up the King against David, this 52. Psalm, is made concerning
this Doeg, and a Prophecy of his destruction, says the Spirit of God, The
Righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh: Note.
If a man can keep his heart spiritiual, sanctifying Gods Name in the beholding
such an object, those that are eminent wicked men brought to execution, he may
Lawfully according to the mind of God, feast his eyes in the beholding of it,
such a day is called the Feast of the Lord. And the Lord does not use to feast
himself, but he calls his Saints to feast with him; Prove. 11. 10.
in Prove. 11. 10. When it goes well with the righteous, the City rejoices,
and when the wicked perish there is shouting. And this is according to Gods
mind it should be so. And therefore Christians above all men should be far from
a proud insulting even over these men, but yet when God lays an* object before
them wherein they may see the answer of so many prayers, and the fruit of the
cries of so many thousands that were oppressed, yea, of so many thousand
conscience* oppressed ones, that have cried against such a one, if at the
stroke of God, they with hearts lift up to him shall give a shout that shall
come up to the Heavens, Judge. 5. ult.
this pleases God, and the holy Angels, and it is music fit for the day of the
feast of the Lord; thus the Saints may do in the day of the feasts of the Lord.

Yea, Expos. [You]*
but says the holy Ghost here by the Prophet, But what will you do? the Saints
may do thus when God makes this his feast in the execution of such eminent
wicked men, he calls you to it, to rejoice and bless his Name, he bids you look
here and see, is it not good waiting upon me? the Saints may do so and bless
God, But what will YOU do in the day of the feast of the Lord? What will wicked
men do in that day? what will become of all your jolity? what will become of
all your stoutness, and wilfulness, of all your pride, of all your scorning, of
all your vain hopes, when this solemn day comes, and when the feast of the Lord
comes? Isa. 10. 3.
In Isa. 10. 3. we have a Scripture parallel to this, What will you do in the
day of visitation? what will you do, and to whom will you fly for help, and
where will you leave your glory? Can you tell what in the world to do? You can
tell what to do now, you have your wills, and pride it, and stout it out now,
but what will you do in the day of visitation, when Gods solemn day and this
feast comes? Oh! what can they do but as the great and mighty men, Revelations
6. they cry to the hills to fall upon them, and to the mountains to cover them,
for the great day of the Lambs wrath is come. Those that are the most bold and
presumptuous in their sins, when this day of the Lord comes they shall be in
the most miserable perplexity not knowing what to do, The perplexity of wicked
men in the Lords day.
they know not how to bear that which is upon them, nor how to avoid it, nor
what course to take, what can you do in such a day? For,

First, All your comforts they are gone, all such things

Secondly, Now God himself fights against you, in Isa. 13. 6. Howl ye, Isa. 13.
6.
for the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come as a destruction from the
Almighty. But it may be you look only upon such and such men that are the
Instruments. No, but it is a destruction from the Almighty, illustrated.
and therefore what can you do?

Thirdly, Conscience in that day that will terrify

Fourthly, You shall not know whither to go for help:

What then? you cannot go to God, then the very

Further, For these miseries they are but the beginning what will ye do in the
day of the Lord? Howsoever a man may resolve to set a good face upon a thing;
Oh! but my Brethren, Some p^t a good face on it even at death, whose souls yet
are full of terror.
though you cannot see daunting in a countenance, yet did you but see, the
black bosom, and the woeful guilty spirit that there is by sin within, you would
know that they could not in the world tell what do do in the day of the Lord.

It Is strange what a man may do even before death, in the presence of men,
although his own conscience tells him quite otherwise, and though men are ready
to be taken with dying men's expressions, yet many times there is much deceit
in them.

Why you will say? What a man does profess when he is ready to die, certainly
it must needs be a truth.

There is a notable story concerning this that Bishop Latimer has, in one of
his Sermons, he tells of the desperate stoutness of a certain man's heart even
when he was to die: as he was ^iding he comes to a place where the execution of
a man was to be, [See King James' Declaration upon the execution of Sir W.
Raleigh.
he turns aside, and when the people saw him they made way, and he comes to
speak with the man, and both he and all that were about him could not get out
of him to give glory to God for the guiltiness of the fact for which he was to
be executed, but stood out in it, that he was not guilty; and when they could
get nothing out of him they turned the ladder, A notable story of B. Latimers*
and the rope being cut and he down, they thought the life had been gone from
him, but at length they saw a little motion in him, and by rubbing and cha^ing
of him they got life, so as he was able to speak, and then he confessed all; that
he was guilty of those very things that he had took upon his death that he was
not. Thus it is possible for men in the stoutness of their hearts even at the
last rather to venture their souls upon it; and well may they that ventured
their souls so much before upon other things, think that they may make bold
with God at such a time as this is. But howsoever there is much dejection of
spirit, and they know not in the world what to do. Well, it is happy for us to
consider what we do, and to lay to heart what we have done, that so in such a
day of the Lord as this, we may know what to do; the Servants of God who have
walked conscionably before him, they know what to do in the day of public
calamity.

`For first', They can bless God that ever they knew him, that ever they knew
his ways, that ever he put it into their hearts to fear his name.

Secondly, They know what to do in a day of calamity, they can exercise their
faith upon that Word in which the Lord has caused them to trust, they can make
it to be the support of their souls, and the joy of their hearts, even in such
a day.

Thirdly, They know what to do, they can sanctify God Name in his righteous
judgments, they can see mercy and the love of a Father in the sorest and
heaviest afflictions that do befall them.

Fourthly, They know what to do; they can ease their souls by pouring them
forth into the bosom of a gracious and reconciled Father.

Fifthly, They know what to do; they can see beyond all these present evils,
they can see Immortality and Glory, they can see that on the other side a
little beyond these troubles and afflictions, Job, 13. 15 and Chap. 19. 25.
there is an everlasting joy and day of peace coming to them. A Job can tell
what to do, he can profess that though God kill him he would trust in him. A
David can tell what to do, Psalm. 119.
In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy consolations
refresh my soul. A Habacuk can tell what to do, Hab. 3. 17*
Although the fig tree should not blossom, nor fruit be in the vines, the labor
of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flocks shall
be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no heard in the stalls: yet will I
rejoice in the Lord; yet will I joy in the God of my salvation: Thus you see
the Saints they know what to do in such a day; and this is the excellency of
grace, that it can never be put so to it, in any strait, but it can tell what to
do; as David said to Achish in 2 Samuel 28. 2. Surely thou shall know what thy
servant can do. So the Saints in time of common distresses they should set
their graces so on work that all may see what their faith, and humility, and
patience can do, that they may be able to say, well, you shall see now what the
Servant of the Lord can do: If one should say to one that has made profession
of Godliness, A quest. to a Professor*
You spoke much of the excellency of grace, but what can you do with it? The
answer that such a one may well give, The Answ.
is this: When you cannot tell what to do in the world nor which way to turn
your selves, yet through Gods mercy I can tell what to do. Grace will be able
to carry a man through fire and water, that faith of mine, and the grace that I
have gotten by the Word, that you can scorn at, it is that does through Gods
mercy enable my soul to rejoice, yea, to triumph in Tribulations, Can you do
that? You can rejoice now when you are in a Tavern, but in the day of
Tribulation, when a dismal day shall come to the world, what will you do then?
I thank God I have that that can rejoice my heart in such a day as this is; and
that that I have gotten by the Word, and by prayer, and by the Ordinances, can
enable me to do that that you cannot do; that is something, that when a man in
times of Tribulation can carry himself above all, so that men or devils are not
able to put him in such a case as he cannot tell what to do. It follows.

VER. 6.
For lo, they are gone, because of destruction.
But do you say to us, What will we do in such a day? Why, we know well enough
what to do, we have a way to help us; if all your threatenings should befall us,
yet we can have help: why, it is not like that all this misery and disolation
that you prophecy of, it is not like that it will come suddenly; then surely we
know what to do, we will get to Egypt, that is not far off; and if we cannot
live here in our own Country, we will go to Memphis, that is a brave City and
there we may live well enough; Many of us are Merchants, and Memphis is as
great a place for Mercandize as where we live, and we will get thither.

Thus carnal hearts have always some shifting thoughts and some plots in their
heads thinking of ways to provide for themselves, Obs. 1.
and indeed it is this that takes off the hearts of men from humbling themselves
before the Lord and making their peace with him, This hardens them*
because they think they may shift off Gods strokes thus and thus, therefore
they do not fall down with trembling hearts before the Lord, and cry unto him,
Lord, what will thou have us to do? but they know what to do themselves; and
were it not for this, that their hearts were thus taken off by shifts, Oh! what
humiliation would there be then before the Lord, what subjecting to him, Isa.
57. 10*
what seeking of him? Isa. 57. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy
way; yet saidest thou not, There is no hope: thou have found the life of thine
hand, therefore thou wast not grieved. Thou thoughtest thou could tell what
to do, therefore thou were not grieved. When God does intend mercy to men, he
takes them off from their vain hopes, from all their shifting reasonings, and
then mercy is at hand. When the hearts of men are brought to this, to cry, Men
and Brethren, what shall we do? and as Jehoshaphat, We know not what to do: but
our eyes are toward thee: I say, when men's hearts are taken off from all their
shifts, and they come to this pass; As for any thing in our selves we know not
what to do, but only our eyes are toward thee; then is mercy at hand, and
never till then. And therefore all the time that you are reasoning thus in your
own imaginations, all that while you are far from mercy.

For lo, they are gone to Egypt, because of destruction.
The Prophet speaks here of a thing as if it were done already. Although they
were in Samaria, and in the Cities of Israel, yet says the Prophet, Lo, they
are gone to Egypt: the wrath of God was too hot for them in their own Country,
and away they are gone and got to Egypt for a refuge.

Carnal hearts in straits will rather make any thing to be their refuge than
God. Obs. 2.
And my brethren, just these for all the world have been (I fear) and it may be
yet are the thoughts of many among us; Why, (think they) Ministers of God they
threaten Judgments, Applied to England.
that God has a controversy against us, and we see now some tokens of Gods
wrath upon us; Well, let the worst come that can, we hope to shift some way or
other, we may get into Holland, or Germany, or France, or New England, if the
worst come that can, I hope we may have time enough to get one way or other to
make shift to live; We should think of helping our own Nation, rather than of
flying.
and these back-doors that their eyes are upon, have made them less solicitous
about, and less helpful in the great things that God calls all with a loud
voice to join together with all their strength, that they may deliver their own
Land from that heavy wrath that hangs over you. Well, notwithstanding men's
thoughts are for shifting, it will prove that all will be vain. Says God, You
think to shift to this place and the other, you may be disappointed, for Egypt
shall gather you, and Memphis shall bury you, my wrath and sore displeasure
shall pursue you thither. It Is a vain thing for men to seek to fly from the
presence of God: When a man may fly.
But certainly in some cases a man may fly from danger: As in regard of men's
Relations and Stations, they see that their work is done in one place, and God
by providence opens them a door to another, though not out of distrust, but if
when God calls for further work here and there is no door opened by providence,
but what is broken open by themselves out of a distrust and slavish fear only to
provide for the flesh, I say, such may expect wrath to pursue them wheresoever
they go, their safest places may prove to be their graves, Egypt shall gather
them, (that is taken from the gathering of dead bodies) Memphis shall bury
them: Memphis.
Memphis was a principal city in Egypt that now is known by the name of Grand
Caer, Grand-Caer.
your Merchants and Mariners they know that City that here the holy Ghost
speaks of by that name; and then it was called Memphis upon the name as some
think of one of the King of Egypts Daughters. The Pyramides there.
A City very famous in Egypt for the Pyramides and the Kings Sepulchers that
were there, and the City that stood very commodious for trafick because it
stood upon the River Nilus and there was multitudes of streets, The number of
the fleets.
I am loath to name you the number for indeed it is incredible, only this thing
is remarkable that generally all the streets had at each end of them two gates
so that they might be locked up as a Tower; and it may be the holy Ghost may
allude the rather to that, in saying, Memphis shall bury you, because every
place was shut up, and it is the same City that you read of in the 19. of Isaih.

Now say they, We will go to Memphis a brave place for trafick, and a very
commodious City, a very safe City that has all the streets like so many Towers
and we will go and help our selves there. Expos.
Yea, but Memphis shall bury you says God.

From thence the Note is, Obs. 3.
That it is a great affliction to be forced to leave ones own Country, and never
to return again, but to lay our bones in a strange Land. The Lord has sent
many of his servants into other Countries to live among strangers, some there
are that have gone among strangers, yet through Gods mercy they have not so
gone but God has given them liberty to return again, See Vindication in
Answer to Mr* Edwards.
and though their going has been (as you know) much aspersed of late, yet when
more weighty work may give leave I make no question but you will be fully
satisfied so as you shall acknowledge a special hand of God even in their going.
But here specially the Jews did account it a great misery to die out of their
own Land. Buxtorf.
Buxtorfious in his book called the Jewish Synagogue, Synagoga Iudaica.
relates such a Tradition that the Jews have, They do believe that the
Resurrection at the great day shall be at Jerusalem of the Jews, that
wheresoever any of the Jews have lived and died, A Jewish tradition.
yet they shall rise up at Jerusalem, therefore when many of them that lived a
great way off did begin to grow old they would leave their station and go as
near to Jerusalem as they could: per meatus terrae.
for this is their Tradition, that their bodies shall come through passages of
the earth all along to Jerusalem, and that they may prevent the trouble of
coming so far under the ground, therefore they remove their dwelling to dwell
near Jerusalem. And this is the vanity of spirit that they are left unto. But
though that be a vanity, yet certainly it is an affliction to any to be out
of their own Country, and there to live and die; but if it be a great evil to
fly from ones own Country for fear of destruction, and to have the place they
fly (...) be made as their grave, what a great evil is it then for men meerlie
out of love for advantage to leave places where before they did or might enjoy
communion with the Saints, to leave the Ordinances of God, to go into other
places among Papists, and Heathe^s where they cannot have the freedom of Gods
Worship? Now such as these are should find these places to be labyrinths of
miserable perplexity to them, it is just with God it should be so, seeing they
out of love to gain would thus venture themselves, and therefore let men take
heed of this how they go upon any private respects from places were Gods
Worship may be had to places where they cannot enjoy it. It follows.

The pleasant places for their Silver, Nettles shall possess them; Thorns
shall be in their Tabernacles.
The word that is translated pleasant places for Silver, (...) Desiderin
argenti.
it is, the desire of their silver.

First, It may have reference to this, to their furniture of silver, that
nettles shall grow where they wear their fine silver things, Expos. 1.
their fine Cupbords of plate, and household stuff that they did take so much
delight in, as in Lament. 1. 7. Jerusalem remembered in the days of her
affliction, and of her miseries, Lam. 1. 7.
all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old. Mark but these two
things from this text, Jerusalem in the days of her affliction and misery. My
Brethren, there may be days of affliction, and yet no days of misery, the
Saints may meet with days of afflictions, but not of misery; the wicked when
they meet with days of affliction, they meet with days of misery; but the
thing I note that text for is this, They shall remember all the pleasant things
that they had. Oh! they shall think then, what fine Cupbords of plate they were
wont to have, and all their fine things; so here, here is a threatening that
there should nettles grow in the very place where their fine household stuff
stood, such a place of the house where such a fine Cupbord of plate was, all
shall be so demolished that perhaps Nettles and Thorns shall grow there.

And then secondly, The places where they hid their Silver, as you know in
times of War men will hide their Silver, and they think they may come back
again and have them, but says God, you shall go far enough from them, and I
make no question but another Generation may find treasures of silver in the
Countries, in the midst of Nettle bushes and Thorn bushes.

Thirdly, It is their delightful houses adorned with silver, that were so
glorious to their eyes, al now is gone says God, (...)
and Nettles and Thorns shall grow up, they shall Inherit, so the word is; you
hope to leave these brave houses to your children to inherit, but now says God
I have other Heirs for your houses than your children, I have Thorns and
Nettles to inherit them, for so the word is in the Hebrew, They shall inherit.
It Is a lamentable spectacle to see places where fair buildings have been that
now Nettles and Thorns should grow, as it is like to be if these Wars hold in
diverse places of this Kingdom, that was the complaint heretofore of Troy, Seges
est, ubi Troja fuit.
There was Corn grew where once Troy was, it was made a plowed field, but to
have Nettles grow it is worse, for where the plow goes there are inhabitants,
but where Nettles and Thorns are that is a desolate wilderness. Travelers tell
us, that in many places of Germany, Germany.
when they go by where brave buildings were, there is nothing now but bushes and
nettles; the Lord deliver us from such a heavy stroke as this is, Isa. 32. 1^*
this is threatened in Isa. 32. 13. Upon the Land of my people shall come up
bry^rs and thorns, yea upon all the houses of joy in the joyous City. Would it
not be a sad spectacle to see such a City as this to have the buildings
overthrown and to have Nettles and thorns in your fairest streets come up?
London.
yet sin is such a ruinous thing as this. And then in Isa. 34. 13. Thorns shall
come up in her Palaces, Nettles and Brambles in the Fortresses thereof, Isa.
34. 13
and it shall be a habitation for Dragons, and a Court for Owls; the Owls they
shall keep Court there. In our Courts we know what abundance of sin was there,
now the Owls shall keep Court there instead of these Courtiers that lived so
bravely there formerly. Oh my Brethren! sin is a leprosy that infects the
doors of our houses: there is a notable story in 2 King. 25. 9. it said of
Nebuchadnezzar, 2 King. 25. 9.
That he burnt the House of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the houses
of Jerusalem, and every great man's house burnt be with fire. There is a great
deal of sin committed in great men's houses, and at this day how have the great
men of the Land almost in all places showed a spirit of Malignity against the
work of Reformation, Oh how just with God is it that the houses of these great
men should s^ffer; this that here is threatened in my text, and many of them
have been spoiled already, and if God give them not hearts speedily to see the
evil of their ways it is very probable that within a few years this text of
mine may be fulfilled upon them,

They shall possess them.
It may be they think though the War did keep us from our houses a while, nay
though they should be broken down, yet our Lands will hold, they cannot take
away them. Nay says God, flatter not your selves with thinking to come to it
again, for you shall never come to them, for Nettles and Thorns shall possess
it. And thus we have done with the sixth Verse, but a very little of the
seventh Verse. And so,

VER. 7.
The days of Visitation are come, the days of Recompense are come. And of
Recompense.
GOD has his set time for the Execution of Judgment. Obs. 1.


What good is it to a Malefactor that he is let alone a while in the Prison,
Admonition
when he knows that at such a day of the Month must be the day of his Execution?

The day of Visitation and Recompense, Obs. 2.
i.e. of Enquiry for all thy evil.

Your Judgments they are none other but, Recompenses; you may have vain pleas
and reasons to justify your selves, but when God comes to visit you he will
deal with you in away of Recompense proportionable to your ways; If you would
fall down and acknowledge your sins and your need of Mercy, then it may be you
may find Mercy; but if you will stand to justify your selves, then expect that
God when he comes, will come in a way of Recompense.

And now my Brethren, Oh! what a desperate venture is this, that men will
venture to deal with God in a way of Recompense, whenas you may be dealt withal
in a way of mercy?

You will say, Use To those that say they do what they can.
Who are those that will deal with God in a way of Recompense?

Certainly those that will plead and justify themselves, and will say, God
knows I do what I can, and this is not so much my fault as others: Then expect
that God when he comes to deal with you he will have your pleas to be fully
examined, and if it prove that your pleas will hold, you shall have
accordingly; and if it prove that your pleas shall be found false, then you
shall be dealt withal in a way of justice. Will you venture? dare any of you
venture upon your Pleas to stand it out? if you say, you do what you can, you
will be tried by it, and you shall be recompensed accordingly; and if it be
found indeed that you do what you can, you shall be saved; but if it be found
you have not done what you could, you shall perish eternally: Will you venture?
certainly, whatsoever you stand pleading to justify your selves by, you may
expect that God will deal with you in a way of Recompense.

The days of Recompense are come.
Twice come: Expos.
as it is said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. Israel was in a way of Recompense
and would hardly be moved with any apprehension of danger, and therefore you
have it twice repeated.

From thence the Note is this.

That the apprehension of an evil presently coming, Obs. 3.
that terrifies the soul. You have a notable text for that in Ezekiel. 7. 6. An
end is come, Ezekiel. 7. 6
the end is come; and then in the next words, Behold, it is come again. In one
little verse three times, An end is come, the end is come; behold, it is come.
And in the verse before, it comes, and in the verse after, it is come; five
times God tells them that, it is come. Then says my text,

Israel shall know it.
Wicked men will not know till they feel; Obs. 4.
when they are struck, then they will know. The best knowledge of Gods
displeasure it is from the causes, but if men will not know from thence, they
shall know from the effects. In their prosperity they had many false Prophets
that soothed them up, so, that they were kept from knowledge, but now when they
had felt Gods stroke, then they should know; but he does not tell you what you
should know. They should know these things.

First, They should know what a great God it is they have to deal withal.

Secondly, They should know how vile a thing sin is.

Thirdly, They should know the vanity of all their shiftings.

Fourthly, They should know the dreadfulness of Divine wrath.

Fifthly, The faithfulness of Gods Prophets.

Sixthly, They should know the wisdom of those who dared not do as they did.

Seventhly, They should know the folly and vanity of all the false Prophets
that did seduce them before; they should know, that the Prophet is a fool, and
the spiritual man is mad. Oh! the knowledge we have of these things in time of
affliction, The saying of a Germa^ Divine.
is another manner of knowledge than we know in the time of our prosperity: It
was the speech of a German Divine in an affliction, In this disease I know what
sin is, Se Melchier Adams de vitae Theolog. Germ.
and how great God is in this disease. And yet he was a Divine, why did he not
know before? No truly, I never knew what sin and God was so before.

Now Israel shall know.
The knowledge that men have of the truth of God in time of affliction, Obs. 5
is a working knowledge. I appeal to you; How many of you in the time of your
sickness and afflictions have known things after another manner than ever you
knew them before? It follows;

The Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad.
In the time of Affliction they shall cry out that those are fools that did
seduce them. Obser.
One that died not long since by the Exchange, cried out of his keeping
company with lewd Ministers that did encourage him in his ways, and that did
harden him against Religion and the Saints of God.

In former times we know how men would close with wicked Ministers, and how
they would be hardened in scorning at Religion, and Puritans, but these will
have cause upon their sick beds, and death beds, to cry out of them, for they
would tell them that they need not be so strict and so pure: take heed now how
you be deceived by those that account themselves spiritual men, they here in
the text upon experience find that the Prophet did but befool them, and those
that had such glorious titles of spiritual men, that they were but mad; and if
you take not heed some that are here may find it hereafter true upon their
death beds, that they may cry out of such and such Ministers that did persuade
them to such and such things.

But truly it is no excuse to men, Observe.
though they should be led aside by Ministers and others, for you shall find
what is the reason that they were given up to Prophets that were fools, it
follows in the text: For the multitude of their iniquity, and for their great
hatred. Thou had a wicked and a vile heart that did hate Gods people and the
ways of godliness, and therefore it was just with God to give thee up to those
that thou see now to be fools and madmen; Oh! it is just with God when men's
spirits are against the true Prophets of God, to leave them to Ministers that
should cozen and undo their souls everlastingly.

VER. 8.
The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the Prophet is a snare of a
fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the House of his God.
IN this, and the former Verse God charges (as the cause of much evil in
Israel) the false Prophets, but yet through the Peoples sin, for it was through
the multitude of their wickedness that they were so guided by those false
Prophets, whom they followed in times of their prosperity. But God would have a
time wherein they should know they were but fools, and the spiritual man but
mad. And this was likewise because of their great hatred, the great hatred of
the the true Prophets, their spirits were against them, and therefore God gave
them up to those that were false: the same argument follows here in the eigth
verse, The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the Prophet is a snare of a
fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.

The watchman.
Such who profess themselves watchmen, that take upon themselves glorious
titles, Prophets and Ministers of God are called watchmen: and these made great
profession that they would be as careful to foresee, and labor as much to
prevent danger to the People as any of them all, they professed to be very useful
unto the people, and to be as much for God as any, Obs. 1.
but they were a snare; and this title of theirs, and this profession of theirs
proved to be a snare unto the people. Many vile things are hidden under fair
and glorious titles, as many excellent things are disgraced under base and
ignominious titles: You know what a deal of evil was lately covered among us by
names and titles, as the Clergy, and the Church; and likewise what abundance
of good had dirt cast upon it by titles, as Conventicles, and Puritans, and the
like; and now the titles of things may be changed into others, but may be as
dangerous some other way, as formerly these titles were both one way and the
other: Let people for ever take heed of titles and examine what lies under them,
be not led away one way nor other, either by fair or specious titles, or by
ignominious titles; Ordinarily people that do not examine things to the bottom,
they are taken with names and titles. But somewhat of these heretofore.

The watchman of EPHRAIM.
The people of Israel, the ten Tribes they had no mind to the true watchmen,
because they threatened hard things against them, they were willing to close
with any others that would preach more pleasing things, so they might set one
against another, and this quieted them; although the truth was, that these
watchmen were a most grievous snare to them.

Thus many who have carnal hearts, Expos.
and are not able to bear the evincing and threatening power of the Word in the
mouths of the true watchmen, of faithful Ministers, they seek to help
themselves by the opinions and judgments of other Ministers, and so think they
are safe when they have the opinion and judgment of some that are learned, and
have repute of godliness too, for so certainly these watchmen had here; and
then they can set the opinion and judgment of one, against the opinion and
judgment of the other, they think they are safe now and may be quiet, yet this
proves a dangerous snare.

When there is clear conviction of a truth, Obs. 2*
it is a dangerous thing out of a lothness to yield to that, to seek the
opinions of others. I confess when a man has the opinion and judgments, and if
out of love to the truth that he might be confirmed in the Truth, or that he
might know fully what the Truth is, for him to seek help from others is a good
thing; but if out of distaste to a Truth, if because the heart is weary of it,
and would fain not have it to be true, because it may bring some trouble, upon
that ground he goes to seek the opinion of some other, and hopes before he goes
that he shall find the opinion of others to be contrary, and so he may have
something to quiet his spirit; this is a great snare to the souls of those that
have been guilty of it.

The Watchman of Ephraim: Ephraim had Watchmen as well as Judah.

No cause so ill but will have some in the place of Watchmen that have the
repute of wise, Obs. 3.
learned, and judicious men to maintain it.

The Watchman of Ephraim was with my God.
They professed more than ordinary judgment in the knowledge of Gods mind, and
acquaintance with the ways of God, and yet they were snares to the people.
Whence observe:

Every man in his erroneous opinion does pretend to be with God, Obs. 4.
and for God; and without this indeed he could never be a snare to those that
profess themselves to be the people of God.

With my God.
It must needs be a great grief to those who have the true knowledge of God,
Obs. 5.
and indeed have interest in him, to see others who are false to maintain that
which is evil; and yet to pretend to God, as if they were for God, and for the
glory of God, and to set up God as much as any. The Prophet seems to speak in
grief and trouble, these Watchmen of Ephraim, those among the ten Tribes, they
will pretend to be for God, to be for my God.

Vatablus has a further Note upon this, Vatablus Ephraim fecit sibi
speculatorum, id est pseudoprophetas eosque vult audire simul cum Deo suo,
audire and colere tam Idola quam Deum, tam falsos quam veros prophetas quae est
mera insania.
(says he) Ephraim made to himself a Watchman, and would hear him, and would
hear them together with his God, like madmen would hear them together with
God, and so they would worship Idols and God too, they would seem to respect
the true Prophets and false Prophet, both which is a mere madness, (thus he.)

The Watchman of Ephraim was with my God.
They would not wholly depart from God, Obs. 6.
and yet they would maintain false worship, they would mingle both together.

But then, The Prophet is a snare, a snare of a Four.
That is, he catches poor simple deluded souls as a Fowler catches the bird
with casting baits that are pleasing unto the bird, Expos.
hiding from the bird the snare that presently comes upon it: so says he, the
Watchmen of Ephraim do thus, First they come to the people with very fair and
specious things, and labor to drop in those principles, and do not discover
what inferences they intend to make of them afterward, they do not discover
what designs they have, and what their scope is, for the present they come to
them, and desire them to yield to such things that seem to be as fair as any
thing in the world, and with much pretense that it is only for their good, and
they intend nothing but good, now when they have brought them to yield to such
things, they know that there are some inferences to be brought from those
things that will make them to yield to other things, which had they been
presented to them at first, they would never have yielded to, but the
inferences lay at a distance as the snare does, and they not seeing what would
follow they are brought to yield to such things, that afterward they cannot
tell how in the world to avoid, but they must yield to further things: thus the
Watchman is as a snare of a Fowler, that lays things that seem to be very
plausible at first, but intend afterward to bring the people to yield to other
things that would be abhorred if at first they were presented to them.

Good people, Applic.
as long as you live take heed of the snares of Watchmen in this kind. God
would not have you submit to any thing, nor do any thing but out of faith.

You must understand the ground from Scripture, Obs. 7.
and especially in the matters of Gods Worship before you yield and submit to
any thing, for otherwise though things may seem to be very fair at first, yet
they may prove to be but snares before you are aware. Again

And hatred in the house of God. Obs. 8.


First, This Watchman is an object of Gods hatred, in Gods House; wicked
Officers in the Church bringing in their superstition, and importuning and
urging the delusions of their own hearts, seeking to comply with the times to
preserve themselves in credit and esteem, and enjoyment of their livings, they
are an object of Gods hatred, these were the Watchmen that did comply with the
times and sought their own ends, they were the object of the hatred of God; no
people in the world whom God does hate more than such kind of Watchmen in his
House. And at this day we see how God has cast shame and loathsomness in the
faces of such. They are hatred by way of exclamation: o rem odiosamit
abominandam domo Dei. Oh hideous and abominable thing that such Watchmen
should be pertaining to the Sanctuary.

Or otherwise by way of efficiency, Watchmen are hatred,

Hatred in the house of my God.
But now, Quest.
Wherein does the false Prophets seem to be enveighed against?

I find some (and I confess not* Answ.
without some probability) understand all these of the true Prophets, Expos. 1.
and then the sense will run thus; You accounted the Prophets of the Lord, who
declared the mind of the Lord faithfully to you, to be no other than fools and
madmen, but you shall know that they were no fools, that they were no madmen;
2 King. 19* 11.
so I find in 2 King 9. 11. Wherefore came this mad fellow in? says the
Captain of Jehu, and in 2 Chronicles 36. 16. They mocked the Prophets and Messengers
of God. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
Here it is thought Ezekiels friends and acquaintance bound him, as thinking
him mad, chap. 3. 5. And so we read in the Gospel of Christ's kins-folks, they
laid hands upon him as thinking him to be mad; and so Paul in 2 Cor. 5. 13.
Whether we be besides our selves, it is to God. The true Prophets were thought
to be as fools and madmen, and they were scorned and contemned as those that
were spiritual madmen; but says the Lord, they shall know in the time of their
visitation whether they were thus or no: you shall find by your woeful
experience that these were no such madmen as you thought them to be. And in
time of affliction men have more honorable esteem of the true Prophets of God
than at other times, those that were jeered at before, Oh! they were so wise,
so precise and holy, and such tender consciences! Now they shall know how vain
their thoughts were of them, when Gods hand is upon such men as jeer at the
Ministers of God for being so holy and the like, yet when the hand of God has
been upon them, they have sent for these men to pray for them above any men.
Chrysostom* Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 34.
So we read of the people of Antioch, though many of them did give their hands
for the banishment of Chrysostom, yet being terrified by an Earthquake,
immediately sent for him again. And so in Job, 33. 23. speaking of the time of
affliction, If there be a messenger with him, an Interpreter one among a
thousand to show unto man his uprightness. But further,

Because of the multitude of thine iniquities, and thy great hatred.
If you understand it of the true Prophets, the sense will run thus, You shall
know in the time of your visitation, whether they were mad men and fools or no;
it was upon the multitude of your iniquity and great hatred that you accounted
them so, to be such fools and madmen before, it was because of the Malignity
of your spirits and the hatred against the right ways of God; you had many
exceptions against them, but the truth is, you saw nothing, but the Malignity
of your hearts lay at the bottom, you accounted them fools and madmen because
of the multitude of your iniquities. Men who are not so able to judge of things
sometimes in controversy, yet they may have this rule to help them to judge of
Ministers and of their cause, (who they are that are most like to be in the
truth) by this rule,

What is the side that men incline most to as they grow most in godliness? A
Rule to help common people to judge of Ministers* and of their cause.
And what side men incline most unto, as they grow more loose and formal in
their ways?

Consider of that, If there be a Side or Party, you are not able to judge
which is in the truth, there is some good men on one side, and some of the
other; but you being weak and not able to examine the ground of things, take
this Rule as a help: What is the Side that men most incline to as they grow in
godliness? And what side is that that men most cleave to as they grow most
loose and most formal in their way and profiting? When (I say) men whose
multitude of iniquities increase, and according to the increase of the
multitude of their iniquities, so they incline to a Party; I cannot but be the
more suspicious of it, when I see the other way that the most conscientious men
are, and the more the fear of God prevails in them, and the more strict they
grow in their ways, they do more incline to another side; I cannot but think
that there may be much of God there. A Caution to the Rule*
And yet it is true, that the greatest Heretics that ever were have pretended
great holiness, that must be granted too. But still, if this opinion were not
of God, those that did indeed grow up in true holiness, the more holy they
were, the less did they savor that way, though it had never such a pretense of
holiness. And if it be but a pretense of holiness and not true, then certainly
the more loose and formal professors grow, the more will they close with that
way (if it be but a pretense;) so it is here, their hearts were taken off from
the true Prophets of God through the multitude of their iniquities; the more
they grew to looseness the more were their hearts taken off from the true
Prophets of God.

Further: The watchman of EPHRAIM was with my God.
Still take it as concerning the true Prophets, that is, Even Ephraim wanted
not watchmen to show them their danger in departing from God; though the ten
Tribes did decline from God, yet such was Gods goodness to them as they had
watchmen that were faithful even among them.

They were with my God.
That is, They had such Whatch-men as looked upon God, as having to deal with
God and not with men, as sent from God, as pleading for God, and hence they
could not be taken off from their way, either by threats or flattery, they
might have have had preferment as well as others, they needed not have been the
But of the hatred and malice of men no more than others, if they would have
done as others did. No, but they were with my God, the fear of the great God
was upon their spirits, and they dared not do as others did, they resolved to
be faithful with God, to approve themselves to God, come of it what would come
they went on in their way, they left their means, and estates, and liberties,
and lives, and all to God, it was for God to provide for them, it was for them
to look to it that they did continue faithful to God. And thus the sense runs,
If they were the true Prophets that were among the ten Tribes, then it is as an
aggravation of the sins of the ten Tribes, that though they had many false
Prophets, yet they had Watchmen that did continue faithful with God.

And with my God.
Those who have interest in God they rejoice when they see faithful Ministers
of God keep close to God, Obser.
to set up God in all their ways, when they see them not to be set upon their
own designs, not to warp this way or that way, but to make it to be their bent
and aim to set up God, and to bring men to the knowledge of God, Oh! they
rejoice in this. So the Prophet speaks with a joy, (if it be spoken of the
true Watchmen) Oh! blessed be God that yet notwithstanding all the defection of
the times and corruptions that there were, yet that there were Watchmen among
Ephraim that were faithful with God, Oh they had no other designs but to set up
God, and were willing to deny themselves in any thing so be it they might bring
souls to God, thus the Prophet rejoices.

And certainly it is a great deal of joy for the Saints to see Ministers of God
to have clean spirits this way, to have no designs of their own, but to set up
the honor of God among people. But even these Prophets as faithful as they
were, yet they were accounted no other than a snare of a Fowler, and are even
hatred in the house of their God, they are accused of being politic subtle
men, who have cunning plots and reaches to set up their own way, that they are
as bad as Jesuits, and such kind of Aspersions as these are the Devil casts
upon them, and gets many good people to drink in these things, and those who,
otherwise were accounted Godly and of great use in the house of their God are
now become even hatred in the house of their God, the Devil has so prevailed
to bespatter and asperse them with such stories about them and reports of them
as even these men that were the most faithful with their God, Aspersion on good
Ministers.
yet now are looked upon as the troublers of the times, and as snares to people,
and are even hatred in the house of their God, even by many people that
otherwise have good affections: no way does the Devil drive on his own designs
more efficaciously than by this, Then by making the most painful, What Satan's
great design is.
faithful, zealous Ministers of God to become even hatred in the house of their
God, even among good people that are professors of Godliness. Thus Jer. 18. 22.
They have dug a pit to take me, and laid snares for my feet. Isa. 29. 21.
They lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate.

Further, Hatred in the House of his God. (Understand it still of the true
Prophets) And then the sense further goes thus: Yet he continues in the house
of his God, here he makes this his encouragement, that he is in the house of
his God, he is in Gods work though he be hated for it. Gods Ministers they
should not be offended though they find the like dealings among the professors
of Religion, yet still they should continue in their work and employment with
all faithfulness that God sets them about, and then all aspersions will wipe
off in time, they will vanish and come to nothing.

Calvin carries the sense of this somewhat different from what has been said,
Calvin. in loc.
in a middle way between both, and if not according to the full scope, yet it
comes very near, thus he takes it; he takes the former part of the verse for
true Prophets, and the latter part of the verse for the false Prophets, as if
he should have said thus: There was a time that Ephraim had Watchmen with my
God, and with his people, they had Elisha, and Elijah, but now the Prophet is a
snare of a Fowler, and hatred, in the house of my God. This is a woeful change
in places where people have had Watchmen that were godly, wise, zealous,
faithful with God, but now these are gone, they are dead, many of them are
banished, and many are with God in Heaven, and they have others now among them,
as a just Judgment of God who are a snare to them, and hatred in the house of
God, others who do succeed these blessed servants of God that are gone, they
are like storms, and tempests, that do succeed fair and Sunshine weather, and
if we take it thus for both, the true Prophets in the former part of the verse,
and the false Prophets in the other; then there is a special emphasis in the
change of the phrase [my God; and his God] the Watchman with my God, and
hatred in the house of his God; the God of the true Watchmen, and the God of
the false Prophets are not the same: those who pretend to worship God, and yet
worship him in a false way, they worship another God, they have not the same
God; and no mervail though there is hatred between true Prophets and false
then; they must needs have hatred one against another who have diverse Gods, My
God, and His God, and yet both pretended to be for the same God.

Yea, but says the Prophet here, No, whatsoever their pretenses are, they
teach people the Worship of God not in a right way, God is not their God: And
who they are that have most interest in God, let God Himself judge; not by
giving the one more of the favor of the times than the other; for the false
Prophets had more of this now: but 1. By the most appearing of the Spirit of
God in men. 2. By the witness of men's consciences when they are going to appear
before God. And 3. By what Christ shall own at his appearing. Oh! that I could
tell how to sweeten these times I speak unto you of. God by providence has
cast me upon this Scripture. I know not how to give you the mind of God in this
Prophecy by being thus plain.

The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: and their hatred in the house of his
God.
Only one Note by the way that Arias Montanus has upon the words, Ar. Montan.
in loc. Dicta est oration ex similitudine eorum qui in magna familia apud
Dominum plurimum posse videntur etc.
says he, This Phrase, Hatred in the house of his God; it is taken from such
men as live in some great families, and seemed to have a great deal of power
with their Lords, and abuse the power they have with their Lord, being
continually by his table and bed side, they are a means to cause a great deal
of hatred, and at length to undo others and themselves: So these Prophets are
just like these men, they are in the house of God, and seem to have much
intimacie with God in his House; but the truth is, they abuse this their
intimacie to the hurt of themselves and to the hurt of others. And thus much
for the Explication of the Eighth Verse. It follows.

VER. 9.
They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of GIBEAH.
THeir wickedness has deeply- rooted its self, so the word here signifies;
there is little hope to prevail with them, labor what you can, Obser.
their superstitious and Idolatrous ways have gotten such deep root in their
hearts that there is no getting of it out. Sin, and especially that sin of
superstion so deeply roots its self in the hearts of men if it be let alone but
a little time that there is no getting of it out.

And indeed there is little hope of the Reformation that is now in hand, Use.
that ever we should see it come to the full beauty and perfection of it until
even God himself, Englands reformation*
either by some extraordinary hand of his should root out those superstitious
principles that there are in many men, or at least by his own hand root out
those that have such superstitious and Idolatrous principles rooted in them. We
wonder that men cannot be taken off from superstitious ways, Oh! they are
deeply rooted, it is not an easy matter to eraditate those ways and vile words
of theirs; it is a blessed thing to take sin betimes, Our young ones may see.
and you that are young that have not other wickedness, and especially
superstition rooted in you, you are those that it is like God will make use of
for the bringing this Reformation to perfection, you shall see the glory of it,
it may be when others are gone and dead you shall come to see what God intended
in all these stirs that have been among us, we find by experience the fruit of
this in the hearts of men, what a deal of stir was there to take them off at
first? Oh! but the root abides still in men's hearts, and there is this
experiment of it, of the depth and root that superstition take, in men's hearts,
That though men be content not to practice those superstitious ways that they
did before, because now the times do not favor them, yet this we find, that men
cannot be brought to leave off those things as sinful, but as inconvenient,
they will be content to forbear the practice of them, but you have but few men,
I had almost said but few Ministers, but so far I may be bold to say, that many
Ministers, Ministers that counted the things now laid aside, only inconvenient,
will take them up again.
but especially those who were any thing forward in superstitious ways, such
as did not before account them a burden, those though they do leave them off at
this time, yet not as things that are sinful, they never could be brought to
that, to acknowledge them to be sinful, and so to charge themselves in sinning
against God, but they are content to leave them off as things that are
inconvenient and as may be burdensome to other men; but the leaving them off
after such a way is no other, but if the times should favor them again there is
a principle retained in their hearts, so as they would be in readiness to
submit to them again, and to do them as formerly, this bitter root of
Superstition abides in their hearts; that is the meaning of this phrase, they
are deeply rooted, that is, their superstition and false worship is deeply
rooted in their hearts. Well, let their superstition be rooted as deep as it
will, A Note for the superstitious.
yet as Christ says in Mat. 15. Every plant that my Father has not planted
shall be rooted out: God will either root thee out, or the superstition of thy
heart out of thee. Us. to true worshipers
And seeing the false worshipers have superstition so rooted in their hearts,
Oh! how should the true worshipers of God have the truth rooted in their hearts
never to be rooted out; so Saint Paul in Col. 2. 7. Rooted and built up in him,
and stablished in the faith etc.

They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah.
This must cost us a little further time for the opening of it fully: Rooted in
their evil ways as in the days of Gibeah. What has this reference to? the
Scripture does note the City Gibeah for two notable things; one, that it was
the City of Saul, and so then upon that some carry it thus: That as heretofore
they cast off my Government when they chose Saul to be their King over them,
Expos. 1.
so now they cast me off as then formerly they did.

But I think that is not the scope, but rather, As in the days of Gibeah; This
has reference to that notable story that you have in the 19. and 20. chapters
of Judges, 2. Our Authors.
there you shall find what was done in the days of Gibeah. You shall find the
story of a Levite that had his Concubine gone from him and playing the whore,
he went to fetch her again, and as he was returning home (the substance of the
story is this) as he was coming home he would not go by no means (as his
servant would have had him) to Jebus, because those that lived there were not
of the Children of Israel, but he would be sure to lodge in a City that did
belong to the Children of Israel, and when he comes to Gibeah, there expecting
to have protection from that City, being they were of the Children of Israel,
yet he found it quite otherwise, the people of the City were notorious
abominable wicked people and they came by violence in the night to break open
the doors where he lodged that they might commit sodomy and filthiness with
him, but they obtaining him not, get his Concubine and abuse her all night
together one after another, till with a long abuse of her they killed her, and
she lay dead at the door, upon which horrid thing, this being committed in a
City that did belong to the People of God, this Levite takes a knife and cuts
his Concubine (being dead) into twelve pieces, and sends them all abroad
throughout the coasts of Israel, and bad them think upon it and consider what
should be done. And upon the sight of that, and hearing the occasion of it, the
people were amazed and said, Never was such a thing done, or seen since the
people of Israel came out of the Land of Egypt. Wherefore all the People even
from Dan to Beersheba they all assembled to consult what should be done, in the
20. chap. they resolved to go against the City of Gibeah; in the 11. verse the
text says, All the people were gathered together against the City, as one man:
and in the 13. verse they required those Delinquents to be delivered up to
them. Now those Children of Belial they stood it out and would not deliver them
up; yea, and they got the Benjamites to join with them, twenty six thousand
Armed men to join with them to stand in defense of these notorious Delinquents,
they got up an Army which one would not have thought that among the People God
there should have been gotten up an Army to have defended such notorious
villains as those were, yet they did, but the people of Israel joined all
together and were resolved that they would have such notorious wickedness to be
punished (there was four hundred thousand joined together) Now in the 18.
verse, they asked counsel of God what they should do, and God gave them leave
to go, and bid that Judah should go up first, so they went to require these
Delinquents and went up against them, but the Benjamites the first day got the
victory and slew two and twenty thousand men. Upon that the Children of Israel
went up to God again and wept before the Lord, and God gave them leave to go
again, and they went, and the Benjamites came out again and slew eighteen
thousand more of them: These wicked Malignants got the Victory two days and
slew forty thousand of the Children of Israel that went not only by Gods
leave, Malignants may have great Victories one after another,
but by his sending, and yet for two days together they fell before those
wicked and vile wretches; but yet afterward they went and wept and fasted,
they knew that their cause could not but be good, and they were resolved they
would go to God again and humble their souls before God, and fast, and pray,
and then they overthrew those wicked Bonjamites, and these of Gibeah; and
whereas there were twenty six thousand came out against them, Yet a good cause
religiously managed prospers at last*
there was twenty and five thousand and an hundred men slain by the sword, and
the City of Gibeah was burnt with fire; so God executed wrath upon them at
length. This is the story that the Prophet has reference to.

Now these men are wicked, as in the days of Gibeah; look how it was in the
days of Gibeah, so now it is; there is many remarkable things to be observed
from that story, in reference to this which the Prophet does quote it for, the
story in general was thus, That they stood out to defend wicked ones so as they
did; it does concern us fully in our times, Our times such.
and our wars are almost the very same now as then they were, for what is the
main cause of our War but to fetch Delinquents to the execution of Justice? and
who would have thought that such Delinquents whose burdens we groaned under in
former times, and we accounted the great evil of the times, that these should
find an Army to defend them? Yet perhaps sometimes we may be overcome by them,
and they may for a while prevail, but let us fast before God and humble our
selves more thoroughly, and certainly God will own his Cause in time as there he
did. But particularly from the story first observe,

That when we make use of men as a shelter and to seek protection from them,
Obs. 1.
if they shall deal vilely with us and accuse us, and make a prey upon us, this
is a most abominable and cursed wickedness in the eyes of God; This Levite came
from Jebus and would not lodge with them, but to Gibeah, thinking to have had
protection there, and yet these deal vily: Does any man put himself under any
of you for protection, and do you deal falsely? Oh! this is an abominable thing
in the eyes of God.

Secondly, Obs. 2*
That sometimes we may meet with worse usage from such who profess Religion and
more strictness in their ways, than from those who outwardly are further off
from profession. It may be if they had gone to Jebus they would not have met
with such ill usage, as they did when they came to Gibeah: sometimes it is so
that they that make profession of Religion they are guilty of more ill usage to
the servants of God than others that are profane and ungodly, or of another
Religion.

Oh! let men take heed of this, Use.
how they behave themselves toward their Brethren, Admonition to some Brethren
now.
that they may not have cause to say, Lord, were we among the Indians or among
some moderate Papists, or under some of the Prelates again we should not find
such hard usage as we do from some of our Brethren who profess thy Name and
seek Reformation; this were a sad thing (I say) if ever there should be cause
for the Servants of God to make their moans to Heaven and cry to God. God
forbid.

Thirdly, Whereas Israel thought themselves holy and devout for God in the
multitude of their sacrifices, and their devotion, and their services that they
tendered up to God, yet God looks upon them as filthy and wicked, as the men of
Gibeah were that committed sodomy and such kind of filthiness, says God, You
have corrupted your selves as in the days of Gibeah; whatsoever your fair
shows are, and your sacrifices be that you offer, yet you are looked upon as
thus vile and abominable before God.

From whence therefore the Note may be, Obs. 3.
That men may have very fair shows in the Worship of God, and do that which may
seem to be much for the honor of God, and yet God looking with other eyes than
men do, God may behold them as filthy, abominable, and loathsome in his sight.
God will not be put off with words of Reformation and the Service of God, for
men may have such base ends in it, and may mix so much of themselves to corrupt
the right way of God, and to keep out the right service of God with shows of
serving him, that this may make them and their services to be as odious to God
as the most filthy thing in the world; that is the clear and plain Note from
thence. We do not read of such abominable filthiness of body as was in the
days of Gibeah, but because of the corruptions of Gods Worship that they
carried fairly, yet the Lord looked upon it as filthy, as that was in the days
of Gibeah.

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
For men after wickedness is committed, to stand impudently, and boldly in the
defense of it, and to be so far from the acknowledgment of their sin, as they
will rather venture desperately the undoing of themselves than they will come
in to acknowledge or let Justice have its course: this is an abominable
wickedness in the eyes of God. Thus they did in the days of Gibeah. And thus
you are ready to do, not only to commit horrible wickedness and sins, but to
stand in the defense of it; there is this desperate stoutness of spirit, and
hardness of heart in many men, that when they are once got into the way of sin,
rather than they would yield and submit, they will venture the undoing of
themselves: the men of Gibeah did so, and they were undone accordingly.

Yea further, Obs. 5*
Not only to stand out our selves in evil, but to join with others to defend
them, though it be the venturing of our own undoing and others, this is further
wickedness; yet how many have we of the Gentry and Nobility of the Kingdom, Use
for many of the Nobility and Gentry of Engl.
that do not only seek to defend themselves, but join with the greatest
Malignants of the Kingdom, with those that are the greatest cause of evil, and
were like to be the utter undoing of us all? to defend them from Justice will
venture the ruin of their own families; whereas were it that the Malignants
were given up, they might have saved their estates families and all; Oh! that
ever God should leave men in such horrible wickedness as this is! This is just
as it was in the days of Gibeah.

Sixthly, Obs. 6.
Those who do so stoutly stand to defend wickedness and other men who are
wicked, yet they may for a while prosper; even the men of Gibeah and the
Benjamites may prosper.

But yet in the next place, Obs. 7.
at last, these men shall perish, twenty five thousand and an hundred of these
twenty six thousand perished, and all the men of Gibeah, and the City was
burnt. So, let men stand out as stubbornly and stoutly as they will, and say,
What care we? they will lose their lives and estates rather than they will
submit and yield, well, they may lose all at lengh; you have yet (it may be) a
day (some victory) and prevailed at some time, yea, but let not men's hearts be
hardened by that, nor let none of the other side be discouraged, for certainly
those that stand desperately out in defending of wickedness they shall perish
at last; so did the Gibeonites.

Yea, But what is this to us (might the Prophets Auditors say?)

Yes certainly it is much to you, for this aggravates your sins, the sins of
forefathers (that is the Note that the Prophet makes use of) what was done in
days of Gibeah.

From whence is this Note,

That the sins of forefathers is an aggravation of Childrens sins, Obs. 8.
when they commit the same and others like unto them. And yet such is the
delusion of many poor people that they excuse the present sins by the sins of
former times: Applicat.
As thus; suppose Ministers or others should complain of the sinfulness of the
times, and declaim against the sinfulness of the times, you shall have some can
say, Why do they keep such a stir of the wickedness of the times, were they not
as bad as they are now heretofore? Oh delusion! This is the great aggravation
when that thou live in those sins thy forefathers did, thou art it seems the
child of a wicked parent, and how just had it been with God to have cut thee
off presently for the sins of thy parents? and do thou say, that thy
wickedness is no other than the wickedness of thy forefathers? Certainly if the
times be as ill as they were heretofore, they are worse than they were
heretofore, If present times be as bad as former, then they are worse.
for the evil of our forefathers is an aggravation of our present evils, if we
continue in them: As the treachery of a parent would be no excuse for the
treachery of a child, for him to say, my father was a Traitor: for me to excuse
the sins of the present times with the sins of the former times, and say, that
they were as ill formerly as now; it is just for all the world such kind of
reasoning; but this is not the reasoning of the Spirit of God, simile*
he aggravates the sins of Israel in Hosea's time with the sins that were in
the days of Gibeah. God may let men alone in their wickedness for a long time,
until they grow to the height of their wickedness, and then God comes upon
them. When the sins of the Amorites were full, Now, he will remember their
iniquities, he will visit their sins. But for this phrase of Gods remembering,
and visiting, that we have had before, therefore we pass it over, and come to
the tenth verse.

VER. 10.
I found Israel like Grapes in the Wilderness: I saw your Fathers as the first
ripe in the Fig Tree at her first time
THE scope of the holy Ghost in this, it is to upbraid the ten Tribes for their
wretched ungrateful dealing with God, their sin is aggravated by Gods love
toward them and their forfathers.

I found Israel like grapes in the Wilderness.
That Is thus; Expos.
look as a man that has been traveling in the parched wilderness, and is dry,
and weary, and faint, he does come to a place in the Wilderness unexpectedly
and finds clusters of Grapes, from whence he has abundance of refreshment to
cool and moisten him, and Oh how refreshed is this poor man when he is parched
in the dry Wilderness and beyond all expectation comes and finds a Vine full of
clusters of Grapes? this would be the most pleasing thing to such a man that
could be; thus says God, Such kind of delight had I in your forefathers. He
names Grapes and Figs here because they are the most delightful fruit of all
kind of fruit to weary travelers: Now if this be so that God has such delight
in his people as a man would have in Grapes thus in the Wilderness, Oh! how
should God be our delight when we are in the Wilderness? Applic. God should be
our delight in his ordinances*
If we being his people are so delightful to him in the Wilderness, surely then
God himself should be delightful to us in our wilderness, Oh! let God in his
Ordinances be to us in our troubles and afflictions as Grapes to a traveller in
his Wilderness; surely if God will account us to himself so delightful, there is
great reason that we should account him to us as delightful: Some of Gods
Servants have been forced to fly into the Wilderness, and though they have not
had such outward refreshments as we have had here that have set under our own
Vines, and Fig Trees, yet God has made them to find Grapes in the Wilderness,
they have sit under Gods Protection and his Ordinances, as a man in the
Wilderness should sit under a Vine of Grapes and refresh himself with them.

I saw your Fathers.
We should lay to heart Gods Love to our Fathers, Obser.
and seek to continue it to our selves: It Is a sad thing to look upon
degenerate Children who have had fathers whom God took delight in; Your Fathers
were as clusters of Grapes that did refresh the very soul of God; as it is said
of Wine, that it does cheer both God and man; so the grace and holiness of your
forefathers, Oh! how refreshing were they to the heart of God? But what are
you, you are sour in the taste of God, what delight can God take in your
unsavory and rotten corrupted spirits? Oh! it is a comfortable thing when a
child is able to say, Exodus 15. 2.
as Exodus 15. 2. My God, and my fathers God, God was my Fathers God, and
delighted in my Father, and blessed be his Name he is my God, and I hope he
has some delight in me: You who are the children of Fathers whom God delighted
in as Grapes in the Wilderness, it is a mighty engagement for you to look to
your selves that your hearts and lives be not corrupt, but follow the steps of
your fathers, that God may delight likewise in you. But further;

As the first ripe in the Fig Tree at her first time.
There Is a great deal of elegancy in these expressions. The Fig Tree bears
twice in the year, and here it is, The first of the first time. Their Fathers
were as delightful as Grapes in the wilderness, and as the Figs, the first Figs
in her first time.

Now we know that we prize fruit that is first ripe, as Cherries when they are
first of all come, when they come it may be two or three into the Market, and
Pease, and such kind of things when they are the first ripe of all, how they
are prized? you shall have many will give any price for them. We say when
Cherries come at first, that they are Ladies meat, or Longing meat: Now the
Lord is pleased to condescend so much to express his love to his people, as the
love of a longing woman to Cherries or other fruit, when they come first of
all; as a woman has a longing after things when they come and are first ripe;
says God, Never did woman long after any fruit when it was first ripe more
than my soul has longed after you to do you good, I have taken as much
pleasure in you as ever woman could take when she had her longing in the most
dainty first ripe things: This is the meaning of the holy Ghost here, to show
the Love of God to his Saints. Ier. 12. 10*
Many expressions we have in Scripture, as in Jer. 12. 10. they are called his
Pleasant Portion, Verse. 7.
and the dearly Beloved of Gods Soul, Jer. 12. 7. and the peculiar Treasure of
God, Exodus 19* 5.
Exodus 19. 5. and here there are two as elegant expressions, as Grapes in the
Wilderness, and as the first ripe of the Figs in the first time: Thus is Gods
exceeding goodness to us, though we be sapless in our selves, and have nothing
in us to procure delight, yet God in his own free Grace is willing to express
himself thus to his People, Oh! what delight should we have in God who takes
such delight in his Servants? And this expression of God we think may very well
hint unto us a meditation concerning the delight that God has in young ones
that do begin to give up themselves unto him, Gods delight is in young ones.
the Lord loves the first fruits, and the first ripe of things: in Mich. 7. 1.
Woe is me, Mic. 7. 1.
for I am as when they have gathered the Summer fruits, as the Grape gleanings
of the vintage, there is no cluster to eat; My soul desired the first ripe
fruits. So it is true, by way of allusion at least, we may apply it, the Soul of
God is a longer, God is a longer; To what? To the first ripe fruits, to the
first of your years, to you that are young ones: We prize highly Nettle buds
when they bud out first; Oh! so graciousness when it buds out in youth at
first, Oh how pleasing is it to God! Exodus 23. 19.
in Exodus 23. 19. God would have the first of the first fruits, he would not
only have of the first fruits, but the first of the first. God stands much
about the first still. Levit. 2. 14.
And in Leviticus, 2. 14. there you read, that the Lord is so eager to have
the first things? (as a longing woman) that he will not stay till they be ripe,
he will have the green ears of Corn dried in the fire; simile*
as many women that long they will not stay until the thing be ripe, but if
they can have it ripened by any art, though not by the way of Nature they will
seek to have it ripened so, and then they must needs have it; so says God, my
longing is so after the first of things that I will not stay till they be fully
ripe, but the Corn, though it be green ears, if they may be dried by the fire,
I Will have them then. And so in Cant. 2. 12. Cant. 2. 12*
The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, the
Fig tree puts forth her green Figs; and in Cant. 6. 11. Chap. 6. 11*
I went down into the Garden of Nuts to see the fruits of the valley, and to
see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded. Oh! the Lord
looks up and down in Congregations that are as the Gardens of God to see such:
^hap. 7. 12
and so in Cant. 7. 12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the
Vine flourish, whether the tender Grape appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth;
there will I give thee my Loves. Oh let us go and see whether the tender Grape
appear, or the Pomegranate bud; there will I give thee my Loves. Where God does
see grace beginning and budding in young ones, An Exhortation to young ones.
there God manifests himself; there will I give my Loves. And this only by
occasion of Gods expressing himself like a longer after the first things. Oh!
give God his longing you that are young ones, and begin to be godly betimes, you
satisfy the heart of God as the first fruits satisfy a longing woman. It
follows:

But they went to Baal-Peor, and separated themselves to that shame.
But says God here, What a But comes after all this? God does manifest his
delight in them as in the first ripe Grapes in the Wilderness, and the first
ripe fruit, and yet behold, Oh! there is a but for all this.

It Is not the greatness of Gods love that is enough to engage carnal hearts:
Observe.
this is an evil and a sore thing to see: there was a time that God accepted of
this people and delighted much in them, but now they are departed: Oh! it is
ordinary for people to degenerate, though a few years since, how forward and
zealous were they for God, and for Reformation, but within a while they grew
cold, and dead, and formal, and slight, and begin to leave off all their good
beginnings, and decline from God, and from his Truth.

They went to BAAL-PEOR.
God complains of this people as a Husband of an Adultress: Though I delighted
in her, and loved her, though she had all the content she could desire, yet she
goes and forsakes me, and gives up her self to a filthy unclean Whoremaster:
God takes it exceeding ill that he loses his love. And I beseech you observe:
There Is nothing goes nearer to an ingenious heart, than the loss of Love; he
had rather lose his Money than his Love (such an one has requited me il for my
love:) this (I say) goes to the heart of a man, and there is nothing more
grieves him than that he finds his love is ill bestowed. So certainly it goes
to the heart of God that his Love should be ill bestowed upon people.

They went to BAAL-PEOR.
Many loathsome and obscene things are reported concerning this Baal-Peor,
Baal-Peor Deus apertionis, indix interpret. nom. vulg. lat. apud latinos
priapus vid. Hier. in loc. ne^ non Drusium.
(this god that was the god of the (Moabites) that is unfit for chaste ears to
hear, therefore we shall not mention such things; Much filthiness was committed
in the worship of this their Baal-Peor, and yet (says God) notwithstanding all
my love to their forefathers, whereby they might have drawn an argument that
they should have had blessings upon themselves, if they had continued in the
ways of their forefathers, yet they went from me and went to Baal-Peor. From
whence the Notes are:

First, Obs. 1.
The more shameful any thing is, the more abominable is it to forsake God: It Is
an abominable thing to forsake God, for the gaining of Heaven and Earth (if it
could be gained by it) but for to forsake God for a Baal-Peor, God takes this
^ll: (but that we met with before.)

Secondly, Obs. 2.
This is the evil of man's heart, That there is no evil so base and shameful,
but he is ready to forsake the blessed and glorious God, that he may cleave to
that. As it is reported of the Panther, The Panther.
that it does love the dung of man so well that if it be hung up at a height,
it will leap and skip for it till it bursts in pieces. So, many there are that
are set upon such base things, that they are content to part with all good that
there is in God and Jesus Christ, if they may but have them, they are content
to undo themselves to all eternity.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
So to leave God, as to give up our selves to baseness and wickedness, Oh! this
is most ab^minable: To be over taken with a sin is vile, but for one to give up
himself, or her self to wickedness, this is abominable: and yet this is that
that many are guilty of; at first perhaps sin is fair-mannerd, and says, Do
but take some dallies with me at first, but after the soul begins to give up
its self in a most desperate way in sinful courses: many an Apostate does thus
that had some comfort before in God, Apostates*
but now having gotten a haunt of wickedness they have lost all their comforts
in God and Christ, and now says this desperate soul, I cannot have comfort in
God and Christ, and therefore I will have it in the satisfying of my lusts. Oh!
my Brethren, what a shame is this? So far as thou art able to be guilty of
shaming even God Himself and Jesus Christ; therefore in Heb. 6. 6. Apostates are
said, to put Jesus Christ to open shame; and Apostate that leaves the ways of
God and separates himself to his lusts, he does put the Lord Jesus Christ to an
open shame. Oh! how should Gods people separate themselves for the Lord, and be
wholly his, seeing Idolaters separate themselves to their Idols? let them look
upon themselves as a people separated for the Lord.

And their abominations were as they loved.
That is, First, as they loved, so they were guided, they were not guided by
the Word, nor by any Divine Rule, not by right Reason, but according as they
loved, they followed what they had a mind to, Obs. Not what we see, but what
God likes.
never regarding what Gods mind was; The judgment is soon gone when the heart
is taken with a thing. Ordinarily people love that way they go, not that way
the Rule guides them to, but what way their affections carry them on in; Perit
judicium, (...) quum res transit in affectum.
this is a very sinful thing for men to be acted with, and carried upon, merely
by the violence of their affections, and especially this is evil in the matters
of Gods Worship, there we may not do things as we love, that is, because we
think such things are very fair and there appears no hurt in them to us, and
they like us well; yea, but we must examine whether we have warrant out of the
Word for that, we must not do as we love, but according as the rule is.

Secondly, Expos. 2.
They were abominable as they loved; they were turned into the very likeness of
what they loved: and indeed our loves what ever they are upon does turn us into
the likeness of the thing, The understanding turns the object into a likeness
to it, but the heart is turned into the likeness of its object.

Austin has a notable expression for this, Quod per voluntate^ resolute^ and
efficaciter vis, hoc absolute es.
says he, Such is every man as his love is, Does a man love the earth? he is
earth; does a man love God? (what shall I say, says (Austin) he shall be even
God too. And indeed the Scripture says we are partakers of the Divine Nature,
Non faciunt bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores. Aug. Ep. 52. ad
Macedon.
Oh! what care had we need have of what we love, Do thou love a base filthy
thing? then thy soul is base and filthy too. Do thou love the glorious and
blessed God? then thy soul is made like to God: Choose therefore good objects
for thy love, love the Lord, and love his holy ways, love things that are
excellent and glorious, and by the loving of those things thy heart will come
to have excellency and glory put upon it; The Chameleon.
but if thou love that which is drossy and filthy, thou come to have a base
and drossy heart of thy own. Plin. Lib. 8. Cap. 33*
Man's soul is like to the Cameleon that is changed into the color of the object
it looks upon.

They were abominable as they loved.
Every man or woman is as he loves. Expos. 3.


Thirdly, They were abominable as they loved. That which is here translated of
the Concrete, I find it may be as well translated of the Abstract, They were
abominable as their love: and so it is carried by Interpreters, that is, they
were abominable as their Idols were that they did love, and their Idols were
called Love in the Abstract; as a man calls his Wife, his Love, so they called
their Idols their Love, and they were abominable as their Love was, that is,
look how abominable Baal-Peor was, so abominable were they; so the Psalmist
says, that, they that make Idols, are like unto them.

But fourthly, Expos. 4 preferred.
which I think is especially the scope of the holy Ghost here, They were
abominable as they love, (though the other may be taken in) this Scripture has
reference to that that you read in Numb. 25. 1. there you find that the people
of Israel by the wicked counsel of Balaam, Numb. 25. 1.
when they could not be cursed, yet Balaam did counsel them that they should
come and bring their daughters before them, and so to entice them to commit
uncleanness with their daughters, and then they should entice them to Idolatry,
that was the wicked counsel of Balaam, they committed whordom with the
daughters of Moab; and they called the people to the sacrifices of their gods.
So They were abominable as they loved: that is, they being enticed to bodily
uncleanness, by the Moabitish women, these drew them likewise to the worship of
their Idols. And so their loves to their Whores was that which drew them to
this wickedness.

They were abominable as they loved; that is, they setting their love upon
these wicked women that did entice them to uncleanness, according to that love
of theirs were they brought unto the love of Idolatry. Solomon's wives drew him
to Idolatry. And it is usual for people to be of that Religion that those are
that they love, Obs.
if so be that their hearts be taken with any, if they love any it is usual for
them to be of that Religion that those are of that they love, according to
their kindred, according to their friends, according to the stock that they
marry in, so is their Religion. Many that have been forward in ways of
Religion, and yet marry into a carnal stock that has no savor of Religion,
you shall find they will grow cold according to what their wives dispositions
are, according to what they love, so their Religion either burns hotter or
grows cooler; as it was usually laid upon Ahab for his wickedness, such a one
was his wife: and so other Kings, the daughter of Ahab was his wife, his
Religion was according as he loved. Admonition to Saints.
And my Brethren, if those who are in a false way can draw whom they love to
it, then certainly those that are in the Truth should as well labor to draw
those who they love to the imbracement of the Truth: Wives that are naught will
draw their Husbands to that which they love, Popish Wives.
to Idolatry, to false worship; Popish wives have drawn more husbands to their
Popery, than Godly wives (I fear) have drawn husbands to the Truth; To
Religious Wives.
Why should not gracious Wives labor to draw their Husbands to good by love, as
well as wicked Wives to draw them to wickedness by their love. And indeed those
who would gain others to good must first gain their love. The women of Moab
gained the love of the people of Israel, and so gained them to themselves in
the matters of Religion. So if you would do any good to people, first labor to
gain their love; let women that have evil husbands that they would ^ain gain:
how would you gain them? not by reproachful speeches, but do you (though they
be never so evil) walk lovingly toward them, that they may be convinced that
your souls do love them, and so do you by your loving carriage gain their love,
and that is the way to gain them to your God by that means. Women in the
primitive times.
So diverse of the women in the primitive times that had Heathenish Husbands, we
have many stories of them, that by their gracious loving carriage to their
Heathen Husbands they gained them to the Truth of Religion. Ministers must
gain the peoples love.
And so Ministers, if they would gain people to God, they must gain their love,
so walk before them in such a gracious holy loving way toward them, as they
may gain their love, and then they will gain their souls; if there be wrangling
between Minister and People, there is little hope that they will gain and do any
good among that people, for people will do as they love very much. And so your
neighbors and friends if you would gain them to God any way, Neighbors and
friends*
gain their loves to you, for it is a mighty motive in matters of Religion for
people to do as they love. And thus much for this tenth Verse.

VER. 11.
As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird from the birth, and
from the womb, and from the conception.
AS for Ephraim.] A Pathetical expression, he makes a stop at Ephraim, Oh
Ephraim! how sad, how much to be lamented is thy condition?

As for Ephraim, their Glory etc.
By it is meant, Expos.
all their pomp, riches, strength, prosperity, but especially by Glory here is
meant, their numerous progeny in which they did so much glory, Ephraim (the ten
Tribes) did prosper very much and were a very great multitude more than Judah.
This Scripture has reference unto the prosperous estate especially in the time
of Jeroboam the second, 2 King. 14.
of which you read in 2 King. 14. Ephraim was in a very prosperous condition
and had prospered very much.

Their Glory.
Children and numerous progeny, Obs. 1.
is accounted a glory unto people. Pro. 17. 6.
That in which they do much glory, in Prove. 17. 6. Childrens children are the
Crown of old men: (...)* gloriatio 70.
(the Seventy) are the Glory of old men. Parents use to glory and pride
themselves much in their children; o grata superbia mat^is.
(says one) Oh! lovely pride of the Mother! so it may be said of many sons and
daughters of children, Claudian* de proserpina.
Oh! the delightful pride of the Father and the Mother in such and such
children.

They accounted it their Glory, For,

1. By their children themselves are multiplied. Re^s. 1.
And,

2. They see what excellency soever there is in the child, 2.
they look upon it as their own, as themselves the cause of it; and men and
women love themselves much, and because they are pieces of themselves therefore
they glory in them. And,

3. They have some hope of continuation from Generation to Generation in their
children; 3.
and this is their Glory.

But let Parents learn to give God the glory of their children, Use to Parents.
and to bring them up to the glory of God, then they may rejoice in them indeed
as a great mercy of God. In Prove. 10. 1. Pro. 10. 1.
A wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is heaviness to his Mother.
explained^.
Why is a wise Son said to be the gladness of the Father? Why? Does not a
Mother rejoice in a wise Son too? And why is a foolish Son said to be the
sorrow of the Mother? Why? Does not the Father sorrow and mourn for a foolish
Son? The holy Ghost not without reason does express himself thus; A wise Son
makes the Father glad.

First; because the Father usually has a more strict hand over his Son in his
education to bring him to wisdom more than the Mother, ordinarily Mothers are
tender over their children, and they co^ker them and so make them fools, some
they cannot endure that they should suffer any hardship, and hence their
children proves foolish and fit for nothing, and great sorrows to them.

And secondly, A wise Son is fit for employment abroad in the world, therefore
rejoices the heart of his Father; but a foolish Son is fit for nothing but to
be at home in the Chimney corner with his Mother, and as he grows up grows
stout and stubborn against her there. And if children be a glory to their
Parents, they should labor to be such as they may be a glory and not a shame to
them indeed. There are many which instead a glory to their parents are a great
shame to them, Tres Vomi^as, tria Carcinomata. Augustus.
as it was said of Augustus Caesar, he had three daughters that were wicked,
and he used to call them his three Impostumes, and his three ^ankers upon his
body. And so children that should be the glory of their Parents, and the glory
of a family, many times they are but the very Impostumes, and Cankers of it,
and the shame to their Parents, every time they come abroad in the world.
Parents must not be a shame to their children.
And if you expect that your children should be a glory to, you must not be a
shame to them; sometimes children are a shame to their Parents, and sometimes
Parents are a shame to their Children. It follows.

Their glory shall fly away like a bird.
Men glory in their outward pomp and prosperity, and their children, Expos. 1.
but both these shall fly away like a bird. That is, 1. Suddenly. 2. Swiftly.
3. Irrecoverably.


A Bird that you have in a Cage, you have kept it perhaps many months, and upon
some advantage gets out and in a moment she is gone, suddenly, and then she
goes away swiftly that you cannot follow her, and then Irrecoverably that you
can never take her. All outward glory is uncertain; Pro. 23. 5.
in Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? illustrated.
Certainly riches they make to themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle into
Heaven; fly away like a Bird, Applic. to England. and Ireland.
and that Bird, the Eagle, that flies so swiftly that there is no getting her
again: How many lately in Ireland, and in our own Land, that have had estates
in the evening, and all has been gone away swiftly like a bird before the
morning? They have been rich in the morning and have been even beggars in the
evening. Let us take our hearts off from glorying in all outward excellencies,
and seek that glory that is abiding, that is constant, that is everlasting: We
should look upon all outward comforts now as upon the wing; if ever you had
cause to look upon all the outward comforts in the world as upon the wing, you
are to do it now, never make account of any settlement in any comforts in the
world, at this day they are all upon the wing; we cannot reason thus, We have
enjoyed such prosperity thus long, and therefore we shall still enjoy it
longer: No, all outward comforts slies away like the bird: that comes in one
moment that before came not in many years. Ier. 9* 23.
In Jer. 9. 23. Thus says the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
illustrated*
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in
his riches: But let him that glories, glory in this, That he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise, loving kindness, judgment, and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight says the Lord.
Wealth (wicked men's glory) flies from them in prosperity, God (the Saints
glory) flies to them in adversity.
Your delights are in other vain things, in estates, in bravery; but in these
things I delight, says the Lord God, and if you will glory, do you glory in
those things that I my self delight in; your glory in the midst of your
prosperity which flies from you like a bird, but the Lord that is the glory of
his in the midst of their adversities, flies to them like a bird: (I say) the
glory of the wicked in the midst of their prosperity flies from them like a
bird, and the Lord God who is the glory of the Saints flies to them in their
afflictions like a bird. Thus you have this very phrase in Isa. 31. 5. Isa. 31.
5. enlightened*
As birds flying, so will the Lord of host defend Jerusalem; defending also he
will deliver it, and passing over he will preserve it. [As birds flying] it is a
metaphor taken from the bird when she sees the young ones in any danger of the
Kite she flies with speed to save them, As birds flying, so will I defend
Jerusalem. Your glory gets away and flies from you in your prosperity, but the
glory of the Saints flies to them in their adversity.

Secondly, The Glory of their posterity shall flee away like a bird* that is,
Expos. 2.
The Lord will cut off their numerous posterity, their young men, that there
shall be few enough left among them. They gloried in their number. The blessing
of God upon Abraham's seed came very swiftly after it began to come; and now God
threatens it shall go away as swiftly: As you may find it if you observe the
story of the increase of the Seed of Abraham, if you reckon it from the time of
their going into Egypt: there was (you know) but threescore and ten souls that
went into Egypt of Abraham's seed: The time the Israelites abode in Egypt.
but when they came out of Egypt, which was but two hundred and fifteen years
after they went in; for the four hundred and thirty is to be reckoned from the
Promise to Abraham until their coming out of Egypt, and it is clear that there
were two hundred and fifteen years from the Promise to their going into Egypt,
so that there were but two hundred and fifteen years from their going in, to
their coming out; and see how swiftly they did increase, from three score and
ten souls (for there was no more then, but) there came out from twenty years
old and upwards, men of war, six hundred thousand, three thousand, five hundred
and fifty; there were increased of Abraham's seed in two hundred and fifteen
years, six hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty, as
you may see in the book of Numbers; besides, the Levites, with the number of
the males, from a month old and upwards, was twenty and two thousand; besides
the women and all the other children: and this was in that time when they were
in bondage. Thus the Glory of Abraham's seed came very swiftly. And now it shall
fly away like a bird, they shall decrease more than they did increase.

Godliness brings blessings swiftly, Observe.
and Wickedness it causes blessings to depart away swiftly again like a bird.

It follows;

From the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.
Gods Curse follows the wicked close: sometimes in their birth; sometimes in
the womb; and sometimes hindering the conception. You see how God has us at
advantage, how he has us in his hand at every turn; he might if he had pleased
smit us in our conception; if he had spared there, stifled us in the womb; if
spared there, made us stick in the birth.

Wherefore learn we to acknowledge Gods mercy in the general, Use.
that he is patient, Gods preservation in our 1. Conception. 2. Womb. 3. Birth.
4. Cradle. 5. Childhood. 6. [Youth]* 7. Middle-age. 8. Old Age* 9. [Death]*
and long suffering, and gracious to us; let us consider at the several
passages of his mercy, to bless God not only for our general preservation, but
how he did preserve us in the very conception, preserves us in our mothers
womb, and then in the birth, and then in the cradle, and in our childhood, in
our youth, and in our middle age, in our old age, for we lie at his mercy at
every point of time.

Their glory shall fly away like a bird; from the birth, and from the womb,
and from the conception; of some I Will hinder the conception, some others in the
womb shall die, others when they come to be born there they shall perish in
their birth, and so at every time my curse shall follow them, from the
conception, from the womb, and from the birth.

Yea and Fourthly, Though perhaps some may escape in the conception, and in the
womb, and in the birth, yet it follows;

VER. 12.
Though they bring up children, yet will I bereave them.
THE Curse of God is here threatened to pursue them, and over-take them, though
they escaped the Curse that others are under.

Many think that when they have escaped some Judgment that has come upon some
others, Obs. 1.
then they are safe enough and all is well; But thy preservation from some
Judgment that has struck others, may be thy reservation to greater Judgments
that God intends for thee afterward.

2. It is a judgment to be deprived of children in the womb, Obs. 2.
in the birth, but when you have endured much pain in bearing and bringing
forth your children, much labor and trouble in bringing up your children, when
many a thoughtful care in the education of them, much sorrow and grief they
have cost you, and now when they come to be hopeful, almost to men's and women's
estate, and you think to have comfort in them, now for God to take them away,
this is very sad unto parents, it goes exceeding much unto their hearts to be
bereaved then; yet such things as these have befallen many heretofore; and
Parents though the condition must be acknowledged very sad, yet they must
submit to Gods hand in this. Perhaps some of you have in the breeding of your
children endured much, and through many difficulties they have been brought
till they have grown up to be almost at men's and women's estates, and perhaps
they have been towardly and hopeful, you had hoped to have had them to have
been the staff of your age, and yet God suddenly has made them fly away like a
bird, perhaps be drowned, perhaps some other way, Especially if untimely deaths.
in a most uncomfortable manner the Lord has bereaved you of them. You will
say, The condition is sad more than ordinary. Therefore God calls you to
Sanctify his Name more than ordinary, to exercise grace more than ordinary,
and the exercise of grace in such an extraordinary stroke of God upon you may
be as great a good and comfort, as great a blessing unto you as the enjoyment
of your child would have been. If a tender mother that through all her care,
and pain, and labor, after breeding and bringing up a child, should have him
taken away in some untimely death (as you call it) she would think her
condition the saddest of any living. Be it known to you, perhaps some may be
here, or know others of their friends that have had such a hand of God upon
them, be but convinced of this one thing which I know you cannot deny, That the
exercise of grace suitable to this work of God that is now upon thee, or against
thee, conceive it as thou will, I say, the exercise of thy grace suitable to
this work of God is a greater good to thee than the life of thy child could
have been, it could never have done thee that good as the exercise of grace may
do in this condition when it is suitable to this stroke of God upon thee; and
this indeed is the only way to make up any losses of children, or loss of any
goods, be it a child, be it a husband or the dearest friend, a wife, or thy
estate, yet the exercise of thy grace is better than the enjoiment of them all.
It follows;

There shall not be a man left.
I Will bereave them when they bring them up, (the words are [not a man,] and
left is not in the Original) that they be not men. And sometimes God lets the
children of men and women live, Obs. 3.
and yet they never come to be men, but strikes them in their understandings
that they are bereaved of them so far that they never come to be men. I
remember it is reported of Sr Thomas Moore that his wife was mightily desirous
of a Boy, Sr Tho. Moore.
(that was her word) and she had one that proved a fool, and says her husband
to her, You were never quiet till you had a boy, and now you have one that be
all his life a Boy.

I will bereave them that there shall not be a man left.
But I rather think the meaning is, I will take them away

Yea, woe to them when I depart from them.
Surely, even woe to them; he puts a sureness upon this, Woe to them when I
depart from them. As if the holy Ghost should say, What do I threaten this or
the other evil, the great evil of all, the rise of al evils is, Gods forsaking
them,

Woe also to them when I depart from them.

God departs from a people, Expos.
or a particular soul, when he withdraws his goodness and mercy from them: and
the reason why wicked men for a time do enjoy good things, it is, because Gods
time is not yet come to depart from them; but when Gods time is come to depart
from them, then al vanishes suddenly: As the light continues so long as the Sun
is in the firmament, but as soon as ever it is gone it grows to be dark, simile.
the darkness of the night comes suddenly. A man has strength and health so
long as his vitals hold, simile
but as soon as ever the vitals are struck, the craseis of the body, if that be
stricken the strength and health goes. The general presence of God with his
Creature keeps strength and health, Obs. 4.
it is God in the creature that keeps its comforts, and upon Gods departing al
vanishes and comes to nothing. Thou have thy prosperity now, and thou think
thou may enjoy it still; Use.
but how can thou tell but God may suddenly depart, and then all is gone? The
alteration of man's condition is not only from Natural causes, but heigher, from
Gods departing. Carnal hearts think themselves safe if they do not see how
Natural causes shall work their ruin, they see nothing, but as they have
enjoyed much good from Natural causes, so they see them working still for good
to them.

Yea, but know that thy prosperity, or thy adversity depends not upon Natural
causes, but upon a higher cause, though thou have the confluence of all Natural
causes working for thee as much as ever, yet if God pleases to withdraw himself
thou art a lost creature.

And so it is with a Kingdom. When God pleases to depart from a Kingdom, he
does then take away Wisdom from the Wise, he gives them up to their own
Counsels, to perverse Counsels, he blinds them that they cannot forsee their
danger, nor see means to help them, but they shall take ways as if they
intended to destroy themselves. If God do but leave them, whatsoever their
wisdom was before, all their endeavors they shall be blasted and come to
nothing, and in this it is we should sanctify Gods Name, and acknowledge it,
acknowledge our immediate dependence upon God for all our outward good we
enjoy, whatsoever second causes we have to help our selves.

Wicked men will not take notice of him in their Comforts, they cry out of this
and the other cause of their evil, but it is Gods departing from them, that is
the great thing they should take to heart. Particular evils must not be taken
so much to heart as this of Gods departing: Whatsoever our condition be, yet if
God be not departing we are well enough, though in the fire, though in the
water, I will be with thee says the Lord. Mark the ground of the confidence of
the Saints in the time of affliction: in Psalm. 46. (Luther's Psalm it is
called, Psalm. 46.
that is, a Psalm that Luther was wont to call to his friends to sing, Luthers
Psalm.
when he heard of any danger that they were in, or any sad thing fallen out,
Come (says he) let us sing the 46. Psalm, And mark the confidence of the
Saints) We will not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains
be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof rore and be
troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof; though the
heathen rage, and the Kingdoms be removed, yet al shall not trouble us. Why,
what is the ground? The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge. And it is twice repeated in the same words in the Psalm, God is not
gone, God is not departed, therefore no great matter what men can do unto us:
But if one be in misery and have God departed, Oh! how dreadful is that
condition! It was a dreadful speech of Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 1 5.
in 1 Samuel 28. 15. I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against
me, and God is departed from me. Oh! when the Philistines make war upon a
people, when there is enemies at our gates, and then our consciences shall tell
us, that God is departed from us, this is a sad condition: It was a woeful
speech of Saul; God is now departed when I have most need of him: Woe to them
then. For,

First, Reas. why Gods departing is a cause of woe.
The root of all evil is very deep that is upon us when God is departed: It
does not lie in this particular, or that particular, we might make shift to get
over them, the spirit of a man might sustain his infirmity; None can help then.
but the root of the evil it lies in the departing of God, And what can the
Creature do when God is departed? As the King of Israel when the women said,
Help O King. Says he, If the Lord does not help thee, whence shall I help
thee? And as all creatures say, Satan him self canuot 1 Samuel 28
If God be departed, we cannot help, nay, the very Devil cannot help if God be
gone: In 1 Samuel 28. when Saul was sore distressed and he would raise up Samuel,
and the Devil came in the likeness of Samuel, says he, Wherefore do thou
ask of me, seeing the Lord is departed from thee? No Creatures in the world,
nor Devils can do good when God is departed, then the evil is only evil when
God is gone. An evil may have much good in it, and God may sanctify it for
abundance of blessings to his People so long as he continues with them; Evil
then is evil indeed.
but if he be gone, then the evil is only evil: And if God be gone all
protection is gone, and therefore thou lie liable to all kind of evils
whatsoever. And however for the present things do seem to be good that are
remaining, yet the blessing of it is gone if God be not with thee. And this
evil that is upon thee it is no other but the forerunner of eternal evil, It is
the forerunner of eternal evil.
and the creature certainly then must needs sink when God is thus departed. Oh!
If so be that it is so woeful a thing for God to depart from a people here in
this world in regard of the withdrawing of outward things and mercies from
them, what is it then for the Lord to depart for ever from the soul? What an
alteration does the departing of the Sun make? Take a delightful Sunshine
Summers day, and how beautiful is it? Now compare that with a winters dark
dismal night; What makes the difference between these two? The presence of the
Sun in the one, simile
and the Sun is departed from the other. It is but the presence, or the
departing of one creature. Saints should priz the enjoyment of Gods presence.
Oh! if the presence or the departing of one creature makes such a difference
in the world, what does the presence or the departing of the infinite God do to
the soul? Let the Saints who enjoy Gods presence prize it, and pray as the
Prophet did, Lord leave us not.

Oh! Use.
how vain is the heart of man that will depart from God? If thou depart from
him, he departs from thee too, and woe to thee whatsoever thou have when the
Lord is gone and departed from thee.

The Lord departs from particular men and women, as well as from Kingdoms and
Nations, and woe to them also: when God departs from a particular man or woman
he does withdraw his common gifts and graces, and comforts that they were wont
to have, he does curse all means for good unto them, and he gives them up unto
temptations; those are the three special things that God does in departing from
any particular soul, he withdraws the common gifts and graces that they had,
and the comforts that follows, and curses the means that may do them good, and
gives them up to the strength and power of temptation.

You will say (it may be) Many a soul that does desire further presence of God
may be afraid out of this that God is departed. Quest.


Now though God (no question) may in some degree withdraw himself even from his
Saints, Answ,
so as they may be afraid that God is gone and departed from them; yet there is
this one evidence to thee, let thy condition be never so sad, yet if thou be
a Saint (I say) this is one evidence that God is not wholly gone, if he leaves
any kind of shine behind him so far as makes thy heart to be longing after him;
God does not so depart from his Saints but he leaves some luster, some little
glimmering of himself behind, so much as the soul sees which way God is gone,
so much as serves to draw the heart of a poor sinner after himself and makes it
restless and unquiet till it comes to be in Gods presence again; As when a
Candle is taken out of a room, the room is darker than it was, yet there is a
glimmering left behind in that, simile
if you go quickly you may follow: When God departs from hypocrites, he departs
so as he leaves nothing behind him, and they have not so much of God as makes
them make after God, and so they turn away from God and seek to make up the
loss of God in some other thing; but a Saint of God that has God beginning to
depart in any degree, when God is gone, he will not turn aside to seek to make
up the loss of God in any other thing else, but he has so much of God as does
strongly carry his heart after him, that he looks, and sighs, and groans, and
cries after the Lord, and as David in Psalm. 119. 8. Ps. 119. 8.
there he shows us that God was in some degree departed from him, (in his own
sense at least) but mark his expression there, and that one Scripture may much
help any soul that is afraid that God is departed: illustrated
I will keep thy Statutes: O forsake me not utterly. Oh Lord, me thinks I feel
that thou art a going, I feel that I have not those comforts I was wont to
have, those stirrings of thy Spirit as I was wont to have, but O Lord, yet for
all this, I will keep thy Statutes (says David) I am resolved though I should
never have further comforts from thee, yet Lord I will keep thy Statutes, do
with me what thou will, I^le do what I can to honor thee, We should labor to do
what we can for God though we apprehend he has le^^ ^s.
and Lord forsake me not utterly. So long as thy heart can close with this text
and say thus as David, Lord, I will keep thy Statutes, though I feel not thy
presence with me as I was wont to do, yet Lord I will do what I can to honor
thee, though I be in a sad condition, and thou seem to leave me, yet Lord I
will keep thy Statutes, Oh Lord forsake me not utterly. So long as thou can
make use of David's expression as thine own, it is an evidence God is not so
departed as he uses to depart from Hypocrites, and wicked and ungodly men. When
we see God beginning to depart, cry mightily.
And if it be so woeful a thing when God departs, truly then when God is about
departing we had need cry mightily to him, both for Kingdoms and particular
souls. When a Malefactor stands before the Judge and is crying for mercy, if the
Judge be a rising off the Bench, then he lifts up his voice, simile.
and then shreeks out indeed, Good my Lord, then he sees if the Judge be gone
off from the Bench, he is a lost man: so when we see God going, as many
footsteps of Gods departing from us there have been, and are, and yet still
God leaves a light behind, blessed be God we have a light of Gods presence,
Applic. ^o England.
and God is no further departed from us, but so that he has left so much of
himself as we may know where to have him. It follows.

VER. 13.
Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shall
bring forth his Children to the Murderers.
WHAT, God departed? Woe to us when God departs from us. Expos.
Why? but Ephraim might bless himself in his prosperous condition in which he
was, Ephraim (might say) What do you speak of Gods departing? We are in a good
condition, it is but your melancholy fears that makes you speak of such fears
as these are, we were never stronger, nor never had better fortifications, nor
never prospered better than we do; and as I told you, this has reference to
the time of Jerohoam the second, and the Prophet grants it, 2 King. 14
that they were in a prosperous estate, Ephraim was like Tyrus planted in a
pleasant place as Tyrus was; Tyrus, it was a brave City, an Island in the Sea,
much like (as it is reported) that famous City in Italy, Venice.
[Venice] which is in the Sea about seven hundred paces from the Land, it is
built as it were upon a rock in the Sea; and so indeed the word signifies,
Rupes. (...)
it comes from a word that in the Hebrew signifies a Rock: it was a very
exceeding strong place. Quintus Cur^ius.
Quintus Curtius in his fourth book of the Story of Alexander, says that,
Alexander in his conquest had more to do to conquer Tyrus than all Asia
besides, Lib. 4. de Reb. gestis Alexandri.
it was such a mighty and strong place. Pliny says the compass of it was
nineteen miles. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 19.
It was the general Mart almost of all the world, and it was a City very full
of people; and to this the Prophet has reference, when he says, Ephraim was
like Tyrus; because Ephraim did so glory in his numerous Progeny; for Tyrus was
a mighty populous place, as Pliny says of it, that there were three other
ancient Cities came out of it, The Colonies of Tyrus.
as Leptis Vtica, and that great CARTHAGE that was but a spring out of this
root, that CARTHAGE that was such a famous City that did strive a long time for
the Empier of Rome, and the Monarchy and Dominion of the whole world; Yea and
Gades divided (as it were) from the rest of the earth, were peopled from hence:
We need not go so much to the Authors that write about this City and the
braveness of it, Ezekiel. 27.
for in Ezekiel. 27. you have a description of the City Tyrus, as a most brave,
rich, and glorious City. Oh! thou that art situate at the entry of the Sea,
which art a Merchant of the people for many Isles: thus says the Lord God, O
Tyrus, thou have said I am of perfect beauty; Thy borders are in the midst of
the Seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty. And then in the 33. verse,
When thy Wares went forth out of the Seas thou filledst many people, thou
did enrich the Kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of
thy Mercandize. Now says the Lord here, Ephraim is thus, she said to her self,
that she was so prosperous, and strong, and rich every way, she was like to
Tyrus, I grant it says the Prophet, and I have seen it so, Ephraim is the very
same even then when I am departing from her.

So that from hence we may see, Obs. 1.
That at the very time when God is departing from a Kingdom, or a particular
man or woman, they may be in the greatest prosperity that ever they were in all
their lives: When thou art nearest eternal misery thou may be in the highest
degree of outward prosperity that ever thou wast in all thy life. Vltimus
sanitatis gradus, est morbo proximus.
Physicians say that the uttermst degree of health in the body, is next unto
sickness. It Is true here, that the highest degree of outward prosperity, it is
but the forerunner of ruin; Oh! let us learn never to trust in our prosperity,
Use.
but always to walk with fear and trembling before the Lord, Take heed in our
prosperity.
never let us think that we are safe and well because we have outward things at
our wills, we may have them at our wills and yet that very night the word may
come, This night shall thy soul be taken away, as you know it was with the rich
man in the Gospel, when he had his barns full and was in consultation what to
do, yet now shall thy soul be taken from thee. And Nebuchadnezzar at that very
time when he was glorying in his Magnificent Palace that he had made, now the
word comes out against him.

Again, Obs. 2.
especially it should teach us, not to trust (as in no outward prosperity so)
not in any fortifications, nor strength. Tyrus was an invinceable place (it
seems to be so) yet God could pull it down: nor to trust in the multitude of
Soldiers: This example is as famous as any to teach men not to trust in any
outward whatsoever. Expos. 2.


Calvin he carries it in somewhat a different way, Calvin in loc.
and truly not without some probability neither. I saw Ephraim that thou were
planted in a pleasant place, as in Tyrus, so he carries it thus, that is, Thou
art a plant like to the plants that were in Tyrus. (...)
And the word translated, pleasant place, it is a word that signifies building:
because they use to build the most delightful places; it signifies also a
secure place of habitation, now (says he) Tyrus it was upon a Rock, and
therefore they had little ground for Orchards, or Gardens, or Plants, but only
such as were made by art, and with a great deal of cost and charges, and (says
he) As men when they are striving with Nature, if they mean to do any thing at
all, they will do it to purpose, and fetch out the most curious plants and
bestow a great deal of cost to cover them from the coldness of the winter, as
we see in places that are near the Sea, that merely by art they fetch out a
place for a Garden or Orchard, they are mighty chargable. So Ephraim was
compared to such a plant, that is, God was at a great deal of charge for it,
and very careful he was to preserve them. As you heard the last day, God
compared his love to his people to a longing woman that longed for the first
ripe fruits; so Gods love was toward his people, and here God compares his
respect to his people; as a man or woman would do to a tender plant that is in
a Garden or Orchard that is made with abundance of cost and charge, look how
careful they would be to preserve some tender plant in covering of it, and
keeping of it from being mixed with the frost, (says he) such was my care
toward Ephraim, howsoever they have served me. Thus to aggravate their sins
God does show his care of them (thus Calvin.) But says the text for all this,
though my care has been thus over them, yet they shall bring forth their
children to the murderers.

God never shows so much respect to any man or woman, Obser.
but upon their forsaking of him, wrath does follow. Yet after all this they
shall bring forth their children to the murderers, as if so be their children
had been born for no other end, but to satisfy the mouth of the sword, to be
objects of the fury of the murderers; and those children that they shall bring
forth in their war, they shall send them forth, just as if a man did send a
company of beasts to the slaughterhouse.

They shall bring them forth to the murderers.
Sometimes indeed in war men are led forth even by the treachery or the spite
at least of Commanders in the war, only that they might be a prey to the
murderers; The villainy of malicious Co^manders in ware against the godly.
if any wicked Officers in an Army have a spite against a man, or any
particular company of men, ordinarily their spite is most against godly men in
their Army, a wicked, swearing, deboist Officer that has a spite against
godly men in an Army he will set them upon the most desperate service, there
enjoin them upon pain of death to do service and not to stir, on purpose that
they might be cut off, or at least hoping that they will fall into the hand of
the murderer. Just in this case like to David, for his own ends in another way,
that would set Vriah in the forefront and would have others withdraw from him;
on purpose that he might fall by the enemy.

They shall bring forth children to the murderers.
Many children have been brought forth to the murderers even in this way. (But
for the Observations from the words.)

First, Observe.
The Curse of God stays not upon the Parents; but goes forwards to the
children; It Is for the sin of the parents that the children are to be brought
forth to the murderers, and especially it stays not upon Idolaters, but goes
to their children. There are two branches in this Note.

1. The Curse of God stays not upon the parents, 1. Part. Deuteronomy. 28. 18.
but goes toward the children; in Deuteronomy. 28. 18. Cursed shall be the fruit of
thy body, and especially to the children of Idolaters. Psalm. 137. 8.
In Psalm. 137. 8. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall
he be that rewards thee as thou have served us, happy shall he be that takes
and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. Isa. 13. 18
And in Isa. 13. 18. Their Bows also shall dash the young men to pieces, and
they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; 2d Commandment*
their eye shall not spare children. So in the second Commandment, the Lord
there threatens, to visit the sins of the fathers, upon the children, to them
that hate him, to the third and fourth generation.

You will say, Object.
Why should children suffer for their parents sins?

You will kill young Vipers and Snakes though they never have stung. Answ.
So, God sees guilt enough in the children of wicked men and of Idolaters, so
that in Justice he may destroy them; but he does rather take advantage to
destroy them, Note.
because they be the children of wicked men and of Idolaters: As if a man
commit TREASON, he deserves death then for his own fault; An apt simile.
but if the King hear that his Father and Grandfather were Traitors, he shall
die the rather because of them. So it is true, the children of godly people have
sin and guilt in them, as well as the children of wicked men; Yea, but the
children of wicked men having guilt, and so liable to Gods Justice, God will
take the advantage the rather to do them Justice because their parents was
wicked and ungodly; and this is righteous enough with God.

And the children of Idolaters above all shall not be spared, 2d Part.
and especially those that live to many years, Seed of Idolaters.
because there is no sin that is so much strengthened from their Ancestors, and
the example of their Forefathers as Superstition and Idolatry is; Idolatry
depends much (...) Ancestors
Why should we be wiser than our Forefathers? What Is the argument of our
superstitious vanities, but our Forefathers did thus? And therefore that is
observable, 2d Commandment illustrated
That there is no Commandment in the Ten threatens Gods judgments upon the
children, but the second Commandment,

Because that there is no Commandment broken from the example and plea of
forefathers as the second Commandment; and therefore let the children of
Idolaters and false Worshipers look to it, Superstitious children admonished.
that they repent from the sins of their forefathers; Instead of pleading for
the sins of your forefathers, you should fall down and humble your souls for
the sins of your forefathers, or otherwise that is the very reason that God will
punish the sins of the forefathers upon the children, because their fathers did
worship God in a false way, and they will do so too.

And then another Note is this, Obs.
That as this is a heavy fruit of Gods Curse upon a people for the Parents
sins, for God, Curse to follow to the children: so this is a special fruit of
Gods Curse upon children, That they shall be brought forth to the Murderers. In
times of War if you make not your peace with God it is just with God that things
should be ordered so that your children should be brought forth to the
Murderers. Tenderhearted Mothers.
Oh! you tender hearted Mothers, who are loath that the wind should blow upon
your children, look upon them and pity them, how can you endure to see their
blood gush out, how can you endure to see your little ones sprawling in the
streets, or upon the pikes of the Soldiers? If your hearts cannot endure this,
seek to make your peace with God, to deliver your selves and your children from
this curse that has befallen many. We know not what these wars may bring
forth, The Irish war.
what they have done in Ireland we have heard much of, how the Parents have
looked upon their children brought forth to the Murderers; and though it is true,
in many Cities and places where the Enemy has come they have not generally (at
least) broke forth to such abominable cruelties as this is, The English Looking
glass.
but who knows what a Summer or two may bring forth; for certainly where War
continues it drives on with more and more rage.

You will say then, Object.
Oh! let us make peace upon any terms.

No, let it rather be your care to make your peace with God, Answ.
that is your way to deliver your cildren from being brought forth to the
Murderers; for if it be a false peace it may be but a further way to bring
forth your children to the Murderers. It is an extreme sad Curse of God, in
this especially, when it shall come before their very Parents sight, for so the
Prophet speaks as if they should be brought forth even before them: Many of the
Heathens have very Pathetical expressions about the sad condition of Parents
when their children are slain before their eyes: as that of Priamus Son Polites
that was slain by Pyrrhus, Dij si qua est in Coelo pietas, qui talia curet,
praemia reddent delita, patrios foedasti funere vultus.
he cries to his gods, Oh! if there be any thing in Heaven that does take care
of such things, come and revenge this (says he,) when as Pyrrhus slew his Son
before his eyes. Thou have before the very face of the Father even sprinkled
the blood of the child upon his face: he was not able to bear it though he saw
himself ready to die next, but cries to the very Heavens to revenge it. And
that was a very sad story of the Emperor Mauritius, Virg.
that his Sons, and Wife, and Daughters were brought before his eyes and slain
before him: This is the woeful evil that falls upon Kingdoms. Children should
beseech their parents to repent.
And if your children did but understand this very text that now I am opening,
they would even look upon you and cry with tears in their eyes, Oh Father! Oh
Mother! Repent, repent, and seek God for your selves and for us, Oh! repent,
and make up your peace with God that we may not be brought forth to the
Murderers.

Oh! but if this be so great an evil for Parents to have their children to be
brought forth to the Murderers here, how great an evil then is it for Parents
to bring forth children to be fuel for Gods wrath for all eternity, to be the
firebrands for Gods wrath to burn upon, milions of years to all eternity? You
then that are Parents, and have children, look upon them and have such thoughts
as these that may break your hearts, Oh! what a sad thing would it be that such
a babe that came out of my womb should be a firebrand for Gods wrath to burn
upon to all eternity? Oh! A meditation for parents.
how had I need pray and bring up my children in the fear of God, lest I should
be such an unhappy Father that out of my loins, should not only bring forth a
child to the Murderers, but for the Devils in Hell? But let not this discourage
you that are godly to venture your children in lawful Wars, for when you shall
labor to make up your peace with God, in such a cause if you be willing to
sacrifice your children to God, if thy child should be brought forth even to
death, yet he is but brought forth even to Martyrdom, rather than to the
Murderers: Thou should rather rejoice that thou have a child to bring forth
in such a Cause, then to be overprest with sorrow that the life of thy child
has been taken away with the Murderers; and some of your children though with
the loss of their own lives, yet they have been a means to keep you, and us all
from the hand of the Murderer, to keep the City and the Kingdom from being
overrun with Tyranny, Idolatry, and all kind of Prophanness, and it may be
worth the lives of your children that good that has been done. Revel. 12. 11.
Revel. 12. 11.
And they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their
Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice ye
Heavens, and ye that dwell in them. They loved not their lives unto the death:
therefore rejoice ye Heavens, enlightened
and them that dwell therein. When parents shall be willing to give up their
children in the Cause of God, even children shall be willing to sacrifice
themselves in Gods Cause, (I say having made up their peace with God) then when
they love not their lives unto the death, there shall be joy in Heaven, and
they shall overcome in dying even as Jesus Christ did. I remember I have read
of Zenophon, Zenophon.
when he was sacrificing to their Idol gods, he wore a Crown upon his head, and
there came news to him that his child was dead, he presently pulls his Crown
from off his head in token of sorrow; but then asking how he died, answer was
made, That he died in the Wars: Then he calls for his Crown again. So perhaps
some of you have lost your Children, nature cannot but work, yea but then ask
how they lost their lives, they lost their lives valiantly in a work that did
as much concern the glory of God as ever any War did, and seeing they died so,
rather bless God than be so sorrowful that they fell into the hand of
Murderers. It follows.

VER. 14.
Give them, O Lord: what will thou give? Give them a miscarrying womb, and dry
breasts.
THIS follows, upon this that they shall be brought forth to the Murderers
hand. Then, Lord, give them; what will thou give them? Give them a miscarrying
womb, and dry breast.

Some think this was an Imprecation by a spirit of Prophecy, Expos. 1.
as if the holy Prophet had his heart filled with the wrath of God, Give them
Lord; what will thou? give them a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts,

But rather according to most Interpreters, I think this expression is rather
an expression of Commiseration, 2. Preferred
(that is) foreseeing the lamentable condition that the ten Tribes should be in
ere long, the Prophet pities their condition, and would fain come in and pray
for them, and he begins, Give them, O Lord (says the prophet;) and then he
makes a stop, as if he should say, but O Lord what shall I say for them, Give
them, but Lord I know not what to ask for them, I am at a stand when I consider
what they are, what the many mercies they have had already, what warnings they
have had, how hardened they are in their sin, and how thy word is gone forth,
but Lord give them: shall I say, Lord give them deliverance, give them peace,
give them prosperity still, Lord I dare not, that I cannot ask, all means have
been used for to bring them unto thee, and yet they stand out against the Lord;
thou know they are deer to me, they are of my flesh, and I should be glad
that they might be saved, but thy glory is dearer to me then they are, and
therefore for that I cannot pray: and therefore the Prophet prays, Give them,
seeing all this misery must befall them, what, shall the enemies be let out upon
them? shall they and their children be made a prey to the Murderer? Lord,
rather let no more be born of them, rather let those children that otherwise
should have been born and might have lived in their own Land, Lord God, (...)
them not be born rather than come to live to so great misery; so he does not
pray for a miscarrying womb and dry breasts absolutely, but compartively. From
whence the Notes are.

First; Obs. 1.
That men's sins make many times Gods Ministers and his Saints at a point that
they know not what to say in prayer. Truly, though there has be a mighty
Spirit of prayer through Gods mercy in the Kingdom, yet considering that since
God has come to show himself willing to deliver us, and Christ has been
coming even upon his white Horse in peace to take the Kingdom to himself, since
that time such a spirit of Malignity has appeared against Christ and his
Saints as ever was in the Kingdom, it puts many of the Ministers and Saints of
God to a nonplus in their prayers, and straightens their very hearts in the
day of their fasting, when they are to seek God, England more unfit for mercy
now than at the first
that the Lord would give forth mercy, The Lord knows that the condition we are
in is more unfit for mercy than we were at the very first day; Thus a Nation,
thus particular people may put the Servants of God to a stand in their prayers,
and straighten their hearts; Oh! were it that people had gone on in the
embracing of Reformation as they seemed to do at the first, Oh! how enlarged
would the herrts of the Saints have been in prayer? Oh Lord! give England
mercy, give England deliverance.

And then a second Note is this, Obs. 2.
That the fruitfulness, or the barrenness of the womb, it is from God. Give
them, give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts. This is from God; Genesis 30. 2
in Genesis 30. 2. when Rachel cried for children, Give me children or else I die,
the text says, that Jacobs anger was kindled against Rachel, Paulus Phagius.
and said, Am I in Gods stead? Paulus Phagius (that learned man) says, Four
Keys in Gods hand.
that the Hebrews have this speech, that there are four keys that are in Gods
hand that he gives not into the hand of any Angel.

1. The Key of the Rain; 1. Clavis pluviae.
and that you have in Deuteronomy. 28. 12. The Lord shall open unto thee his good
treasure, the Heaven to give thee rain unto thy Land in his season.

1. There Is the Key of Food; 2. Clavis cibitionis.
in Ps. 145. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in
due season; thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing.

3. There Is the Key of the Grave, 3. Clavis sepulcronn^
in Ezekiel. 37. 12. Behold, Oh my people I will open your Graves, and cause you
to come up out of your Graves.

4. And lastly, 4. Clavis sterilitatis.
The Key of the Womb, and that is in Genesis 38. 22.

These four Keys God keeps in his own hand, Non nuptiae dant liberos, sed qui
nuptijs lege^ dedit Deus.
and therefore Gods providence is to be observed in this, and there ought to be
a submission to his hand in it.

Thirdly, Sin may bring such evil time upon a people as better those who live
to such times had not been born, or died before those times had come; Theodor.
Give them a miscarrying womb and a dry breast, if they should have children
that should live to endure all the miseries of those times that are coming,
they had been better not to have been born, or have died long before this time
says the Prophet, We must take heed of wishing this upon every little
affliction that does befall us, as it is the frowardness of many people even
with God himself, that if their children do but anger them to wish they had
never been born, or cold in the mouth many years ago, I wish I had gone to your
Grave: Parents many times are ready to wish their children that they had never
been born of them; but this is frowardness against God himself, and wickedness;
those that are so ready to wish their children had not been born, they are the
least sensible of the sin that does cause the affliction upon which they do
wish such a thing as that is.

Give them a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.
First; Reas. 1.
There may be either such miserable slaughters as that Parents might even wish
that they never had any Children.

Or Secondly, Reas. 2.
They may live under such cruel tyranny for their souls and bodies.

Or thirdly, Reas. 3.
They may be drawn from God by false Religion, and so may be in a condition
worse than if they had not been born.

Hence Parents to whom God denies children or takes them away, Use. 1.
they should quiet themselves in Gods dispose, Parents to submit.
especially in such times as these are: it may be God has taken away your
children to deliver them from greater evils: as in the house of Jeroboam, 1
King. 14. 13.
there was but one child that had any good in it, and says God, That child
shall die, and gives the reason, Because it had some good in it. So that God
takes away many that he has the most love unto, and lets others to live that
he has not so much love unto.

Yes, Quest.
(some may say) If I were sure that their souls were safe, though God does take
them away, if I were sure of their salvation, then I would be content.

That Is true indeed, Answ.
If your children were saved, what hurt is that to be taken away here and
received to Heaven, and there to live for ever with Christ, not to sin, or
sorrow more: but howsoever you may satisfy your selves in these three things.

First, That they are under an indefinite promise, though not an universal.

Secondly, Suppose he should not be saved, then it were better that he should
be taken away than to live to sin more against God, he might have lived to have
done a great deal of mischief in the world if he were one that God did not
intend to save, and therefore quiet thy self; However God sees further than
thou do, either when he denies the^ Children, Use. 2.
or takes them away in such times as these are. Evil times good times to die in*


Further, In times when public evils are threatened, they are good times to die
in; If better not to be born in evil time, then certainly it is no great evil
to die in evil times. Good men are taken away from the evil to come. As if a
woman had her breast to be launc'd or cut off, An apt simile.
would not the tender Father take the Children out of the room in the mean
time? Who knows but God may have the breast of his his Church (our Mother) even
to be cut off for a time, yet may suffer heavier things than ever she has
done, and if God shall take away his tender Children that will not be able to
bear such a sight as that, what great evil is it? As we read of God toward
Moses, when Gods Glory was to pass by, he puts Moses into the hole of a Rock;
and truly the graves of the Saints are but as the holes of the Rock til the
Glory of Gods Justice passes by a people.

And thirdly, Use. 3.
If the sins of Parents may be the cause of such things to Children as better
they had not been born, let not parents cause their children to wish they had
never been born.
let those that have Children take heed that they lay not up such wrath for an
Inheritance for their Children, as that their Children afterward should even
wish they never had been born of such Parents, especially if Parents be
careless in the education of their Children not to bring them up in the fear of
the Lord, By neglect of good education.
hereafter their Children may curse the time that ever they were born of them,
and say, Oh! that I rather had been of the offspring of Vipers, or the
generation of Dragons than that I had come of such Parents, Oh! that my Mother
had had a miscarrying womb, or that she never had had breasts to give me suck.
Certainly this will be the voice of many children against their Parents one
day: Look to it that there be never a Father nor Mother in this place that may
give cause to their Children thus to wish they had never been born of such
Parents. If better not to be born in respect of temporal calamities; what then
in respect of eternal?
And certainly if the enduring of sorrows and misery in this world may put them
into such a condition, what then will sin and being the authors of miseries to
others do? Those Children that are abominable and wicked in their lives, and
are causes of mischief to others, especially those who are authors of
calamities to others.
how much cause is it that it had been said, that it had been been better his
Mothers womb had miscarried: as it was said of Judas, that it had been better
that he had never been born: And so it may be said of abundance at this day,
what abundance of evil are some at this day the cause of unto others? What
woeful disturbances, As at this day in Eng.
distractions and calamities do some men bring upon a nation? had it not been
better that their Mothers wombs to have miscarried, and their breasts not to
have given them such?

And again, What horrible wickedness are some guilty of? How many Mothers this
day have cause ^o say, Oh! that my womb had miscarried of such a Child! Oh that
my breasts had never given such a Child suck! Oh that ever one should come out
of my womb to do so much mischief, to take up Arms to fight against his
COUNTRY, to fight against the Saints, to bring in Slavery and Tyranny, that
ever any out of my womb should have a hand in such a mischievous way as this
is! Oh! these breasts of mine every time I look upon them, I wish they had
never given such a one suck, for it may be they will suck my blood too.
Certainly if ever there were a time to wish their wombs had miscarried, and
their breasts never given suck, these are the times many may do so. Luke. 23.
29.
And this seems to have allusion to that which Christ says in Luke 23. 19.
Blessed are the wombs that never bear, and the paps that never gave suck. I
say, concerning many particulars in the Kingdom in this time, it might have
been said, Oh! blessed had the womb been that such men were in, had they never
been born, and the paps that they sucked, that they had never given suck. This
would not have been an interpretation, but a good prayer, if it could have been
foreseen, if any Prophet could have forseen this, that thou should have been
a Child, and he should have been an Actor in so much mischief as has been done
in this Kingdom of late, if any Prophet could have forseen this, Note.
thou would have said Amen to his prayer, Lord give this woman a miscarrying
womb and dry breasts that she might never have born nor given suck to such an
one. It follows.

VER. 15.
All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them.
WHAT this Gilgal was I opened in the 4th Chapter at the 15. Verse, Gilgal.
it was a very famous place for many remarkable things: Chap. 4. 15
Stones were set up in remembrance of so great a mercy in coming over Jordan,
and there was the first Passover that ever they had, and there they were
circumcised, and the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you, from whence it had the name; they were not
circumcised in all that time in the Wilderness, from whence it was called
Gilgal, because the reproach was rolled away; I showed abundance of mercy to
them in Gilgal, there they eat the fruit of the Land, and there the reproach
was rol'd away, Expos.
and the monument of my great mercy in bringing them over Jordan; but now they
have turned this place to the most abominable place in the Country, for because
there were such great things done in Gilgal, they thought that it was a holy
place, and therefore they might justify their superstitious ways, though God
afterward did choose another place for his Worship, yet they thought to
sacrifice and worship in Gilgal, they thought it might be justified, because it
was a place where such great things were done. Now says God, I never intended
that, all their wickedness is in Gilgal.

Superstitious men are proud to put holiness upon places that have had
remarkable things done in them in reference to Religion. Obs.
This phrase we have had occasion to meet with before, and therefore I pass it.

All their wickedness.
That is, Their chief wickedness, as if God should say, there is a great deal
of wickedness among them, Expos. 1.
there are Murders and Thefts, and abundance of other evils, the breaches of
the second Table; but yet above all, their wickedness is at Gilgal, they think
to make use of that place where I showed so much mercy to them, they think to
justify their superstitious worship, but I Will have them know that I hate this,
There I hated them says God, I abhor this that they think to be justified by.
So that the Notes are.

Above all sins, Obs. 1.
the sin of Idolatry is that that God looks upon as the great wickedness for
which he does hate and abhor a people. Because in that sin men think by their
own ways of worship to make God amends for their wicked ways, and present
their own ways of worship, to justify themselves in all other kind of
wickedness.

And again: Obs. 2.
For men to abuse that wherein God shows mercy: For them to take advantage or
occasion by that to turn it into sin against God, this is that which God hates.
For there was much mercy they met withal at Gilgal, and they made Gods mercy an
occasion to their wickedness. To make that which should engage us to God to be
an occasion of wickedness against God this is abominable in Gods eyes: As you
read in the Law, Exodus 23. 19.
that you must not seath a Kid in his mothers milk; that which is the milk to
preserve the Kid, that must not be a means for a second death, to seath or boil
it in says God, that is unnatural, and but cruelty; so for us to deal with God
to take those things that should be a means to engage our hearts further to God
to be occasion of further sinning against God, that is abominable; there says
God, I hated them.

Concerning Gilgal. Expos.
Their Idolatrous Priests told them (as it is propable) that that place was a
holy place, and surely God that had appeared so to them there would accept of
their services in that place rather than any other, and so though God had after
chose another place, yet still they doted upon this place, [Gilgal] and that
which was so famous for Gods Worship became as infamous for superstition and
wickedness.

Polanus upon the text compares that Town in Germany, Wittebergan ob
Reformationis inititu^ per Lutheru^ Sathanus haeresium Theatrum fecit. Pol. in
loc.
[Wittenberg] to this Gilgal. Those places where the Lord has been more
gracious to people, the Devil seeks to corrupt those places most of all; as in
Wittenberg was the beginning of Reformation by the means of Luther, and now
(says he) the Devil has made it the Theater of diverse Heresies, and still
makes it more and more; that very place which was a place of Gods mercy to the
Country: so here, that place that was the greatest place of mercy, See
Wilkingson against the Familists; print. Lon. 1579. page 3. Reporting the like
of Colchester in Essex. And in Fox Act. Mon. 1. edit. p. 606. A. not untruly
is here the greatest place of wickedness; the Devil envies it so much the
more, and all their wickedness is here.

All their wickedness.] That is, the chief wickedness, their Superstition and
Idolatry is the chief and the great wickedness that provokes God against a
people; not only because of the presumption in it, but because it is an Inlet to
all other kind of wickedness. Hence observe:

1. Where there is false worship in any place all manner of wickedness follows.
And people do most stick unto their superstitious ways more than to any thing,
and therefore that is the chief wickedness, yea and they think to satisfy God
with those ways for their other sins, All their wickedness is there.

A further Note from hence is, Obs. 2.
That to sin in face of mercies, where there are the Testimony of Gods abundant
mercies, that is very abominable to God. That Is a great aggravation of sin, to
sin in the face of the testimonies of the mercies of God, what, where so much
mercy, yet here wicked and abominable? Does God fill thy family, thy chamber,
thy closet, thy bed, thy shop with the Testimonies of his mercy? Take heed how
thou sinnest there where there are abundant Testimonies of Gods mercy to
witness against thee, and to aggravate thy sin.

But I find some Interpreters, Expos. 2 Ar. Mon. and some Hebr. Interpreters.
and that not one or two, but many, (and that makes me speak of this
Interpretation) that refer this wickedness to the casting off the Government
that God had appointed, and the bringing in of a new Government: at Gilgal was
the place where they would have Saul to be their King, and cast off the
Government by Judges that God had appointed among them, Gilgal was the place;
now this was the ground of all their other obstinate wickedness, and God
remembers this a long time after and says, All their wickedness is in Gilgal,
and there I hated them.

From hence the Note is this, Obs. 3.
That it is a hateful thing to cast off the Government that God would have us
under, Civil and Ecclesiastical Government united in Israel.
it is hateful to God; the Jews had both their Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government by Divine Institution, they were both mixed in one there. And though
now we have not our Civil Government by Divine Institution, but it is left to
the Creation of man, Civil Government Ecclesiastical Government
according as in prudence men in several Countries shall think best; but
Ecclesiastical Governm^^t certainly is as much by Divine Institution now, as
ever it was, and it must be so, because it is spiritual, and nothing can work
in a spiritual way upon the inward man but that that is by Divine Institution,
therefore whatever the Government be (I will not meddle with the particulars)
yet we must take heed how we cast off that which is appointed by God, for
that is hateful, there I hated them; we had need therefore search and examine to
find what that is, pains must be taken about it.
and if we think it be not so clear as their Government was to them, we must
take so much the more pains to examine, and not think it long that there is so
much time spent i^ seeking to find out what the Government should be, do not
think it a light matter: many people they think it but a circumstance, and
things that we need not trouble our selves so much about, and why should there
be so much time spent in searching it out; As a thing of great consequence.
Learn from hence to look upon it as a great matter, as a matter upon which the
welfare or the evil of a Kingdom does much depend, for so it was here, says
God, because they cast off the Government that I would have, there I hated
them. Thus you may take in both the meanings, both the Testimonies of Gods
mercies in Gilgal at first, and the place where they cast off my Government and
would have another, I hated them there says God.

Again, Obs. Some sins provoke God to hatred.
There I hated them.] There are some sins that provoke God to anger, and some
to grief, but some to hatred, and that is dreadful when our sins shall provoke
hatred, the Lord hates the works of iniquity. This is the great difference
between the sins of the Saints and others, the sins of the Saints may anger
God, may grieve God, but the sin of others they provoke God to hatred. I hated
them.

Again, Obs. God manifests his displeasure in the places where we sin.
There I hated them.] (There) Sometimes God manifests his hatred in the very
places where men do sin against him. As a man's spirit will rise if he comes to
a place where he has been wronged by any; If you should come into the very
place where your children have been murdered, simile.
or wives ravished, would not you have your hearts rise with indignation, in
this place was my child murdered, in this place was my child ravished; so says
God, every time he looks upon Gilgal, Oh! here was this wickedness committed,
there I hated them. Hence it is that many guilty consciences dare not go into
the place where they have committed sin, There I hated them.

It follows.

I will drive them out of my house.
They shall remain no longer in a Church State, they shall remain no longer so
to be in my House. Expos.


Those who under the color of being under the Church of God, yet live in the
ways of wickedness, God will unchurch them even in regard of the outward
appearance of a Church Estate; I Will drive them out of my House: It Is a dreadful
expression this, for a father to take his child or servant and drive them out
of his house notes great indignation; simile.
to be driven out of Gods House is a sore evil, that makes all other evils
indeed to be evil, as abiding in Gods House is a great blessing, and
recompenses the want of many outward blessings. If any of you that have been
servants to great men, and should be driven out of their houses, and especially
for your conscience, yet if God takes you into his House you are well enough,
Psalm. 2. 8. illustrated.
and for that you have a famous Scripture in Psalm. 52. 8. But I (says David)
am like a green Olive tree in the House of God, I trust in the mercy of God for
ever and ever; Upon what occasion was this Psalm penned? It was when David was
driven out of the house of Saul by the occasion of Doeg, there was a Doeg that
did exasperate Saul against him, and David was driven from his house, so he
dared not come into it, but what comfort had David? But I am like a green Olive
tree in the House of God; though I cannot be in Saul's house, and enjoy the
privileges of his house, yet blessed be God that I may be in His House, and
there thrive and prosper as a green Olive tree.

I will drive them out of my house.
God cannot endure wickedness in his house, Obs. God cannot endure wickedness
in his house,
neither should we; God accounts it his dishonor to have wickedness and wicked
men in his house, and so should we, as in the Church, ungodly men should be
driven out of the house of God; we must not make Gods house an Hogs-sty, an
unclean place for all Swine to come in, Neither should Christians in their
families.
but they should be driven out as Christ drove out the Buyers and Sellers out
of the Temple; yea, and so should all Christians drive out of their families
wicked and ungodly servants: Psalm. 101. 7. He that works deceit shall not
dwell within my house (says David) And he that tells lies shall not tarry in
in his sight. Ps. 101. 7^
It Is a dishonor for any who make profession of Religion, that though
themselves be not scandalous in their own lives, yet there are those in their
house that live scandalously, they have as wicked servants in their houses as
any; this is a dishonor to Religion: God drives out wickedness out of his
house, and do you do so to yours.

And I will love them no more.
By [Love] here is meant, Expos.
the communication of outward good things, for that carnal hearts account to be
the only love of God: Indeed if they may have but outward prosperity here in
this world, they make that an argument of Gods love unto them: Well (says God)
though you have had many such kind of arguments of my love, (such fruits of my
love) yet I will love you no more, I will take away all those privileges and
good things that you have enjoyed, There are privileges and good things that
come from no other love but that which may be taken away; Oh! let not us be
satisfied with those, let us be satisfied with nothing else but that which
comes from everlasting love. You may have your outward estates, you may have
comely Bodies, Health, Strength, Success in your labors, comings-in
plentifully, yea, you may have Church Privileges, and yet all this not come
from the everlasting love of God, that can never be taken away; these fruits of
Gods love may be taken from you, and God may say as concerning all these, I
will love you no more: but there are fruits of love, the sanctifying Graces of
Gods Spirit, the fruits of Electing love, and God can never say of these, I
will love you no more.

No more.
After many deliverances that this people had in a way of love, God resolves
with himself that he will have done with them, he will love them no more, he
will deliver them no more: God may withdraw the sense of his love from his
people for a while, but he manifests his love again, the afflictions of the
Saints they are but a little cloud that soon passes over, the Sun soon breaks
in again upon them, and Love shines; but the Sun of the wicked and ungodly
sets, and never rises again: this is dreadful when a man's ruin, or a peoples
ruin is thus sealed by God, whatever mercies you have had heretofore, yet now
there is an end of all, Adieu mercy, adieu love, I had gracious manifestations
of them once to my soul, but they are now gone, I must never enjoy them more,
now God has changed his administrations toward me, I must expect nothing but
wrath, the hand of his sore displeasure to cause ruin, and to be sunk
everlastingly: Oh! let thy provocations of God be no more, do not thou ad unto
them; I have dealt falsely with God, dallied and trifled with the Lord, many
times promising fair, but when I was delivered then have dealt wickedly with
thee; but no more Lord: Oh! take heed, if thou add'st any more unto thy
wickedness lest that this dreadful sentence be pronounced in Heaven against
thee, I will love thee no more. Original reading*
The words are in the Original, I will add no more; I have done enough already,
I will do good to this wretched creature no more; my Goodness and Mercy has
had their turn, no more; Spirit strive with them, no more; Ordinances, no more
do them any good; Mercy meddle no more with them, I will love them no more.

All their Princes are revolters.
This is a very strange expression: What all? Yes, even from Jeroboam to
Hoshea's time, every one of them, the Princes of Israel were wicked men, for
two hundred and fifty years space, in all successions every one were naught,
and false, (...)
and ungodly, all were revolters. It Is an elegant Paranomasia that in the
Original, Princes revolters, the words have a greater elegancy in the Original
than in our English; (...). qui persuaderi [ut credant] non possunt 70.
the Seventy they turn it by this word, Men that could not be persuaded, they
were all of them men that could not be persuaded, they were set upon their own
way, their own ends, and would have their own politic fetches, and let
Prophets, let any of the Godly come to show them the mind of God, they were
resolved in their way, they would not be persuaded, but were wilful, and they
would have this way, and whatever came of it they would venture their lives and
the loss of their Kingdom but they would have it, in a desperate way they were
set upon their wills, come of it what would they would go on in this way.

Men that are great in Power and Authority they think it a dishonor to them to
be persuaded to alter their minds, Obs. 1.
but rather will go on desperately to the ruin of themselves, and the ruin of
their Kingdoms, rather than they will hearken to counsel; they were all of them
men that would not be persuaded: and Luther upon the place has this expression
(says he) Being lift up in the pride of their hearts by their Power that they
had, Elati pote^tia voleba^t superiores esse verbo.
they would be above the Word it is self, they think it much to have their
hearts come under the Authority of the Word. Luther.
This is the wickedness of men's hearts when they grow great they swell above
the Word of God.

They are all wicked, all of them revolters.
Some of them there were that made some kind of show at their first coming in,
Expos.
when they came first to the Crown they gave great hopes (some of them) that
they would have better times than they had before, Princes when they come first
to the crown promise fair.
and that things that were evil in former Princes Reigns would now be reformed,
but within a while they went all the same way; you know Jehu, and so some
others went in a fair way at first, but they all turned to be revolters; from
whence our Notes are: First, See what CREATURE ENGAGEMENTS are: Obs. 1.
see what engagements will work in the hearts of men when they are engaged in
their honors, and in their preferments in their great places of Dignities and
Powers, and Profits and Gain* see what they will do: evil Princes being engaged
and afraid of losing their power; if any should go to Jerusalem to worship,
they all went in one stream, not one of them was taken off from their great
Engagements; indeed many in smaller matters may be taken off to God, but if it
come to a great matter, then none; perhaps some poor Ministers that had little
livings (you know) heretofore, they would be taken off, and see the Truths of
God, and the sinfulness of Ceremonies; but where did your Deans, and Bishops?
where did any of the Prelates that had great Engagements? they would never see
the Truth that now almost every body sees, their great Engagements hindered
them. And so the great Engagements of Princes hindered them though the Truth
was clear enough.

Secondly; This is brought as the cause of the evil of the People, they were
all wicked, no mervail though the people were so, Obs. 2.
According to peoples interests so they are, as they see those above them go
that have power over them, that way people will go. Ephraim was wicked, because
all their Princes were revolters. Those that are in places of power they drive
the people along before them, for (I say) God has little honor in the world
but as it suits in men's Interests, Use.
according as they have Interest this way or that way. Let Magistrates consider.


Thirdly, They are all Revolters.

From this the Note is this, Obs. 3.
That Princes though they should be used with reverence, yet must not be
flattered, but their sins must he showed plainly unto them, Psalm. 104. 32.
reflected on.
[They are all Revolters,] though they can hardly bear it. Touch the Mountains
and they will smoke, touch the great men, reprove but them, and presently the
heat of their wrath rises and they smoke even with indignation. But yet those
that are faithful about them they should trust God with their places, Servants
to great men exhorted.
and estates, and with their lives; Oh had we but those about Princes that
would deal faithfully and show to them how far the guilt of blood may be upon
them, and the evil of it might be upon them, Certainly it would be otherwise
with us than it is at this day: had we but Latimers and Deerings (that worthy
Preacher in Queen Elizabeth's time) It Is said of Latimer, Latimers and Deerlings
spirit.
that sending a Book to King Henry the Eigth, he writes in the first Page of
it, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge: and Deering in his Sermons even
before the Queen speaking of disorders of the times, and these and these things
are thus and thus, and you sit still and do nothing: and again, even before her
face, preaching to her, (says he) may we not well say with the Prophet, It Is
the mercy of the Lord that we are not consumed, seeing there is so much
disobedience both in Subjects, and in Prince: Certainly much good might come
had we men of such Spirits as heretofore have been. Note.
All their Princes are Revolters.

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
When Princes one after another are wicked, there is little hope of good then to
a people. The Saints under the persecution of one they groan and cry to God,
but another comes and oppresses them more. We had need therefore pray for those
in high places, for Princes, for it concerns much the people, as we shall see
more after. It follows.

VER. 16.
Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit.
EPHRAIM is smitten.] God had threatened Ephraim long before, but now he is
smitten; not threatened only, but smitten.

Observe this Note, The phrase*
(the manner of the phrase is as if he were smitten from Heaven by a
Thunderbolt, in a dreadful manner God himself smote him) observe this, Observe.
God will not always forbear sinners, at last God smote; he threatens a long
time, but he smote at last: God may be a long time bending his Bow, and making
his Arrows ready, and preparing the instruments of death, but at length he
smote; and when he smote he smote terribly. How sad is the condition of a
wicked man who has had many warnings, and much patience of God has been
showed toward him, and at length this is the news that one neighbor tells
another, Oh! such a man is smitten of God, the wrath of God has pursued and
has overtaken such a man, the fearful stroke of God is upon him, and this
certainly will be the news of wicked impenitent sinners, secure sinners, this
will be the news that will be told of you, such a one is smitten; Oh! and what
sad reports are there at this day in all Countries about us, even through the
world, what is the news throughout the world almost but this (the Christian
world) England is smitten, the Lord has smote them? the Lord has smote us
with a dreadful stroke and still he continues smiting of us. Isa. 5. 25.
That Scripture in Isa. 5. 25. is made good upon us this day, The anger of the
Lord is kindled against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand
against them, and has smitten them, (mark what follows) The Hills did tremble
(Oh that our hearts did) and their carcasses were torn in the midst of the
streets: (and so it has been with us:) And for all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: And thus it is with us. And
the principal cause that is there given of such woeful smiting, it is as you may
observe in the 20. and 23. V. 20. 2^.
verses, the crossness of men's spirits in turning things quite contrary and
cross to that which God would have them. As thus, Crosness of men's spirits.
They call evil good, and good evil: they put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: Justifying the wicked, and
taking away the righteousness of the righteous. This is the cause of this
smiting, and never was there such perverseness in the hearts of men to turn
things quite cross, in Engl.
to cry out of Truth for Falsehood, to cry out of the Ways of Christ as the
Ways of Sedition, and the great troublers of the Kingdom, to cry out of the
Saints that are for peace, as the great Stirrers up of the Kingdom, and to
justify the wicked in many places; Maligna^ts escape:
What favor has many Malignants? and those that have most appeared in the
Cause of God, Faithful men are discountenanced.
how are they discountenanced? This is the Cause why God would smite them, and
why their Carcasses should be torn in the very streets. The Lord has smitten
us this day as he did the people in 1 Kings, 14. 15. 1 King. 14. 15.
The Lord shall smite Israel as a reed is shaken in the water, (and then it
follows after) he shall root them out of the good Land. So it is here, Ephraim
is smitten, and his root dried up. The Lord this day has smote us as a reed is
shaken to and fro, that which men cried up at first, they cry down again
presently after, and forward for a little while, and then quite the other way
again, and wavering and unconstant in all their ways, and know not indeed what
they would have; thus the Lord has smote us, yea the Lord has smitten us so
as he has fetched blood, fetched blood, yea, the Lord has smitten us by those
that should protect us, and that is a sore smiting, to smite us by the hand of
such as should protect us; that threatening that is denounced in Zach. 11. 6.
Zach. 11. 6.
Oh how is it made good upon us this day, says the text there, I will no more
pity the inhabitatns of the Land says the Lord; but lo, I will deliver the men
every one into his neighbors hand, and into the hand of his King, and they
shall smite the Land; and out of their hand I will not deliver them. It Is a
very strange Scripture, Scarce parelle^'d in Scripture in respect of this
Nation.
I know not the like in all the Book of God, God threatens to smite this
people, and how? Oh! this is a sore smiting, I will deliver every one into his
neighbors hand, and they shall smite one another, and I will deliver every one
into the hand of his King. Why is it so great an evil to be delivered into the
hand of our neighbor, and into the hand of our King? truly at this time it
seems it was: Oh! the Lord smites us this day, he smites us sorely by giving us
up to smite one another. We smite one another with the tongue, in Jer. 18. 18.
Come, let us smite with the tongue, Ier. 18. 18
say they. When was there ever such smiting with the tongue as there is now?
yea, even good men smite one another: There was a time when the Prophet desired
to be smitten by the Righteous, Ps. 131. 5* inverted.
in Psalm. 141. 5. Let the Righteous smite me (says the Prophet) it shall be as
Oil to my head; but now we may justly cry out to God, Lord, let not the
righteous smite me; the very smiting of the righteous is a sorer smiting this
day than the smiting of enemies, to smite with the tongue, yea and worse too,
in Isa. 58. 4. Isa. 58. 4.
In the day of their fast, they smite with the fist, and smite with the pen,
Smiting with the Pen worse than with the Sword.
that is a sorer smiting sometimes than smiting with the sword. And smite with
the sword too, for Brother is against Brother, and Father is against Child, and
Child against Father, and this is a forerunner of Gods smiting the earth with a
Curse, Malach. 4. 5, 6.
in Malac. 4. 5, 6. verses, the very close of the old Testament, there Eliah is
prophesied to come, and to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and
the hearts of the Children to the Fathers, lest (says the text) the Lord come
and smite the earth with a Curse. Oh! that Eliah might come among us otherwise?
What can be expected but the Lords smiting the Land with a most dreadful Curse?
When was Fathers against Children, and Children against Fathers as now, and
that in matters of Controversy? It was wont to be a Proverbial speech among
the Jews, when they had any knotty Controversy that they could not untie, Quum
venerit Elias*
When Elias shall come, then we shall come to know the meaning of this. We may
say this day, well, because we see what Controversies there are and what
differences of this and the other way and judgment, the Lord Christ (whose
forerunner Elias was to be) he will come ere long, and he will open all things
to us, the Messiah will come again and tell us all, and satisfy us in all our
difficulties, and put an end to all our desputes; But for the present the Lord
smites us, England smitten as Sodom.
not only by the sword, but he smites us as he smote the men of Sodom, with
blindness, and that Curse threatened in Deuteronomy. 28. 28. Deuteronomy. 28. 28.
is even upon us, The Lord (says the text there) shall smite thee with
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart, and thou shall grope at noon
days, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall not prosper in thy
ways, and thou shall be only oppressed and spoiled ever more, and no man shall
save thee. Oh my Brethren! how is this fulfilled at this day? with what
blindness, and madness, And that evidently by God himself.
and astonishment are the people of the Land smote? If it were not the smiting
of God to smite men with blindness, it is impossible but they should see what
should be done in such a time as this is, and you are only oppressed: Indeed
now almost every man in the Kingdom cries of being oppressed and spoiled ever
more.

We thought that when spoylers and oppressors were amongst us that we were safe
and well when it was over, Oh! Our opressions not removed, but renewed.
but it is renewed again, and then come the spoilers the second time, and the
third time, spoiling ever more, and this is the fruit of Gods smiting men with
blindness, and madness: And yet who is it that returns to him that smites him?
But Lord, seeing thou art a smiting, Oh! that thou would smite once more,
smite these rocks of ours, these hearts of ours, if thou will but smite there,
that might free us from other strokes, that there might gush out tears of
repentance, smite there that we may every man smite upon his thigh; Oh! that we
may smite upon our own hearts. But it follows:

Their Princes are Revolters: and Ephraim is smitten.
Only a word more from the connection of these two, All their Princes are
revolters: and Ephraim is smitten.

From thence the Note is, Obser.
If God leaves those who have the chief Government in their hands to revolt,
the people then will be smitten. Oh! pray much for them, and let not them that
have the chief Government in their hand think much that people enquire into
their way, and that they use all means that they can to keep them upright; for
if they should revolt they would not only undo themselves, but undo us, it
concerns us to enquire how it is with them, and to be solicitous about them,
and they must not bid us that are beneath them to let them alone and meddle
with our own business, and follow that which concerns us, certainly it concerns
us much what they do: were it indeed that if they miscarried they only should
be smitten, An apt simile.
then we had less to do to look after them; but if they revolt we are smitten:
If a child should in all humility and reverence beseech his father to leave off
such and such a sinful way, or to take heed of it that he be not carried by
such and such counsels, if his father should say, Meddle you with what you have
to do: the child might well answer, Oh father! I hear in the Word of God, that
God does visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, and I may feel of
these sins of yours when you are dead and gone, therefore I beseech you, Oh
father, consider what you do? (I say) the same might be answered if we should
Petition and labor with our Governors in all humility to take heed of any evil
Counsel, and if they should bid us lock to what concerns us, we may well
answer, We have heard in the Word that when the Princes are Revolters, the
People are smitten, that if Governors should any way revolt from any former
Protestations the People is like to be smitten; it is we know from the
revolting of many of our Lords and Members of that High Court that we have been
smitten so as we have been, Applied to this present Parliament*
Now many of them have revolted to the Enemy? and these that have been the
Members of that Court, (I say) their revolting have been the cause of such a
sore smiting which we have had.

Further: Obs. 2.
It cannot free Ephraim from being smitten; smitten because their Governors are
evil, Compulsion of Authority does not excuse sin.
they cannot excuse their sin by that: Perhaps the People would plead thus;
What could we do? we could not help it, those that were in Government they
enjoin such things, and if we did not obey them they would undo us, we were not
able to bear their smiting of us, therefore we were forced to yield; Oh! better
endure the smiting of man than the smiting of God, it is a fearful thing to
fall into the Hand of the Living God.

The apprehension of Gods hand smiting is that which should humble the hearts
of sinners very much. Obs. 3.
It Is a notable Scrip-which you have in 2 Chronicles. 26. 20. 2 Chronicles. 26. 20.
observed.
of Vzziah, that when he saw that he was smitten, though he were stout and
proud before, yet when he was smitten he made have out of the Temple. It Is no
longer standing out, for the Lord has smitten. So when we apprehend God
smiting, it is no standing out against the great God, but we had need make have
to reform. And thus much for this expression. It follows.

Their Root is dried up.
But though we be smitten we hope we may grow, Expos.
we may lose our leaves and some of our boughs, but we hope that we shall
spring again: perhaps these are the vain apprehensions of some men, but never
look to making their peace with God, no says God, I Will not only smite to take
off your leaves and branches, but I will smite the very root, that shall be
dried up: There Is difference between the pruning and lopping off a tree, and
the drying up of the root of it, there may be help so long as the root remains
alive. I will never trouble my self any further (says God) with them, I have
already smote off their boughs, and that does no good, I will dry up the very
root now. It Is a great aggravation of Gods smiting when he smites at the root,
every smiting it is not a drying up of the root, it is the base unbelief of our
hearts, the discontentedness, frowardness, Disordered passions (...) causes
sadder conclusions than needs of^ times.
fullenness of our vile spirits that makes us thus to conclude almost upon
every stroke of God, that he intends our undoing, if he does but smite us so as
a few leaves are but shaken off, or that our branches are but shak'd, we are
presently ready to conclude that God intends to blast us, and to dry up the
very root, and ruin us utterly; how often in our unbelief, when by temptations
we have been shaken and the leaves of our comforts have been shaken off,
Enlargements.
(our enlargements) and the like, how often we conclude, Oh! the Lord is coming
against me, and he will certainly blast all, all that I seem to have, the very
root of all my hopes and comforts will presently be blasted, Oh! this (I say)
is the evil of our hearts, it comes from our fullenness, frowardness, and
unbelief ever so to conclude, it may be God intends only to prune thee and to
take away superfluities, that so the sap may go down more at the root, that
thou may have more Humility, and Self-denial, and Faith, that thou may
have more exercise of the Root-Graces, Humility, Patience, Faith, Self-denial,
and God perhaps smites only to make the sap go down more to the Root-Graces,
though thou concludest that he will dry up the Root presently. In this smiting
wherewithal the Lord has smote us we hope that he intends not to dry up the
root, but we may say of it as in Isa. 27. Isa. 27. 7.
Has be smitten him as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain according
to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? The godly party may suffer
much, but I make no question but the ungodly party has suffered as much, and
by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; Verse. 4.
and this is all the fruit to take away his sin, and in the 4. verse God tells
us, that fury is not in him, God is fain to make an Apolegie to his people when
he is a smiting, though I smite you, yet not so as those that smite you, but in
the day of the East wind I stay the rough wind, and fury is not in me, but by
this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and this is all the fruit thereof
to take away his sin.

But God has his time to dry up the roots of sinners, Obs. 1. Of Persons.
and the roots of Nations. 1. God dries up the roots of many that have made
fair profession in former times, they have had no other Root but only Parts,
and common Gifts, and Morality raised, and this Root is dried up; this day many
fair and glorious Professors, how are they this day blasted! sapless, dry
spirits, and useless in the world in this time when there is so much service
required of them? And by by being dried up, what are they but prepared for the
fire? Old withered, sapless Professors (I say) whose root is dried up they are
fitted for nothing but the fire, they are like those in Jude, Jude, 12.
corrupt trees, trees that are corrupt in the Autumn: Thus it is with many
Professors at the time when God expects fruit, now they are sapless, now they
are corrupt fruit, they are dried up by the root, and what are they fitted for
but for the fire?

And then God has his time to dry up the root of Nations, 2. Of Nations.
in Isa. 5. 24. Now we might seek to understand what the Root of a Nation is,
Isa. 5. 24.
but I think we need not in this place, because it is sufficient only for the
Metaphor, to show that God does not only afflict a Nation, but intends the
utter ruin and destruction.

Yet a word or two thus.

What was the root of Ephraim? Quest.


The Covenant that God made with him, Answ.
that was his Root in the first place. And when God intends to break his
Covenant with them, Hos. 10. 4
(because they broke theirs) then he dries up the Root; and therefore in the
next Chapter you shall find that God charges them with dealing falsely in
making a Covenant.

And then, The Godly among a People are as the Root of that People, Isa. 6. 13.
in Isa. 6. 13. But yet it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
eaten: as a Teyle Tree, and as an Oak, whose substance is in them when they
cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. So here,
the holy seed shall be the substance of it. The holy seed in a Kingdom is as
the root and substance of it; and yet such is the wretchedness of men, that
what do they do but in stirring against them, they would root out the very Root
of the Nation.

And the vigor and power of the fundamental Laws in a Kingdom is as the Root of
it, from whence flourishes all their outward Peace and Comfort.

And the blessing of God upon the wisdom and faithfulness of those that are put
into place, that is as the Root of the good of a Nation, in these things
especially consists the Roots of a Nation. We hope that God will not wholly dry
up our Root, only let us take heed of this; though there be indeed a difference
between the Covenant of God with the Nation of the Jews, and any Covenant that
God makes with any Nation at this day, yet if we be false in the Covenant that
we make with God, this may root us out; let us look to it that the vigor and
power of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom be maintained, and that the godly
be maintained, let us not set our selves to root out them, for in so doing we
do but seek to root out our selves, and let us pray that the blessing of God
may abide upon those that are in place of power, and while these things
continue we may hope that the Lord intends, though he may scatter and break us
in pieces, yet that there may a Root stay, and there is little question (I
think we may make) that God will preserve our Root howsoever; and that there will
be a Root of the Saints that shall flourish till Jesus Christ comes again, The
Root of the righteous.
The Root of the Righteous shall not be moved; Pro. 12. 3*
though the Righteous may be lopt from all their outward comforts, yet their
Root must not be moved, that lies deeper than my Creature-power is able to
reach unto. But there is a Root, Oh! that God would dry up that, A Root o^
Bitterness Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
a Root that the Scripture speaks of, a Root of Bitterness, that brings forth
Gall and Wormwood, Oh! what bitter fruit does that Root bring forth! Oh! that
God would dry up that root. It follows.

They shall bear no fruit.
They would bring forth fruit to themselves, Expos.
and seeing they would bring forth no other fruit but to themselves, they shall
bring forth no fruit (says God.) How happy were we if God would say the root
of bitterness (that we speak of) as he said of the Fig Tree, Never fruit grow
on it more, Oh! that that Curse of God might be upon the root of bitterness
that there is in the hearts of many, that God would say, we shall never hear
the evil Language, the evil Speeches of People, and the bitter expressions as
heretofore we have done.

Yea though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of their
Womb.
The word translated Beloved fruit, Expos. (...)
it is Desirable, the Desires of their womb; Children are the desires of the
womb, that is, Honest women very desirous of children Harlots not so.
women are very strong in their desires after them, Give me children or else I
die (says Rachel:) Indeed Harlots are not, they care only for their lust, and
would have no fruit of their womb: It Is an excellent Emblem for the expression
of the vanity of many Preachers that care for nothing but to satisfy their
lusts, Which are an Allegory of a true Preacher and a false.
and show their wit and parts, but care not for any fruit at all, care not for
beget-any children to God; like Harlots they desire not the fruit of the womb,
but Wives that are faithful to their Husbands, they do desire it. And the same
word that is here for desires, The use of the word translated beloved.
and translated beloved, it is likewise in other Scriptures translated beloved,
that in Dan. 9. 23. Oh man, greatly beloved* Oh man of desires. And so in Dan.
10. where the Angel says, great beloved, it is a man of desire. And so in
Prove. 31. 2. What, my son! and what, the son of my womb! and what, the son of
my vows! You may see how Solomon's Mother speaks with a great deal of affection,
Oh my Son! the Son of my Womb, and the Son of my Desires. But indeed the word
signifies properly, the Son of my Vows, Oh! I made Vows to God, if God would
give thee me, and since I have given thee up to God, and by Vows dedicated thee
to God, what, the Son of my Vows! Women therefore they should look upon their
children as the children of their Vows, and show forth their love unto them in
the right way that God would have them. It is a strange place that we have in
Titus, Tit. 2. 4. illustrated.
where aged women are commanded to teach the young women to love their
hu^bands; and to love their children; it is a strange thing that a mother must
be taught to love her children; thy child is the beloved fruit of thy womb, but
yet thou must be taught by God, taught by his People, taught by his Word to
love thy children, to love them in a right and holy way; take heed of loving
them so as to provoke God to take them from you, Mothers fond Love s^aies their
children.
take heed that they be not slain for your sakes; many Mothers have slain the
fruit of their womb by loving them too much. Do not honor your children above
God as Ely did, when you look upon their natural comeliness consider they have
that in them, A meditation for Parents*
and that by your means that except they have another birth will make them
objects of Gods eternal hatred, they are the beloved fruit of your wombs, and
you look upon them and see them sweet babes and very comely, yea, but think
withal that you are the cause to bring them into that that if they have not
another birth, though they be objects of your mirth by being born to you, yet
they will be objects of Gods hatred by being born in sin by you; you may look
upon them as objects of your delight, but God may look upon them as those that
he has appointed to slay, Alas those poor sweet babes, what hurt have they
done? God sees enough in them that in his Justice he may slay them. But in this
that he says he will slay the beloved fruit of their womb, or the desirable
fruit, take but this one Note:

If Gods Honor, Obs.
and his Ordinances, and his Saints that are deer to him, be not deer to you,
even the very fruit of your womb shall not be regarded by him; That Is the scope
of the threatening: says he, Oh here is a people that my Honor, my Ordinances,
my Saints are not deer to them, therefore even the desirable things of their
womb, the very beloved fruit of their womb, that that goes more to their hearts
than any thing in the world, that that is the dearest to them I will slay them
in mine anger. If you would have what is deer to you be deer to God, let that
that is deer to God be deer to you.

And then it follows in the last Verse.

VER. 17.
My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him; and they
shall be wanderers among the Nations.
MY God] Not their God, Expos.
but my God. There Is much to be observed from hence.

First, Note.
The Prophets constancy. They forsook God generally, the ten Tribes generally
went away and forsook God, but the Prophet still keeps close to God.

Let all the world do what they will and forsake God and seek other comforts
where they will, Obs. 1.
but still (says a faithful soul) God shall be my God. Hosea he lived in
wicked times, generally all the ten Tribes went away from God, but still my
God, my soul shall keep close to God, I have chosen the LORD to be mine, and I
have found that Soul-satisfying good in Him, that he shall be mine for ever,
here will I rest for ever; I have chosen the way of Gods true Worship, I will
not suit my self with the common way of Worship where I live, but I will choose
God to be my God whatsoever the world does.

But secondly, Obs. 2.
this is the comfort of a gracious heart, In ill times when others forsake God,
yet one that has a gracious heart, can have God to be his God: Yea, and
especially when times of trouble comes, when sore evils are ready to be upon
the people generally, yet here is the comfort of a gracious heart, My God,
blessed be God for that Interest I have in Him; they may take away my House, my
Estate, my Means, but they cannot take away my God, I have Interest yet in God,
I have Interest still in that God that they cannot take from me. This was the
comfort of Micah, in Chap. 7. there he described the evil of the times wherein
he lived, Micah, 7. 2. 4. 5. 7.
Verse 2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright
among men, they all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man his brother with
a net. And then in the 4. verse. The best of them is a bryar, the most upright
is sharper than a thorn hedge. And then the 5. verse. Trust ye not in a friend,
put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
lies in thy bosom. But then in the 7. verse, Therefore I will look unto the
LORD, I will wait for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me. Oh my
brethren! there may come times ere long that the knowledge of God, interest in
God may be worth ten thousand thousand worlds unto us.

But in the third place: Obs. 3.
It is no presumption for one, or for a few to challenge a special interest in
God, in way of distinction from the multitude, and from the generality. So it
is here: How singular was Hosea at this time? This people might think him to be
very presumptuous; What, as if no body had interest in God but he, Is not God
our God as well as his? He is bold to speak this in way of distinction: You may
forsake God and His Worship, but I have cleaved to God, He is my God. When
multitudes and generality of men depart from God, yet for two or three, or a
few that cleave to the true Worship of God, they may challenge God to be their
God when he is none of the God of the multitude. In 1 John 5. 17. you may see
how singular John was there: 1 Job. 5. 17.
We know that we are of God: and the whole World lies in wickedness. How could
the World take such an expression? What are you? a few poor people: and yet we
know (says he) that we are of God: and the whole World lies in wickedness.
What are you more than others? Yes, John knew, and would not be discouraged to
affirm, that the World did lie in wickedness: and yet we know we are of God.

Let not men be offended at the fewness of those that keep the Truth, Use.
and the multitude of those that forsake it. I remember Plutarch relates in the
life of Phocion the Athenian, Plutarch.
that upon a time there was an Oracle of Apollo Delphias read before the
people, which did say, That although all the people did agree, yet there was
one man amongst them that dissented from them: now the people began to startle
at this; But Phocion stepping forth before them all bid them never seek further
for the man, for it was he that liked none of all their doings; and yet Phocion
at length gained as much respect from them as ever any man did, and they chose
him (I think) forty times to be Praetor for all that. And so let never so many
go on in a way that thou can not see light in thy conscience for, keep to thy
principles, only examine them, (so far the respect we do owe to others must lead
us) that if there be a greater party go one way than another, Keep to
principles:
we should call things into the more nearer scrutine, but carefully examine them:
we should think we may possibly be rather in an error than they, and we ought
to give all due reverence to the judgments of more men, and more learned and
wise than our selves, but still after all, and pray,
praying to God to show us his mind, and searching our own hearts to see
whether there be no particular Engagement, and searth thy heart.
and after all endeavors to find out the Truth, And yet then if God does
persuade your consciences after all means used, we should not be discouraged
because the greater part go the other way, but keep to that which our
consciences tell us is the right. And thus it was with Hosea, though they went
generally another way, yet he could claim a particular interst in God.

And then another point.

My God well cast them away.
It is a dreadful thing for wicked men to have such as have interest in God to
declare against them. Obs.
God rejection of them, My God will cast them away. Those who have interest in
God, who know Gods mind, and that such a God as he is cannot have communion
with such people. Thus you know it was with Isa. about the 57. and latter end,
Isa. 57. 21
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. He puts the emphasis there, he
says not, there is no peace to the wicked, Use.
says God, but says my God. Oh! when those (I say) that have an interest in
God, when such as keep close Communion with God, and thereby comes to be
acquainted much with Gods mind, when they shall declare concerning you, do not
slight it, it is a great matter then when they shall say, there is no peace; If
any of them should say: If I know any thing of the mind of God, If I have any
Interest in God certainly there can be no peace to thee in such a way as thou
art in, take heed of the slighting of the very suspicion of men that are godly,
and humble: It is true, many that may make very great profession of Religion,
they may be bold to suspect and to censure others, that it may be are better
than themselves, but if I see one that walks humbly, strict in his way, holy,
and heavenly, and self-denying in other things, if such a man should but have
any suspicion of my condition, I had need look to it, it should daunt my heart
to have such a Christian look upon me but with a suspicious eye, because such a
one is much acquainted with God and his Way, and therefore take heed of
slighting such a one.

My God will cast them away, Explic.
with violence and with anger, as a man takes his stubborn child or servant,
and thrusts them out of his house.

When men are violent in wickedness, Obs. 1.
they must expect that God will be as violent with them in the ways of his
Judgments: Lam. 2. 6.
and for that we have a notable Scripture in Lament. 2. 6. He has violently
taken away his Tabernacle. They abused that Ordinance of God, abused his
Tabernacle, and he has violently taken away his Tabernacle. Oh! unworthy
wretched people, that should enjoy mine Ordinances so, and abuse them; he has
violently taken away, he comes in an anger: simile.
As you shall see a man or woman when their passion is raised they will run and
snatch away such a thing from another.

Take heed of being violent in the ways of sin, Use.
you will cast the Cords away, Psalm. 2.
you will cast away the Truths, as you had it before in Isa. 5. so you cast
away the Truths of God, Isa. 5.
and his Cords away; take heed thou be not a castaway thy self, those that
are so full of casting away Gods Truths, it is just with God that God should
cast them away, as a man casts away a loathsome thing; as those are discribed in
Isa. 30. Isa. 30.
That cast away their Idols as a menstruous cloth, and says, Get theee hence:
And you perhaps cast away the Truths of God as loathsome now, but the Lord will
cast thee away as a filthy and loathsome thing.

They shall be cast away: but why? Because they did not hearken unto him. This
is a notable Sentence. Says Luther upon the place, Haec notabilis est
sententia, and digna quae in omnibus parietibus scribatur.
This (He shall cast them away, because they have not hearkened to him) is a
notable sentence, and worthy to be written upon all our walls; for indeed there
is much in it, they would hearken to such and such, and to the rules of their
policy, and to their own ends, but not to God. And that is the special point
from hence: That in matters of Gods Worship we must hearken to God, Luther.
and the not harkening to God is that which provokes God with indignation to
cast away a people: Obs. 2.
perhaps other duties we may know by the light of nature; but when we come to
matters of Worship, there God must be hearkened to, and not any else; God
expects that his creature should hearken to him in what he says, Exodus 21. 6
illustrated, ^y Ps. 40. 6*
we should be all as the servant was with his ear boared; Christ himself had
his ear boared, he would hearken to what his Father said, therefore the Psalm
says, Mine ear has been boared: Christ was as a Servant with his ear boared,
to note, that he would have his ear at the command of his Father. And who, or
what are you that you should have your ears free? In Isa. 28. 23. mark what
several expressions we have about calling to hearken. Isa. 28. 23 noted.
Give ye ear, and hear my voice, hearken, and hear my speech. In one little
verse there is these four: Give ye ear; there is hear; there is hearken; there is
hear; Oh! God expects that we should have a hearing ear; and that is the way for
wisdom: 1 King. 3. 9.
in 1 King, 3. 9. Solomon prays, Give thy servant an understanding heart, but
in the Hebrew it is, a hearing heart, and so it is turned, A hearing Heart.
That I may have a hearing heart, so as I may be able to judge thy People. Those
men and women that have not a hearing heart, they have not an understanding
heart, Pride the root of not hearing. Ier. 13. 15.
and the not hearkening to God, Oh! it is that which comes from the pride of
heart: in Jer. 13. 15 Give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken; there
is no such pride as the turning away our ears from hearkening to God,
Destruction the fruit of it, whereof also it is a sign.
and turning away our ear from the Law of God is that which makes God turn away
his ear from hearing our prayers; it is an evident sign of destruction that is
a coming: in 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. mark what the Prophet says to Amaziah, I know
that God has determined to destroy thee; because thou have done this, 2 Chronicles.
25. 16.
and have not hearkened unto my Counsel. Do thou come to the Word and not
hearken to the Counsel of God in his Word? It is an evident sign that God
intends to destroy thee. Oh hear! hear and your souls shall live, your souls
shall live. Indeed here lies the ground of all the evil almost in those that
are professors of Religion, The not hearkening to the Truth; I suppose those
that make profession of Religion if they have enlightened consciences they dare
not sin against a known Truth; but now here is the evil of thy heart, look to
that; thou say, If I knew it were a Truth I would not go against it: yea but
the corruption of thy heart makes thee unwilling to hearken to the Truth, the
corruption of men's hearts makes them that they would fain have such a thing not
to be a Truth. I appeal to you, have you never felt some corruptions stirring
this way, that when you are engaged another way, and you see that if you should
be taken off from that, a great deal of ease and liberty, and outward comforts
would be gone, and upon this your hearts are very loath that that should be
true, and therefore you are not willing to hearken, to hearken with a clear
heart, so as to be willing to entertain the Truth, if it does prove to be a
truth; that soul that shall be willing to retain every truth, and be willing to
let the truth prevail what ever it be, that is a sign of a gracious heart; but
the lusts of men's hearts do hinder them from hearkening, and they are loath to
hearken to those Truths that come nearest to them; but when a man or woman
shall be able in the presence of God upon examination of his or her heart, to
say, Oh Lord, let thy Truth prevail, thou know that I am willing to hearken
to every Truth of Thine, though it should pluck away all my outward comforts, I
would fain know thy Truth, and I would know the strictest Truths, what Truths
they are that most concern thy Glory, and thy Worship in the best manner,
whatever becomes of my Credit or estate, Lord, let thy Truth prevail in my
heart: (I say) here is a gracious heart that will thus hearken to God and his
Truth: But they have uncircumcised ears, they cannot hear (says Jeremiah;) so,
through the corruption that is in men's spirits they cannot hearken to those
things that seem to make against them.

But the last words of all here, is the threatening.

They shall be wanderers among the Nations.
It is a judgment to have an unsettled spirit wandering up and down, Obs. 1.
and can settle to nothing* sometimes in this place, sometimes in that;
sometimes in this way, and sometimes in another; Eccles. 6. 9.
this is a judgment of God. Solomon has such an expression, The sight of the
eyes is better than the wandering of the desires: the wandering of men's appetites
and desires, work a great deal of vexation to them.

Again, observe that, Those who are cast away out of Gods house, they can have
no rest, they go about like the unclean spirit, seeking rest, but can find
none. Psalm. 139. Here will I rest for ever: in the Hebrew it is emphatical
(...) then the walking soul, so the Bible marg*
The Church of God and his Ordinrnces are Gods rest, and should be the rest of
the hearts of his people, and they are indeed the rest of the hearts of those
that are gracious; but alas poor soul! who art wandering from God, Whither go
thou? where indeed will be thy rest? It was the Curse of God upon Cain, to be a
wanderer up and down upon the face of the earth.

But you will say, Quest.
May not men be wanderers, (that is) may not they be cast out of their
Habitations and Countries, and wander up and down, and yet not be cast off from
God?

It Is true, Answ.
we read in Heb. 11. that the Christians wandered up and down in Sheep skins,
Heb. 11.
and Goats skins, whom the world was not worthy of: But that was in a way of
persecution for God, and for his Truth; it was not because they would not
hearken, but because they would hearken; and though thou should be forced to
wander from thy Brethren, and the sweet Habitation that thou had, and thy
Friends, perhaps thou art fain to wander up and down even for thy life, yea,
but can thou say, Yet I hope I am not one of Gods cast-away^? It Is one of
Gods Epithites that he glories in, That he will gather the outcasts of Israel;
Man has cast me out, yea, but I bless God, I carry a good Conscience with me;
and that man or woman needs not be troubled with wandering, that can carry a
good Conscience with them; you are cast out from your Friends, yea, but still
thou have the Bird that sings in thy bosom: Can thou say, I have not cast
away thy Commandments, Lord? Indeed if a man's conscience tell him, that he has
cast away Gods Commandments, then if he wanders it is dreadful to him: What,
though thou art wandering from thy house, from thy outward comforts, but not
from Gods Commandments; Cast me not out of thy presence, says David; though
thou be from thy friends, yet not from God presence: here it is, I will cast
them out among the Nations. Psalm. 44. 11. observe.
It was a Curse in Psalm. 44. 11. Thou have scattered us among the Heathen: It
was a great Judgment of God, to be scattered among the Nations, This curse of
wandering upon the Jews to this day.
for they were a people that were separated from the Nations, and not to be
reckoned among the Nations, and Gods peculiar Treasure. There were these three
expressions, not only to be wandering among the Nations, not only among
Strangers, but among Heathens, among Blasphemers, this must needs be a heavy
and sore judgment, to be cast among Idolaters; This Curse is upon the Jews to
this very day, how are they wanderers among the Nations.

Let us learn from hence, Obser.
To prize the communion of Saints, let us learn what a blessing it is to live
among our own People, especially among the Saints, in the enjoyment of Gods
Ordinances, let us make use it now lest God teach us what it is by casting us
away and making us to wander among the wicked and ungodly, then your
consc^ences will fly in your faces and tell you, Oh! what times we once had,
and what sweet communion had we? but we began to neglect the prize that God put
into our hand, Oh! if we were where once we were, we would meet often, and
pray, and confer, and we would labor to edify one another in our most holy
faith, and warm one another spirits, not spending all our time in wrangling
and jangling, Oh! but now those times are ^one, and we are cast away and are
wandering up and down among wicked and ungodly people. Communion of Saints
neglected in Engl. more than formerly.
Truly there has not been a time in many years when the communion of the
Saints has been so little improved as at this day, we now wander (as it were)
among our selves, and little converse one with another, what should we do
living together? Just were it with God to bring this Judgment upon us, The
drnger of it.
that we should wander among wicked people here and there, and that we should
not come to see the face of a Saint to have converse or communion with them.
Thus we have finished this Ninth Chapter.

CHAP. X.
VERSE. 1.
Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself: according to
the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the Altars: according to the
goodness of his Land, they have made goodly Images.
HERE Gualter makes the beginning of Hosea's seventh Sermon. The Argument is
like unto the former, upbraiding and threatening. Hosea had to deal with tough
and stought spirits, and therefore he still strikes with sharp rebukes and
severe threats.

Israel is an empty Vine.
The Church is often in Scripture compared to a Vine, in Psalm. 80. 8. Ps. 80. 8.
Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the Heathen and
planted it. Isa. 5. 1^^
And in that known place Isa. 5. 1. Now will I sing unto my well beloved a song
of my beloved, touching his Vinyard.

The Church is compared to a Vine. Obs. 1.


First, Reas. 1.
There Is no plant has a more unpromising outside than the Vine has, the
outside of it, how mean is it? looks as if it were weathered, rugged, grisled,
weak, and hollow the stalk of it: and this is the Church, the outside of it is
very unpromising, little beauty and comeliness; as Christ himself had little
beauty and excellency in his outside.

But yet secondly, 2. Plin. lib. 14. 4.
The Vine is the most fruitful plant that grows out of the earth; Pliny (that
great Naturalist) tells of very strange fruitfulness of some kind of Vines, in
his 14. Book, one Cul^us is 20. Amphorae, and 1. Amphora is a Tankard of 18
Gallons, so that the sum is about 1800 Gallons.
and 4. Chapter, he tells of ten Culei (that is his word) that an Acre of Vines
brought forth in a year, which comes to a matter of eighteen hundred gallons:
nay in the 1. Chapter of his 14. Book, he tells of one stock, one single Vine,
that was planted by Livia the Empress, that yielded an hundred and eight
gallons of good Wine yearly. The Vine is a very fruitful thing, though
unpromising in the outside. And what fruit indeed is there brought forth to
God in the world but by his Churches? and God expects much fruitfulness among
his people; how ever, as you shall hear, they are charged with being empty.

Thirdly, No plant requires so great care as the Vine; What a deal of do is
there in dressing the Vine and underpropping of it, and pruning of it, looking
to it continually? and the Lord has the greatest care of his people, of his
Church: himself accounts it no dishonor to be the Husbandman, as he is said to
be in John 15. and in Isa. 27. 3. you have a most admirable expression of Gods
taking care of his Church, as his Vine. I the Lord do keep it: I will water it
every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. I will keep it
and I will water it, and every moment lest any hurt it, I will keep it (again)
night and day. And this is the Vinyard that he speaks of in the beginning of
this Chapter, and it was the Vinyard that brought out red Wine, the best sort
of Wine. Those that bring forth the best sort of Wine shall have the best of
Gods care and charge and protection over them.

Fourthly, The Vine it is the most depending creature in the world, it is not
able to under-prop its self, but must have props more than other Plants, the
strings in the Vine
and therefore Nature has given unto it strings by which it catches hold upon
any thing next it: And so the Church, the Church is weak in its self, and is
the most depending thing in the world, depends upon its props that God affords
unto it; you have an excellent place to set out that in Isa. 27. 2, 3. ver.
there the holy Ghost speaks of a Vinyard of red Wine, and in the 4. verse, Isa*
27. 2, 3
Fury is not in me; which shows that there should come a kind of great storm
and tempest, but he would not have his People to be discouraged. Fury is not in
me. And then in the 5. verse, Let him take hold of my strength, that he may
make peace with me, and he shall make his peace with me. explained.
Let him take hold of my strength; that is, speaking to his Church as a Vine,
in the time when my fury is abroad, yet do you like the Vine, which catches
hold upon a pole, and there under-props its self, so let him take hold of my
power, let him act faith upon my power in time of storms and tempests and he
shall make peace, though he has never so much trouble abroad in the world with
others, yet he may, he shall have peace with me. That Is the nature of the Vine
to catch hold upon that which is next it, and especially in time of storms,
when the strongest Oaks are rent in pieces, yet the Vine catching hold upon the
props it has, rests there.

Fifthly, If it be not fruitful, it is the most unprofitablest thing in the
world. Ezekiel. 15. 2
I suppose you know that place in Ezekiel. 15. 2. What is the Vine-tree more than
any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the Forest? Shall wood
be taken thereof to do any work, or will men take a pin of it to hang any
vessel thereon? Behold, it shall be cast into the fire for fuel; It is not
meet for any work, the Vine is meet for nothing, not to make a pin if it be not
fruitful. And no people in the world are so unprofitable as Professors of
Religion if they bring not forth the fruit of godliness, and the world may be
rid of them better than any people else if they bring not forth their fruit
unto God.

And then further in the sixth place, A Vine is the most spreading plant that
is, that spreads larger than other plants, and fills a great deal of room with
the spreading of the branches of it, and so you have the Promise of the Church
in Isa. 27. 6. Isa. 27. 6.
Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

And then lastly, The Vine is the most tender, soft plant, and it is the Emblem
of peace, the sitting under our Vines, it is to set forth Peace. And so the
People of God they should be of tender soft spirits, not like the Bramble, nor
the Thorn full of pricks, if we sit under Thorns and Brambles we may be pricked
with them; but sitting under the Vine there is nothing but sweetness and
delightfulness there: Israel is a Vine; yea but he is an empty Vine. The word
in the Original is a Participle, an emptying Vine, and yet the sense will come
much to one, an Empty Vine, or an Emptying Vine: (...)
that is, Though there be much cost bestowed upon Ephraim, so as he might be
fruitful, Expos.
yet he makes himself empty.

This shows how he comes to be an empty Vine; not because Gods mercy is scant
to him, but he makes himself so by his sin, what juice and moisture he has he
does empty it forth into other things, and so is empty.

Israel was a Vine full of clusters, refreshing God himself, as you heard in
the ninth Chapter, that he was to the Lord as Grapes in the Wilderness, as a
Vine that did bring forth Grapes in the Wilderness, that was so sweet to a
weary and thirsty traveller. Israel was once such a one, yea, but now he is
come to be an empty Vine, though he grows in the Vinyard of God, and not in the
Wilderness.

Empty] and no mervail, Chap. 9. the last V.
for as you have heard in the latter end of the former Chapter, he would not
hearken to the Lord, he would not hear the Word of the Lord, the Lord threatens
to cast him away, because he hearkened not to him, Verbu^ tanquam foecunda
pluvia, sine verbo, nulli possunt very fructus.
from whence Luther has this Note, The Word is like a fruitful rain, there can
no true fruit be without the Word, those that will not hearken to the Word, no
mervail though they be empty, it is the Word that makes fruitful, it is that
that is as the fruitful rain: Those that leave and forsake the Word, observe
them how fruitless they are, what empty spirits they have; Luther.
many that heretofore were forward in hearing the Word, and loved it, the Word
was delightful to them, Oh! then they were fruitful; but since they have been
taken off from the Word, converse with them now and you shall find their
spirits empty, and their lives empty; Wil-worshippers empty.
and there is no men in the world so empty as those that would worship God in
another way than the Word appoints, men that would think to worship God after
their own fancies, and ways, Oh! how empty are they in all their Worship they
tender up to God?

But the main Note and Observation is, Obs. 1.
That emptiness in those that profess themselves to be Gods People, is a very
great evil. Oh! it is a great charge upon those that grow in Gods Vinyard, that
profess themselves to be Gods, to be charged with this, That they are empty, an
empty Vine. When we would speak of a man contemptuously, as one that has no
natural or aquisite excellency in him, we say such a one is an empty, Mat. 5.
22 Racha explained.
or a slight fellow; and that is the meaning of the word that you have in Mat.
5. 22. Whosoever calls his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the counsel;
the word Racha, it is empty, it is as much as if he should call his Brother an
empty fellow, for that is the signification of the word Empty. Iam. 2. 20 (...).
And in Jam. 2. 20. Know thou not, O vain man, that faith without works is
dead? The words* are, Oh empty man, know thou not, O empty man, that faith
without works are dead? There Is many that keeps a great deal of noise of Faith,
and of Gods Free Grace, and yet are extreme empty men and understand little of
the true excellency of the Covenant of Grace; some Antinomians.
Know thou not, O empty man, that Faith without Works is dead? Speak as much
as thou will of Faith and Gods Grace, yet if there be no Works, thou art an
empty man. Nature will not endure emptiness; some of the Philosophers have
said, that the world would rather be dissolved than there should be any
vacuity; vacum non datur.
creatures will move contrary to their nature rather than they will suffer a
vacuity. Certainly an emptiness in the souls of Gods people, it is the worst
emptiness that is in the world: Reasons.
For,

First, It is the most unnatural thing for a Vine to be empty.

And secondly, For the Saints to be empty, they are a dishonor to their Root
that they do profess they are upon: Christ he has all the fullness of the
Godhead in him, And of his Fullness we are to receive Grace for Grace: To grow
upon him, upon such a root and yet to be empty, Oh! what a dishonor is this to
Jesus Christ!

Thirdly, This frustrates the Lord of all the care, and cost, and charge that
he is about, if thou were another plant that grew in the wilderness it were not
much, but a Vine, and one in Gods Vinyard, and yet fruitless, Oh this is a sore
evil! Fourthly, There Is no blessing upon thy soul if thou be an empty Vine
in Isa. 65. 8. Isa. 65. 8.
As the new Wine is found in the cluster, and one says, Destroy it not, for a
blessing is in it. If there be Wine in the cluster, then a blessing is found in
it, but otherwise destroy it. No blessing is found in those that are of empty
spirits.

Fifthly, If there be grace, it is the Divine Nature its self, and cannot that
bear fruit? It is an evil in a Vine to have but a little moisture, to shoot
forth in leaves and bear no fruit; yea but what is that unto Grace that is the
Divine Nature its self, the most glorious thing in the world? Therefore for
Christians to be without fruit is an exceeding great evil, Do thou know what
fruit is? One gracious action that comes from the sap of the Root that is in
Christ, it is more worth than Heaven and Earth; any one gracious Act (I say) it
is more worth than Heaven and Earth, Oh the fruit of the Saints is fruit to
eternity, and to be without this fruit must needs be a great evil, those that
are empty and without fruit (you know) they are said in John 15. to be but as
branches, Ioh. 15. 6. (...).
not branches, they that bear no fruit are said to be but as a branch, and then
such a branch as must be cut off, God will cut them off, cut off those
branches, explained.
he will cut them off from their profession and suffer them to fall so as they
shall not continue in their eternal profession, and they shall wither, he will
curse their very common gifts that they have.

6. Oh! how many that heretofore seemed to flourish, yet but leaves, and
bearing no fruit, now their leaves are gone too, and their common gifts are
taken away from them, and not only withered, but shall be cast away, cast away
from God, and out of the hearts of the Saints, and men shall gather them, the
men of the world they shall catch them, and so they shall join with them, and
they shall make use of them, and they shall be cast into the fire and burnt;
cast into the fire, not for a fiery trial, but cast into the fire that they may
be burned: these are the threatenings against those that bear no fruit. Phil. 1.
11
It is the glory of Gods People, Ephesians. 5. 18
to be filled with the fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1. 11. To be filled with
the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. Yea, to be filled with all the fullness of God, Cap.
3. 19
Ephesians. 3. 19. So it is expected of the Saints, that they should be filled with all the fullness of God: Oh! how contrary is this to emptying? And surely filled
the Saints should be with fruit, because they are the very fullness of Christ,
the fullness of him that fills all in all: In Ephesians. 1. last verse, Cap. 1. ult.
the Church is said, to be the fullness of Jesus Christ himself; And shall the
Church be an empty Vine, when as it is the very fullness of Him that fills al in all?

7. An empty spirit is fit for the Devil to come to possess; Mat. 12. 24. he
found his place empty, and then he comes in: where the Devil sees an empty
spirit, there is a fit place for him to come. It is an evil thing for you to
grow upon Gods ground and to cumber it, to cumber any part of Gods ground; it
may be if thou were gone, there might be another in thy family, or place, that
might bring forth fruit to God; but thou hinderest, God might have more Rent
(as I may so say) for all his possessions in the world, the great Rent is, the
fruit that the Church brings forth; in Cant. 8. 11. it is said, Caut. 8. 11
that Solomon let out his Vineyard, and it brought him in a thousand pieces of
Silver for the fruit of it. And God he lets out his Vinyard, and his Rent (I
say) it is the fruit that the Saints bring forth to him; What glory has God in
the world, if those that profess themselves to be his people should be empty?

8. God does not let us sit under empty Vines; our Vines they have bin fruitful
Vines, shall we then be empty Vines our selves?

9. The Lord has justly struck this Vine here in England, and our Vine bleeds;
it bleeds, and is in danger to bleed to death, and what though it does, it has
brought forth little fruit, and therefore it is just with God that he should let
this Vine even bleed now to death.

10. According to the greatness of the opportunities that any man has, or any
society of men, so is the greatness of the evil of emptiness: Oh! now to be
empty, when God puts great opportunities of great service into our hands, now
to be empty when God expects great services, Oh! it is the most vile thing of
all. Oh my brethren, that we were but sensible of this.

But if this be an evil thing to be empty, Use. 1.
than what is it to bring forth the Grapes of Sodom, and the Clusters of
Gomorrah? to bring forth the Wine of the Gall of Asps, wild Grapes? And yet a
great deal of such fruit there has been brought forth; And truly the fruit
that most men have brought forth now, they are wild Grapes at the best. If men
do any thing, yet they do so mingle the vanity of pride, the sowreness of their
own spirits, the rigedness of their own nature with what they do, that all is
but sour before God.

Well, Use. 2.
To conclude this, about the emptiness of the Vine: Oh! let us prize
fruitfulness more, and say as the Vine that is brought in, Judge. 9.
in the 9th of Judges, Shall I leave my Wine which cheereth God and man, and go
and reign over you? Oh so, Shall we leave our fruitfulness upon any earthly
advantage in the world? Let us account it a greater advantage to bring forth
much fruit to the glory of God, than to glory in any earthly advantage: No
matter what becomes of us, so we may be but fruitful; though God dung us,
though he cast all the filth and reproaches in the world upon us, yet if God
will make this but cause us to be fruitful, it is no great matter.

But further from the manner of the Phrase.

Israel is a Vine emptying its self.
That is an aggravation of emptiness when we empty our selves, when God is not
wanting to us in means, but we are the Cause of it. And what is the cause of
emptiness, but the emptying out our strength and spirits to our lusts and the
world? No mervail though we have no fruit for God, and strength in his service,
when we let out all to other things.

And the old Latin here turns it, Vitis frondosa vulg. (...). bonos habens
palmitis. 70.
A leavie vine. And the Seventy they have it, A Vine that brings forth goodly
branches: And yet it is said here empty, that is, all the strength and juice of
it is let out in the goodliness of the branches and leaves. Oh! so, many
Professors in these days they empty out all their strength that they have and
all their parts merely into leaves, and have goodly branches, make goodly
outward profession, Worldly Professors.
and goodly words they give, and will speak much of Religion, but nothing but
leaves, nothing but words all this while.

Pliny in his 17. Book and 22. Chapter, Plin. lib. 17. cap. 22
says of Vines, that it is fit (at least for two years together after their
planting) that they should be cut down to the very ground, that they may not
sprout out in leaves, and so to lose their juice and strength at the root. Young
Professors should be kept down.
And truly this is that that has lost the hopeful beginnings of many young
people in these times, they have presently sprouted out into leaves; for never
was there a more hopeful time of young people than at the beginning of this
Parliament, and no greater encouragement was there than from them at that time,
(I will not say it is wholly lost,) but Oh! how many of them that began to
understand the ways of God, has let out all their strength in leaves, and
contests, and disputes, and wranglings, and strange kind of opinions, and
little fruit is come of any thing? Nay, there is little savor at all in their
spirits; Oh! how happy had it been if so be that God had kept them down in a
work of humiliation to the very ground for a year or two together? The benefit
of thorough humiliation.
Now that is a thing that is altogether laid aside, any work of humiliation, but
presently they sprout out into leaves. My Brethren, whatsoever may be said, or
whatsoevee heretofore has seemed to be preached [to the contrary] yet
certainly if rightly understood has been but the same things that must of
necessity be acknowledged; we do not press Humiliation as the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, we look not at it so, How Humiliation shonld be preached.
but Humiliation keeps the spirits of men low, and empties them of themselves,
and keeps them down, (I say) this is that which would have made them a great
deal more fruitful, and they could not have run up as mere leaves, and their
strength spent: and so, how many of them are fallen off again, not only to be
slight and vain, but to be wicked and ungodly, and quite naught, because they
were not kept down low for a while, but God ordering things that they should
live in times of liberty, Oh! how luxurious have they grown that way? A
dangerous thing for young professors to be in times of Liberty.
When God lets a people grow rank and prunes them not, they quickly grow
barren. We had never so many rank Christians as we have at this day that grow
out in luxurious branches, and they think they have over-topt all, because they
can talk more than others do, when as there are some poor Christians that grow
low to the ground, and when they get a little comfort it is gone away from them
presently, Low Christians.
and they walk humbly before God, and no body takes notice of them, but are
despised and contemned, O! these will grow and be delightful to the palate of
God, when such rank professors as these shall wither and be cast out. The
pruned Vines bring forth the best fruit; and therefore that is observable: Isa.
5. compared with chap. 27. explained.
compare Isa. 5. with the 27. there is a Note very observable: In the 5.
Chapter, God complains of his Vinyard, that he looked for Grapes, and they
brought forth wild Grapes; but there the Prophet speaks of the time before the
Captivity: but in the 27. Chapter there is a Scripture that seems to refer to
the times after the Captivity, and there the Vinyard of God is said to be a
Vinyard of red Wine, and God speaks much unto it what it should be after the
time of the Captivity, it should bring forth the best kind of Wine, for then
God pruned it; they thought that God would come in a furious manner upon them,
no (says he) Fury is not in me, but this is all the fruit, to purge away their
sin. The Vines that are pruned bring forth the best and the most fruit.

But I find other Interpreters upon this text, Expos. 2.
[Israel is an empty Vine;] Vitis spoliala, direpta.
They turn it thus: Is a spoiled Vine. And Luther refers it to the emptying of
the abundance of her riches and prosperity; Indeed these two go together,
Emptiness of fruit, Luther.
and being emptied of our comforts and prosperity, to be spoiled: Israel has
spoiled her self, and I have for her sins let the spoilers come among them, and
so has emptied her of all her good; even while she enjoyed her outward
prosperity, she was emptied of the blessing of God upon her; but after the Lord
emptied her even of all her outward good too.

And that is the Note from thence: Obs.
That sin will empty a Land of all the blessings God has bestowed, or empty a
family, or person: Sin is an emptying thing, sin empties Lands, and Families,
Isa. 34. 11
and persons of all their outward comforts, in Isa. 4. 11. there God threatens
the Line of confusion, and the Stones of emptiness for sin; and Oh! how has it
emptied many parts of our Land? Applied to England.
how has sin emptied us? what empty houses are there in many places? houses
that were wont in every room of them to be filled with furniture so brave and
glistering, now the Owners come into their houses and look upon the bare walls
and see them empty of all the rich furniture that was in them; Oh! what empty
chests, that were filled with such brave clothes heretofore, now they are
broken to pieces, and those places that were filled with diet and plenty are
now empty; Barns empty, Purses empty, and Bellies empty, and the Veins of men
emptied even of their very blood; Oh! how are we a spoiled Vine now at this
day! the Vine that a while since was so delightful to God and man, and so
glorious even in the esteem of all round about us, yet Oh now! now has the
Lord sent his emptiers to empty us; Nah. 2. 2.
as in Nahum. 2. 2. The Lord has turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the
excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their
Vine brances. This text is fulfilled toward many parts of this Kingdom at this
day.

An empty Vine, and brings forth fruit to her self.
This is very strange, Empty, and yet bring forth fruit; If she brings forth
fruit, Expos.
how empty? Yes, it may very well stand together, she brings forth fruit to her
self, but she is empty in regard of any fruit she brings forth to me, but yet
she has juice and sap enough, to bring forth fruit to her self. Oh! how many
people that are barren toward God, and have no abilities to do any thing for
God, but when they come to themselves to do any thing, Oh how active and
stirring are they? but when you put them upon any duty for God then they are
weak and unable, and the like: but if it was in a matter that concerned
themselves there they have spirit enough and to much a great deal; If parents
have children that sin against God, Parents.
they are not sensible at all, but if they do any thing against themselves, Oh!
how do their spirits rise, and what rage is there in the family? The truth is,
were our hearts as they should be, if we have no strength for God we should
have none for our selves, yea, we would even reason so, when as we complain,
Oh! that we are weak in our memories, and are not able to resist temptation,
and we can do nothing for God, we should take a holy revenge upon our selves
and say, Certainly if I can do nothing for God, I will do nothing for my self
neither, If I cannot rejoice in God I will not rejoice in my self, and if I
cannot take care for God I will not take care for my self; to be barren to God
and fruitful to our selves, this is a great disproportion.

He brings forth fruit to himself.
The old Latin is, Fructus adaequatus est (...).
even like himself, so they turn it, he brings forth fruit like to himself.

Men of base principles will do base things, Obs.
corrupt hearts will have corrupt ways. An ingenuous spirit sometimes wonders
to see the ways of many men so base and vile as they are, Applied to England.
men employed in public employment that have opportunity to do God a great
deal of service and when it comes to it, how sordidly and basely do they carry
themselves, not caring what becomes of the public good, of God, and Kingdoms,
and Churches, so be it they may scrape but a little to themselves? Yea, but do
not wonder, it is fruit suitable to themselves, they are men of base spirits,
of base corrupt principles, and therefore they bring bring forth fruit like
themselves, fruit like the stock that they are on. simile*
And so many times children are like their parents, their parents are wicked,
and they wicked accordingly. Like an Imp or Branch of such a stock, such are
the fruits of many.

But he brings forth fruit to himself.

That is, Expos.
in all that he does he aims at himself, he has regard to his own ends, to
fetch about his own designs, to bring his own plots to an issue, and all must
be subservient to some design that he drives on; Ephraim had many designs and
plots that they drove on to make themselves to be rich, and all their strength,
and what they were able to do it was for nothing but to be subservient to their
own designs: Zach. 7. 5, 6.
It was said of Judah in their Captivity, in Zach. 7. 5, 6. They did fast, and
eat, and drink to themselves; all that was done it was nothing but to
themselves; whereas the fruit that they should have brought forth, it should
have been to God, and not to themselves: There is a very sweet place for that
in Cant. 7. 13. Song. 7. 13*
At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits new and old, which I have laid
up for thee, O my beloved. Thus should every gracious heart say, and especially
he should say so then when God makes your hearts most fruitful with pleasant
fruit new and old; Have ye at any time found your hearts most enlarged to God,
How to use ^ur enlargments in duties.
and you could melt toward God, and had full expressions in the presence of
God, and acting of your graces? Take heed now that this pleasant and sweet
fruit that you have, that is new from God, and your old experiences that you
have had heretofore of Gods goodness, let not corruption reap that that God
has sown, you know it is a Curse that one should sow and another reap; it is
God that sows, and shall the flesh reap now? and shall the Devil reap? Oh! let
not these sweet fruits, especially the fruit of enlargement in prayer, and the
fruit of abilities to do God service in any public work, Oh! take heed that
this be not for your selves, do not you take in the glory to your selves, Oh!
but let this fruit be for your beloved; at any time when you find your hearts
most fruitful, graces most fully exercised, Oh think thus, I will lay up this
for my beloved, I will lay the experiences of the goodness of God unto me that
may ^it me to glorify God more than heretofore. Oh that is sweet indeed, when
God comes in with fruit, Song. 8. 11 12. illustrated,
and we lay it up for our beloved; God he is to have all our fruit: you shall
observe in Cant. 8. that Solomon let out his Vinyard, and m^rk, in letting out
his Vinyard, he must have a thousand pieces of silver, and the Husbandmen must
have two hundred: if God does afford to us some wages for what we do, let not
us take the greater part unto our selves, let Solomon have the thousand, and
let us be contented if we may have two hundred; but ordinarily we take the
greater sum, and return the less to God in any fruit: Verse. 12.
but if you observe the 12. verse, the difference between Solomon's Vinyard, and
Christ's Vinyard, Solomon let out his Vinyard, But my Vinyard, which is mine:
and there is noted this difference, That Jesus Christ he takes the care of his
own Vinyard, he does not let it out. And therefore if we have any thing,
Applied.
we must not have it so much for our wages as free gift, for Christ does not
let out his Vinyard as Solomon did, but he keeps it and dresses it himself, Isa
61. 3. explained.
and therefore it is fit that he should have all the fruit. In Isa. 61. 3. That
they might be called, trees of Righteousness, the Planting of the Lord, that he
might be glorified. Such should the Saints be, they should bring forth fruits
unto God. Phil. 1. 31*
And in Philip. 1. 11. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. So should the Saints be, and
all the fruits they bear.

But Carnal hearts they aim at themselves, Carnal hearts.
all that they do they act from a principle within themselves, and no further,
and therefore they cannot go beyond themselves. It Is an argument that all thou
do has a principle not higher than self, when thou actest for thy self;
whereas the principle that the Saints act by, it is the principle of Grace that
comes from Heaven, simile [omnia eo, unde. Eccles. 1. 7.]
and therefore it carries unto heaven, as the water is carried as high as the
Fountain from whence it comes. A selvish heart is a narrow heart; but a
gracious heart is a heart enlarged, it enlarges its self to infiniteness; and
that is the property of Grace, though it cannot be infinite, yet it is enlarged
to infiniteness. Those that work for themselves, the truth is, they lose
themselves in their working, and lose all their fruit; it is thy worst self
that thou aimest at; there is a kind of selvishness that we may aim at, that
is, if we can make God to be our own end, our happiness, as the Saints do, no
men in the world do more for themselves, than the Saints; yea, but how? because
they make more of their own good to be in God than themselves, and they make
themselves to be more in God than in themselves, and therefore they have
themselves more than any, but they have themselves in God; and no men looses
themselves more than those that seek themselves most: He that will lose his
life, shall save it; those that will aim at themselves, what is that, but a
little money, and credit, and esteem of men? Oh poor base, vile heart, have
thou nothing else but this, when as all the Glory that is in God Himself may be
thy portion, and thy self may be in it, that if God Himself be happy, thou
may be happy, because God Himself may come to be thy portion; and is not
that a better self to be emptied into God? but therein thou dare not trust
God, nor thy self to empty thy self into God, but certainly that is the way to
enjoy thy self. Phil. 2. 21
Every man cares for his own (says the Apostle,) but no man for the things of
Jesus Christ. Oh! this selvishness it is vile at all times, but never so vile
as at this time, for men to look and aim at themselves, especially for men that
are in public places, now to be selvish is the most abominable and the most
foolish thing in the world: simile
for Mariners in the time of a calm then they may look to their several Cabins,
but in the time of a storm, then to be painting and making fine their Cabins,
how do they deserve to be pulled out by the ears, and to be cast into the Sea,
that shall then be looking to their own Cabins? What is your joy more than the
joy of others? and what are you that you must have ease and content more than
others? In such times as these are if ever God calls us to be emptied from our
selves, certainly it is in such times as these are.

But the main Note is, Obs.
That it is all one to be an empty Christian, and to bring forth fruit to
themselves. Men think that which they bring forth to themselves is clear gain;
but this is an infinite mistake, for that which is for thy self is lost, and
that which is for God is gained. Professors that are selvish are empty. Many of
you complain of emptiness and unfruitfulness, Why Professors are empty.
here is the reason; You are so selvish, that prayer is an empty prayer though
never so full of words and excellent expressions whose end is self, many of the
Saints in joining with such they find their prayers to be such though there be
excellent words, because they see selvishness, men that aim at selvishness they
had need be cunning to keep it from being seen, let self be seen in a duty
though it be never so glorious outwardly yet it is loathsome in the eyes of the
very Saints; Prayer.
let but a man appear to affected with himself in what he does, with the tone
of his voice, or carriage, or gesture, any thing affected, we know how
abominable it is in the eyes of all; And so for Sermons, Preaching*
where they are selvish, certainly they are empty things; and so I might
instance in every other thing that men do, the fullness of the Spirit in a
PRAYER, or SERMON, what is the fullness of a duty.
or any other Duty, it is the seeking to lift up the NAME of the Blessed GOD in
the duty, that is the fullness of it; many that are of weak parts, very poor
abilities to exercise themselves, yet their hearts being upon God in a duty,
Oh! Weak prayer may be strong.
there is a fullness in that duty, there is more in that weak expression, in their
sighs and groans than in all the eloquence of your empty hypocrites, they not
being filled with the Will of God: Colos. 4. 12.
in Colos. 4. 12. it is in your books, That you may stand complete in all the
Will of God; (...).
but it is, being filled with the will of God; if thou would have a fullness
in what thou do, a fullness in a Prayer, a fullness in thy Service, in any
thing thou do, be filled with the Will of God, and not with thy self ends.
simile.
You know empty vessels will break when you set them at the fire, and so will
selvish spirits, those that are selvish they quickly grow empty. You that are
Merchants, if you have Factors abroad that trade for themselves, they seldom do
any great matters for their Masters; I have known Merchants that have been
chary of that, for their men to be trading for themselves. And God does not
love to see us trading for our selves, but only as we trade for him, and so
account that to be for our selves. And here is an evident demonstration that
your selvishness will make you empty for God; why Christians complain of empty
duties.
how many are there that complain of emptiness? Oh! they cannot do this, and
they cannot do that, why? because except they find comfort, and that coming in
which they aim at, they have no mind to any duty, they go to prayer, and strive
to pray, and they come away and say, Oh! the empty prayers that we make; but
what is the reason that you cannot pray as you would? you have no heart to
pray, if you would have enlargement in prayer, and present answer of your
prayer to get what you would have, Oh! then your hearts would be much let out
in prayer, and then you would have a mind to pray; but now though it be your
duty to pray, because you shall tender up the worship that a creature owes to
God, that is no argument that puts you upon prayer, so it appears that it is
selvishness that appears in prayer; Try this experime^t
but now try this way, try this way but to get above your selves once, and be
emptied of your selves, and look with a more single eye to God when you go to
prayer, let this be the great motive, O Lord, this is that Worship that I as a
Creature owe to thee, and the strength of my body and soul is due to thee, and
I let out what I can, though I have not enlargements and comforts, though I
feel not that I get by duty to my self, yet in obedience to thee, and that I
might lift up thy Name, and that I might worship thee, I am resolved to go on
in such duties as thou requirest of me; try but this way, and see whether you
will not grow more fruitful in prayer than you did before. Expos. 3. Pareus


But to pass that, I find that some turn the words thus, (as Pareus) An empty
Vine he is, although he treasure up fruit unto himself: and so we may
understand emptiness by that word that I have opened to you, a spoiled Vine, he
is a spoiled Vine, and he is emptied of all his prosperity, and riches, and
glory, that he had, although he seeks to treasure up unto himself. And indeed
in such a kind of reading there is a very profitable Note.

They seek to treasure and enrich themselves, to lay up and provide for
themselves now, that they may have store by them come what will come, but this
will not do says God, Israel must be a spoiled empty Vine for all this.

Now that is the Note or Meditation hence, Obs.
That when God is spoiling and emptying a Nation, it is a vain thing for men to
think to provide for themselves: This certainly is not the time when God is
spoiling and emptying of a Nation, or other parts of the Kingdom for men to
have their thoughts now to scrape an estate to themselves and get even from the
evils of the times to enrich themselves, Those that gain by these times noted
for
by Places and by Offices to enrich themselves, certainly there can be little
honor in such an estate, or little comfort: It is the frame and guize of a vile
spirit to think of enriching of themselves in such times as these are,
certainly it must needs be a very low spirit that minds the enriching of its
self in such times as these are; unless by some extraordinary providence or
eminent service.
what God may cast men in by extraordinary providence at any time we speak not
of that, or by some eminent service; but certainly if it shall prove that God
in his mercy shall put an end to such times as these are, when men shall prove
to be rich after this storm is over, that had not some eminent providence of
God to cast it upon them but only in his ordinary way, (I say) whosoever should
appear to be rich after these times, it will be little honor to him, or his
posterity, it will be the most dishonorable riches that ever was in the world.
In Jer. 45. 4. says the Lord to Baruch there (he was a good man and yet much
over seen in this) Behold, Ier. 45. 4.
that which I have built, will I break down, and that which I have planted,
will I pluck up, even this whole Land. And seek thou great things for thy
self, seek them not. I am breaking down that which I have built, and plucking
up what I have planted, Act. 8. 20.
And do thou seek great things for thy self? seek them not. In Acts, 8. 20.
says Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. So may I say to many,
is this a time for men to treasure to themselves, for men to have their chief
care now to gain riches? Oh! Some make advantage ^f the troubles of the times.
it is just with God to say to thee, Thy riches perish with thee; whosoever now
will make it his chief care, and think now it is a time of trouble, and now I
may gain thus and thus, and it will not appear; (I say) those that shall make
this to be their care now, to take advantage of these times to treasure up to
themselves, just were it with God to say of them and their riches, Thy money
and thy riches perish with thee. It follows.

According to the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the Altars:
according to the goodness of his Land, they have made goodly Images.
Here you have the unthankfulness of Ephraim; Expos.
you have had his barrenness, and selvishness, in the two former expressions,
and now here his unthankfulness: The Devil he loves to have superstitious and
Idolatrous people have good Lands, and good Possessions, that he might be
served accordingly; Idolaters serve their Idols according to their Lands and
Possessions that they have, According to the multitude of his fruit, were the
multitude of his Altars. And certainly it is a great reason why all the Papists
are so desirous to get England, and contribute so much that they might but get
into England, and get Possession here, for there is no place that they have,
where they should have more goodly Images, and more brave things than they
should here in England, the fruitfulness of this Land is that which makes it to
be such a suit to the Antichristian party, and to the Devil, he thinks that
might the Popish party get here, Oh! the brave things that I should have here;
I began to have fine Altars, but if they should begin to have possession of all
the riches in the Land, then Oh what golden Monuments should I have? we began
to have great charges to be laid out upon Temples (as they called them) but
certainly if they should prevail now, you should have them build them up to the
very skies, such Pinacles and glorious things there would be, for the Land is a
great deal more fruitful and goodly than it was heretofore, it is improved
mightily now; what brave buildings were there in our Forefathers time, witness
these that we have near us, Westminster, and Paul's, and the like. I remember
Latimer in one of his Sermons before the King tells of his Father which was a
man that kept good hospitality, Latimer
and kept a Horse for the King, and yet the portion that he gave with his
Daughter was some five pounds. So I say, if that men were so poor and mean in
former times, yet what brave things did superstition do, certainly if the
superstitious party should have the possession of the Land there would be brave
things done; and therefore the Devil seeing that, strives to bring it into
their power.

To make Gods blessings to be the Means and the Increase of our wickedness, Obs.
that is an abominable thing; To increase our sins according to the increase of
Gods blessings. How many may be charged with this, That when they were of low
and mean estates then God had more service from them, Applied.
than he has now they are of higher estates? the higher they are raised in
their Estates, the lower they are in the Work of God: simile.
As it is observed of men that grow very fat, they have so much the less blood.
And ^o the fatter men are in their Estates, many times the less blood and life,
and less spirits they have for God.

Certainly this is against the ingenuity of a Christian to be less for God when
he has most from Him, Reas. 1.
when his own turn is served, then to turn his back from the Author of all his
good, nay it is against a main Christian Principle so to do.

This is a main Christian Principle, Reas. 2.
that the good of an Estate consists in this; A Christian principle.
That it gives a large opportunity in proportion to what it is, in proportion
to what it is to the service of God. This is a great Christian Principle about
Estates; an Estate either greater or lesser, affords either a lesser or greater
opportunity for Gods service; upon this principle does a Christian go in the
enjoyment of his Estate. Now to be less for God, or more for that that is evil,
the better his Estate is: he goes against that great Christian Maxim.

Yea, and it is against thy Prayers for a Sanctified use of thy ESTATE; Reas. 3.
Does God give thee an ESTATE? I hope thou do seek that this may be
Sanctified: now for thee to do less for God, and more for that that is evil by
the increase of thy Estate, thou do go against a Sanctifying Prayer.

But yet the chief point of al I take to be this: Mark here:

They do ACCORDING: (for there lies the very strength of these words) ACCORDING
to the multitude of his Fruit, and ACCORDING to the goodness of his Land, they
have made goodly Images.
There is a great deal of elegancy in the words in the Hebrew, (...)
so that from these two expressions, According, and According, here is the
Note: That the love that Idolaters bear to their Idols, it is proportionable to
what abilities they have to show their love; according to the multitude of
their Fruit, and according to the goodness of the Land. When Idolaters are low
they will yet do what they can, and as they grow up they will do more.

Virgil he has a very fine expression of the Idolater toward his Idol there:
Nunc te marm^r^a pro tempore fecimuis, at tu, si foetura gregem suppleveris
aureus esto.
We now make thee but of Marble, but if so be our flock does increase, and we
have as many Lambs as we have Sheep, we will make thee of Gold.

And thus the true worshipers of God should do in their service to God, that
must be proportionable; if they be able to bestow but Marble for the present,
if God raises their Estates, their Marble is to be turned into Gold, and not
only in regard of their Estates, Virg. Egl. 7.
but of the Gifts, and Means they have, any Abilities; know that that which God
will accept of when thou art low in thy Gifts, and Means, and Parts, it will
not serve turn when God increases thee in thy Gifts, and Means, and Parts. Have
you more than others? Account it your shame that it should be said of any in
the world, That there is such an one that has less mercies than I, and yet God
has more service from him than he has from me. There is no proportion between
many of your increases for God, and your increases from God. Now you must look
to the proportion to make it as exact as can be, my increase from God, and my
increase for God; Oh! be often parallelling these two together, and see whether
one do not come longer than mother; and be not at rest, Oh Christian! except
thou can make thy ends be even: Those who are rich, must be rich in good
works. 1 Timothy 6.
In 1 Timothy 6. God gives us richly; therefore be rich in good works. It is not
enough for a rich man to give sixpence, or twelvepence for some great service,
but he is to be rich in good works, and for releeving distressed ones, and the
maintenance of the Gospel; he is to be rich in good works, Riches in good
works the best wealth.
and to account their riches to be as well in their good works as in their
estates; thou have so much comings in more than others, thou art rich in that;
yea, but what works goes from thee more than others? art thou rich in that? If
we should judge the riches of men and women by their good works, how many rich
men would there be accounted very poor? Every man must be serviceable as God
has blessed them, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
1 Cor. 16. 2. Oh! this meditation would be of very great use to those whose
estates are blessed by God; think thus, Is there such a distance between what
service I do for God, and the service others do, as there is between what I
receive from God, and what others receive from God? This Meditation (I say)
would be very useful; A meditation for a rich man.
cast up your accounts thus, Consider what service does others for God, and
what do I? I do as well as others, I but is there as much distance between the
service that I do, and the service my poor neighbor does, as between my estate,
and his estate? you perhaps can look upon poor people carrying Tankards,
earning dearly ten pence or twelve pence a day, and you have many hundreds a
year coming in, now is there as much difference? You would be loath to be in
such a condition as those are in, Oh! but is there as much difference between
the glory that God has from you, and the glory that God has from them? It may
be some of them when they have been hard at work all day, they get home, and
get alone with wife and children and fall a praying, and letting their tears
fall down, and blessing God for their bread and drink that they have. And
perhaps you in your many hundreds a year, and many dishes at your table, are
but discontented and froward, Oh! consider, that though God has raised you
above others in estates, yet you are lower than many others in good works; If a
man has increased his estate more than before you shall quickly see it in his
clothes, and his house shall be finer than before, his furniture shall be finer
than before, you shall see his estate raised that way; but can you see it
raised in his good works more than before? Oh! that such a man does more for
the service of God than before, more for the relieving of the woeful
necessities of his poor Brethren than before: Men are ready if so be that men
come finer to the Exchange than they did before, they think, What is this man
grown richer than he was before? You should (if God does raise your estates)
make it appear in being forward with good works, in good works that are
chargable, as that men may take notice of your riches by your rich works,
rather than your rich clothes; except there be a proportion between our plenty
and our prosperity, there is no evidence that our prosperity comes in mercy:
but if a proportion, then not only an evidence that our prosperity comes in
mercy, but a good addition to the good of our prosperity. If a Merchant has
his Ship come home and he has gootten a thousand pounds by the Voyage, now if
God raises his heart in a proportionable way to the furtherance of the Gospel,
that is more than ten thousand pounds; a man would account that well if he has
gotten so much and he could employ it to get ten times so much more, think but
thus: Thou have gotten in thy estate by being proportionable in service for
God, thou do increase the blessing ten fold, thou often think of the
blessing of God in giving thee an estate more than before, and others think of
it, Oh what a blessing such a man has! yea, but think of the other blessing
that follows; but has God given him or her a heart to do a great deal of
service; The second blessing is the great blessing indeed. David.
When David had rest, he presently thinks of building God an house, and that
proportionable in what God had blessed him in. And that is very observable in the
difference of Moses Altar and Solomon's Altar; Moses's Altar and Solomon's,
you know Moses he was in times of affliction, and his Altar was five cubits
long, and three cubits broad; and Solomon's was twenty cubits long, and ten
broad; Moses he was low for outward; Solomon he was high; therefore Moses was
five cubits high, and three broad; and Solomon's was twenty cubits long, and ten
broad* Gods example^.
God does proportion his goodness to what we do for him, why should not we
proportion our service with what he does for us? And therefore when God blesses
any of you in your outward estate, it is very good to do somewhat presently, as
thus; A man perhaps heretofore had but a little stock, and lived in a Parish
where he had but poor and mean preaching, now God raises his estate and he
would have his house better, and his clothes better, why then should not I have
better preaching for my soul? And so many other ways, if God has blessed you
with good preaching, then help your poor neighbors some way or other that the
Gospel may be furthered by Gods blessing, and that in a proportionable way.

They make them goodly Images.
There is a very fine elegant paranomasy, According to their good Lands, (...)
so goodly Images. Now this word that is translated Goodly, it signifies also
Beauty. They that were good Benefactors to their Images, they made their Images
beautiful: and it is the same word used in the story of Jezebel where she is
said to tire her head, it is the same word that is here for making goodly
Images, We should do for Gods lively Image as much as Idolaters do for dead
Images, viz. to all men: but especially to the Saints.
she made her self a goodly head. Oh how great a shame is it to do so much for
Images, dead Images, and to do so little for the Images of God? Shall Idolaters
not care for what cost they bestow upon their dead Images, and shall thou see a
man or woman that carries the Image of God with them in a lively way, shall
thou see them naked, and looking hunger-starved, and looking rufully and
miserably, and will thou deny to one that has the Image of God? Every man has
the Image of God in some measure, even in wicked men, but especially in those
that are godly there it is a renewed Image, there the very Life of God does
appear, the Divine Nature does appear: And what a charge will this be, when God
shall bring Idolaters at the day of Judgment against thee, that shall bestow so
much upon their dead Images, and thou shall let these Images of God to suffer
want so as they do? Certainly so long as there is any that has Gods Image upon
them that wants, and wants miserably too, for thee to think of increasing thy
estate now and to be richer than in former times, it must needs be very vile.

Goodly Images.
Men are taken with outward shows, Obs.
but a spiritual heart, the Ordinances of God though they be never so plain in
their outside, Oh they are goodly things! A Spiritual heart sees a goodliness
in all Gods Ordinances; Carnal hearts they see goodliness only in their outward
bravery, and outward pomp and glory.

And lastly, Obs.
A Note that Pareus has: Here we see the vain distinction that Papists make
between their Images and Idols; we see here they are charged for making goodly
Images. It follows;

VER. 2.
Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty.
MY Brethren, I know that you would be willing enough that I should in such a
Point as this is, go beyond an Expository way, seeing God has cast me upon it;
but in regard this Point has been fully handled in a See the several Exercises
and Sermons which he spent (most seasonably and excellently) upon this subject,
are printed in a Trettise by themselves with this Title [IRENICVM:
Heart-divisions opened, etc.] which is to be taken in here, and then that which
follows (in the subsequent Exposition) to be annexed.
Treatise already printed, (to which I shall refer you) I shall pass it, and
proceed to the following words:

He shall break down their Altars: he shall spoil their Images.
The Divisions of this People, of which you have heard so largely In the
Treatise of Heart-divisions printed by its self.
, were much about the way of Worship, most of them contending for the way of
False Worship against the True; they would have their Images and their Altars
honored: but God says, he would break them down, and spoil them; ye keep a
stir for them, but you shall not have them: But he will break down their
Altars. Decollabit, the word comes from a root that signifies a Neck; Expos. 1.
and so that which you have in your Books translated, Decollabit (...) cervix.
break down, it is, break their necks; he will break the necks of their Altars.
Ternovius a learned Interpreter has a Note upon the place, it has an allusion
(says he) to that that they were wont to have upon their Altars, Vatabl.
they were wont to have Ornamenta quasi Capitela, that were (as it were) the
heads of their Altars, they were wont to have brave things upon their Altars,
and Crowns upon their Altars: I, but says the Lord, I will break the necks of
them all: He will break down their Altars, and spoil their Images.

The Notes from thence are briefly these.

First, Obs. 1.
Though men make never such a stir to maintain that which is evil, God will
break it; they may by their contending and seeking have it a while, but God
will break the neck of it at last, it shall come to nothing.

He will break down their Altars.
Why, Expos. 2.
they were convinced before of the evil of them, for so in the former words,
Now shall they be found guilty, they shall acknowledge themselves guilty in
contending so much for them; well, but says God, though you are convinced of
your guiltiness, yet that is not enough, I Will break them down, for otherwise if
they do remain, they may be snares unto you afterward.

From whence then the Note is: Obs. 2.
That though men be convinced of an evil, yet if the temptation shall still
abide, they will be ready to fall to it again. Wherefore to prevent that evil,
the temptations are to be taken away as much as we can, (says he) I will take
away the temptation; you acknowledge your selves guilty when my hand is upon
you, but you will fall to it again if the temptation be not taken away.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
Superstitious Altars and Images are to be taken away. Altars and religious
Images to be removed from among Christians and broken: not sold.
It Is the Magistrates work to take away those that are in public place; but I
have met with that heretofore, and I shall not need to speak of it now, only
for you to meet with any superstitious Pictures, and Images, you must not keep
them and say, what hurt will these do? though they do not hurt now, yet they
may do hurt afterward, you are not to sell and make advantage of them, but do
as God does, break them down and spoil them, that they may not hereafter be
snares to any others.

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
Those things that we give that respect to, which is Gods due, are liable to
the stroke of God. They gave respect to their Altars, and Images that was due
to God, Gods Spirit rises against that, I Will break them down and spoil them
says God. So, whatsoever it be that you give that respect to, that God
challenges to himself, you may expect that God will spoil them and break them
down. If you give respect to your Estates, that is due to God, you may make an
Idol of them, expect that God will break them; yea, to your Children, your
Names, your Bodies, Parts, whatsoever you have, that you rob God of that
respect that is due to him, and give it unto them, expect that God will break
such things.

Fifthly, Obs. 5
If it be Gods will to break down that which is evil in his Worship, let us
take heed that we have no hand to set it up, that we do not endeavor to set up
false Worship, for it is in Gods heart to break it down, let us not set up Idols
in our hearts neither, or else where.

I Will break down their Altars, and will spoil their Images.
From whence our Note is this; Obs. 6.
We must not break down superstitious and Idolatrous things to make up our own
broken estates, for our outward advantage. We should labor the abolishing of
those things, and not our own benefit by them; as certainly many do in breaking
down things that are naught and superstitious, they endeavor to make up their
broken estates and to gain to themselves that way, and there is all they aim at:
but says God, I Will break them down and utterly spoil them; so should we, and
look not to our own advantage.

He will break them down.
I find some Interpreters render the words thus, Expos. 2.
It shall break them down, and so apply it to their divided hearts. Ipsum cor,
for so the Pronoun that is translated, he, is relative, and the Antecedent
according to the former Exposition is in that last Verse of the former Chapter
where he had spoken of God; but according to this Interpretation the Antecedent
is: Their heart is divided: Their hearts, their very dissentions, their
divisions shall break down their Altars, and spoil their Images. And we may
have a hint of a good meditation from thence, If I say the Relative should have
that Antecedent, and their hearts being divided should be a means to break down
their Altars, then the Note is this:

That men's divisions and contentions break the neck of that which they contend
for; Obs. 7.
especially when men in their contentions, are violent, furious, outrageous,
and heady, they do usually by their rage and headiness, and passion in their
contentions, break out and spoil the very thing that they would fain maintain,
and their party is very little beholding unto such as seek to maintain them in
a furious and in an outrageous way, by a spirit of contention. You know those
furious violent Prelates, The late Prelates.
Did not they break the neck of their Prelacie merely by their fury and
outragiousness? And in any party, those that are the most furious and
outrageous, Furious me^ do the least service.
do the least service to their party, and many times are the very break-neck of
their Party, and of their Cause: It shall break them down. It follows.

VER. 3.
For now they shall say, We have no King.
WHAT, break down our Altars, and spoil our Images! no, the King will maintain
them against you all, let the Prophets say what they can and a company of
precise fools be against them what they will, A graphical Paraphrase upon the
words.
we have the King will stand for that, he will rather lose his Crown than he
will lose these things, he will stand for them to his very life, and therefore
we do not fear that they shall be broken down. No, that will not serve your
turns (says the Prophet) your King shall not be able to help himself, much
less to help you in those superstitious ways that you would have. For now
shall they say, We have no King. They rejoiced and gloried much in their King,
they bore themselves altogether upon their King, no matter for the Prophets;
they have the Kings Commandment to do what they do, they can show the Kings
broad Seal for what they have done, and they were sure that they had the Kings
heart with them, their King would bear them out in all. They cared not
therefore whatsoever they did, so be it they have the countenance of their King
that he would defend them, and not only defend, but by being zealous and
forward for his ways they hoped to have promo^ion by him, they did not fear to
be questioned for any thing, no matter whether they went against Law or not,
they could shelter themselves under the power and favor of the King, the Pomp
and Glory of the Court that was a great thing in their eyes, they were bold in
their Idolatrous way and oppression, because of the power and greatness of the
King; who should control them in any thing that they did? But now (says the
Prophet) You have had your day, you have had your time that you could thus
shelter your selves under the power of the King, and do what you list, and
oppress, and rage, and no body durst meddle with you, because of the power of
the King, but now the case is altered.

But now they shall say, We have no King.
Had they no King?

Yes; Expos.
Hoshea was their King, but the meaning is, It Is all one as if we had no King,
his power is so broken that the truth is, Ac si non esset, nam is quam habemus,
non potest nos protegere, quod est Officium Regis.
he cannot help us. Says Drusius upon the place; he cannot protect us, which
is the property of the King, and therefore it is as if we had none; now they
shall say, We have no King; Alas he is not able to save himself, he can do
nothing for us, his Pomp, his Power, Bravery is in the dust, he is distressed
himself, and we are miserably disappointed of our hopes, we are undone, who can
help us now? Drus.
whither shall we go? what shall we do? our consciences upbraid us now for our
bold presumptuous wickedness, Oh! how far were our hearts from the fear of the
Lord, we dared the God of Heaven and all his Prophets, we boldly ventured upon
those ways which we were told, yea which we knew in our very consciences were
a provocation to the Lord, we set up our own worship, we pleased our selves, we
made our wills to be the rules of all our actions that we did, we took liberty
to satisfy our lusts, we mingled our own ways with Gods Ordinances, we
subjected Religion to public ends, we were riged, we were cruel toward those
who differed from us, we upheld the Authority of the King against God and his
People, and now God has justly brought this distressed estate upon us, that
now the Kings Power that we trusted so in, is now broken and in a manner gone,
Oh! now we see we feared not the Lord, we have none to help us now, we now know
what it is not to fear the great God, God is above us, and therefore now, what
can a King do to us? what could he do for us? Suppose we had him again, Alas!
our misery is beyond his help, seeing God is provoked with us, and has
forsaken us, what should a King do for us? And thus in this short Paraphrase
you have the scope of the words, as if the People should have spoken in this
manner.

But now the question is, what times does this refer to?

Now they shall say, Quest. concerning the time this prophecy refers to Answ.
We have no King etc.
When did they say so?

The times that this refers to, seems to be those that we read of in 2 King.
17. If you read that Chapter, you shall find the times that this has reference
to; then they might well say, We have no King; because we feared not the Lord:
What then should a King do to us?

For the Observations from it, the first is this:

It Is a great evil for a People, Obs. 1.
not to have the Protection and the Blessing that might be enjoyed in the right
Government of a King over them: A great evil; And they complain of it as a
great evil, and so far their complaint is right, That they are now deprived of
the Protection and good that otherwise they might have had from the right
Government of a King over them.

And my Brethren, Applied to England.
our condition is even such in regard of the personal presence and protection
of a King, in those regards we may almost use the same words as here, and say,
We have no King among us. And whether it be better for a People to have no
King, or to have no Protection from their King? But that which is contrary to
Protection is a Question fitter to be discussed and determined in a Parliament
than in a Pulpit; and to them I shall leave it.

But the Church of God shall never have cause to make this Complaint, Ps 29.
10. 11.
That they have no King; in Psalm. 29 10, 11. The Lord sits King for ever.
The Lord will give strength unto his People; Psa. 45. 6.
the Lord will bless his People with peace. In Psalm. 45. 6. Thy Throne (O God)
is for ever and ever: the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Ps. 145. 13
Psalm. 145. 13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom: and thy Dominion
endures throughout all generations. Ps. 149. 9
Psalm. 149. 2. Let the Children of Zion rejoice in their King.

Because we feared not the Lord.
It is a great evil not to fear the Lord. Obs. 2.
Fear ye not me (says the Lord) who have placed the sands for the bounds of
the Sea? It Is an evil, and a bitter thing, that the fear of the Lord is not in
men. For God is a great God, infinitely above us, clothed with Majesty and
Honor; trembling frames of heart becomes his presence: non like unto the Lord;
great and mervailous are his works; Oh! who would not fear him? God has
infinite authority over us, to save, or to destroy us, he has us all at an
infinite advantage by the least word of his mouth to undo us, his wrath is
insupportable: Isa. 33.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? Dare thou a vile wretch presume to rebel against
any word of the Lord, Use.
when the next word may sink soul and body into the bottomless gulf of eternal
horror and despair? Who art thou that do not fear the Lord? Do thou not
fear the Commanding Word of the Lord, when the next word that proceeds out of
his mouth may be a destroying word to undo body and soul for ever?

Secondly, They said, We feared not the Lord.
And observe: Obs. 3.
In times of prosperity when men have the favor and countenance of great Ones,
then there is little fear of God among them. Now they said, We feared not the
Lord. Oh! those times when we had the favor and countenance of great Men,
there was little fear of God among us. So long as men have any confidence in
the Creature, so long they see no need of God, their hearts are swollen with
pride, God is not in all their thoughts, they say to God, Depart from us, we do
not desire the knowledge of thy Ways. They set their hearts and tongues against
the God of Heaven, they can venture upon any thing then; to tell them it is sin
against God, it is a poor dry business, it is nothing at all with them; how vile
and foolish are the hearts of wicked men, that the enjoyment of such poor
things as they have in the Creature should imbolden their hearts against the
great God of Heaven and Earth? yet thus it is, men little consider but even
those things that their hearts do so much rest upon, they are absolutely at the
dispose of this God whom their hearts do not fear.

But note, Gods fear should destroy in us Creature-confidence.
let the Saints of God take this Note with them, Shall creature confidence take
men's hearts off from Gods fear? Then let Gods fear take your hearts off from
creature confidence: Certainly there is a great deal more reason. Oh! it is
infinitely irrational that creature confidence should take the heart from Gods
fear; but it is infinitely rational that Gods fear should take our hearts off
from creature confidence.

Thirdly, Now they shall say, We feared not the Lord.
The taking from a People the protection of, Obs. 3.
and benefit they might have by Kingly Power, is a punishment of the want of
the fear of God in them. We have no King, we are deprived of the benefit of the
good that we might have, the protection that we might have by Kingly power; it
is, because we feared not the Lord; what evil we feel in this let us attribute
it to the want of the fear of God in our selves, and in the people of the Land.
We complain of Civil Counselors
those that are about the King, and of Queen.
Her that lies in the Bosom of the King, and of the evil of his own heart in
part; but whence is it that God has left him, either to them, or to any evil
in his own spirit? The Lord in this punishes the sins of the People: it is usual
for God to punish the sins of the People in leaving Governors unto evil
courses, in 2 Samuel 24. 1. you have a remarkable Scripture for this, 2 Samuel 24.
1.
says the text there, And the Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel:
and what then? And he moved David against them to say, Go number Israel and
Judah. The Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them: to what? God lets temptations be before David for to fall into
that sin that might bring evil upon the people. It was because the anger of the
Lord was kindled against Israel. It Is because that a people fear not God,
therefore it is that the Lord leaves Kings, leaves their Governors to those
evil ways that they are left unto, and therefore learn we when we hear of any
evil that is done by countenance of Kings or any power, learn we to lay our
hands upon our own hearts, and say, even this is because we feared not the
Lord: how easy had it been with the Lord to have wrought upon his heart, Oh!
what prayers has been sent up unto the Lord for the heart of one man? never
since the world began more prayers for the heart of one man; but the Lord has
seemed even to shut his ears against the prayers of his people, now let us lay
our hands upon our hearts, God has denied our prayers, it is because we have
not feared him: now certainly there has been but little fear of God amongst
us, and little fear of the great God is still to this day among us. And that is
the third Observation, We have no King because we feared not the Lord.

And then the Fourth is this, Obs. 4
The times of Gods Wrath and Judgments forces acknowledgment from men that they
did not fear God. When God comes against them in ways of wrath, now they can
acknowledge that they feared not God; should the Prophet have come to them
before and told them, Oh! you are a wretched vile people, there is no fear of
God among you. Why, wherein do not we fear God? as in Malac. 1. Malach. 1.
they would not be convinced, but, Now shall they say, etc. Now when the wrath
of God is upon men, now they shall say, we see now apparently we feared not the
Lord. Cardinal Wolsye.
As it is said of Cardinal Wolsie when he was in distress, Oh says he, Had I
but served God as well as I served the King, it would have been otherwise with
me than it is; but I sought to please the King rather than God, and now I am
left in this distressed estate. He would have scorned that any should have told
him before that he pleased the King more than God; In affliction God appears
dredful.
but afflictions they will draw forth acknowledgment: for in afflictions God
appears dreadful to the soul, it is no dallying, and trifling, and putting off
then, we see we have to deal with an infinite, Glorious, and dreadful God, and
in times of affliction now conscience will brave over men, it will not be
quieted and stilled so as in the times of prosperity, but it will speak, as we
read of Zebul in Judges, 9. 38. Judge 9. 38.
says Zebul, Where now is thy mouth wherewith thou saidest, Who is Abimelech?
So says conscience in times of affliction to wretched creatures, Zebul's
exprobatio^
Where now is that bold and presumptuous heart of thine? Thou scornest at
fearing and trembling before God, and slightest his Word, but where now is that
proud wretched heart of thine? And in times of afflictions now are men's hearts
abased and humbled, and therefore now they are ready to say, It is, because
they feared not the Lord.

Mark here, they do not (when they are in afflictions and troubles) say, I, we
may thank these kind of people, there were a company of factious people and
they would not yield to any thing, and we may thank them for all this; you hear
no such words, Oh no, but it is, Because we feared not the Lord.

When the heart is in any degree humbled, Obs. 5.
it will not put off the cause of evils to other men, or other things, but will
charge its self as the cause of the evils that are upon it. Oh how much better
my Brethren were it for us to see the want of the fear of God by his Word to
us, and his Spirit in us, than by his wrath against us, or his stroke upon us.
Let us every day examine our hearts, How has the fear of God been in me this
day? has the fear of God acted, and guided me in all my thoughts, counsels, and
actions this day? How happy were it when we ever lie down to rest to have such
a short meditation, A meditation at going to bed.
Has the fear of God been the thing that has Acted, and Governed, and Guided
me in my course this day? But it follows.

What then shall a King do to us? (or, for us?)
Suppose we had him, now he is gone, but if we had him, what good would he
bring to us if we had him? As if they should say, we speak much concerning our
King, but now we have not the King with us as he was, but if he were with us
again, what should he do for us? what would our condition be better than it is?
And indeed, what good had their Kings done for them? The People of Israel they
were very desirous of a King, they must needs have a King, God granted to their
desires in giving them Saul, then afterward they must have a King again, so
they had Jeroboam, and he must be the King of the ten Tribes. Their first King
they had, it was in Gods wrath, and every one of the Kings of Israel David and
Solomon, and many of the Kings of Judah are excepted: because God was their
King, 1 Samuel 12. 14. and Chap. 8. 7.
was a plague to them, what had they done for them? All the time they had
Judges they were in a better case; Israel was in a far better case when they
were ruled by the Government of God. And Peter Martyr in his Preface to the
Book of Judges, Pet. Mar. in Prefat. Comment. on Iudic.
observes three things wherein Israel was better when they were under Judges,
than Kings.

For first, (says he) All the time they had Judges, they were not let Captive
out of their own Country so as afterward.

Secondly, When ever they were oppressed and God raised them up a Judge, he did
always prevail so as to deliver them from their oppression, before he had done
he delivered them from their oppression; that is to be observed in the story of
the Judges: but their Kings did not so.

And thirdly, We find not any one of their Judges are charged or condemned by
God for evil, that they were evil Judges among them, as the Kings are; such a
one did evil in the sight of the Lord, and such a one did evil, and every one
of the Kings of Israel did so. God does not charge the Judges so; it was
otherwise therefore with them after they had Kings. Christ little behol^ to
most Kings.
And the truth is, that Christ has been but little beholding to (I may say)
almost to most of our Kings; yea, little beholding to most of the Kings that
have lived upon the earth, and he has takes as little care of the greater
part of them: As they have taken little care of his Honor, so he has taken
little care of the Greater part of them, of all the Roman Emperors that were
declared by the Senate in Number sixty three, Historians agree that there was
but six of al them that had such protection from God as to die a natural death,
but six of three score and three; there were twenty nine of the Emperors that
did not reign above twenty five years and od months; yea there were twelve of
them that did reign but three years and od months: see what havoc was made of
them: they regarded not the Honor of Jesus Christ, but were enemies unto him,
and he regarded as little their safety.

What then should a King do to us?
From hence the Notes are these:

First, Obs. 1.
When God forsakes a People, there is nothing can do them good. For they did
most dote upon a King that should do them good, and help them. When God
forsakes a People, nothing then can do them good, Ps. 127. 1.
Psalm, 127. at the beginning, Except the Lord build the house, etc.

Secondly. Obs. 2.
It Is just with God, to make those things unuseful to men which they sinfully
dote upon, and put their confidence in. They sinfully doted upon Kings, and put
their confidence in them, and God does now justly make the power of Kings
unuseful to them: What shall a King do to us? If we dote upon them, it is just
with God to make them unuseful to us. Or if we dote upon our Credit, and Names,
and so upon Kings and Princes; If men expect preferment from them, it is just
with God to blast all their hopes, that they should be forced to say, Now I see
God fights against him, as well as against me. Thus the people spoke in respect
of their Kings.

This Scripture may well be a Comment upon that Text we have in Psalm, 146. 3.
Ps. 146. 3. explained by the text
Put not your trust in Princes, etc. Do not put your trust in Princes, have no
confidence in them; If you put your trust in them, they will be unuseful to you.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 146.
And Chrysostom upon that very Psalm has this Note: Princes, why not to be
trusted in.
Whereas they would say, Oh! he is a Prince. Says Chrysostom, Let me tell you
that which you perhaps will wonder at: Because he is a Prince, therefore put
not your trust in him (says Chrysostom) And he gives this reason, Because
(says he) who is in a more unsafe condition than they? 1. None so unsafe as
they.
Are not they fain to have their Guards go about them to protect them? They in
times of peace when they are in a City that is ruled by good Laws, yet they are
fain to have the Instruments of War round about them, to protect them; and
therefore put not your confidence in them, because they are Princes: but then
in the Psalm, they are called to put their confidence in the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is; 2. None often times so
perfidious. (and that's true of most that are in place and power.)
which keeps truth for ever. Alas you may put confidence in Princes, but they
will not keep truth; they will make fair promises to you, that you shall have
some great matters by them, but they use you for to serve their own turns; but
put your trust in the Lord, and the Lord shall reign for ever; as it is in the
10. verse, Kings do not reign for ever, they are the children of men, the
breath is in their Nostrils; but the Lord shall reign for ever.

And again thirdly, Obs. 3.
What shall a King do for us?

How great an evil is it to a people then, whose complaints are; Musculus in Ps
164.
what does a King not do against us? Musculus upon the forenamed Psalm, (those
that read his Coment shall find that Note in it) says he, You are not to put
your trust in Princes that are the children of men, they are but men; yea, but
what shall we say to those that are cruel oporessors that are rather like
Tigers and such kind of wild beasts among men, that seem not to be children of
men, An ^ffigies of the last times.
how shall we put our trust in them? Oh! it is a sad condition indeed that a
people is in, when they have this cause to complain, when they shall have cause
to cry out and complain, Oh how! how does he run from place to place,
plundering, spoiling, breaking, tearing, destroying wheresoever he comes? That
people is in a sad condition, what shall he do for us? Nay, what does he not do
against us continually? and all this, because we have not feared the Lord.
That Is the third Note.

The fourth is, Obs. 4.
And what shall a King do to us?

See here the alteration of the spirits of these men toward their King; King,
not long ago they put their confidence in their King, and gloried in their
King, and now, what shall a King do to us? Hence the Note is:

God can soon make a great change in the hearts of people in reference to their
Kings; that even those that did dote, and admire him, and own no other God but
their King, shall even turn their hearts and say, What can a King do for us?
the least turn of God upon the hearts of people will make such a change as this
is.

Again, Obs. 5.
here observe, The difference between the blessed estate of Gods People, and
the wretched estate of wicked men; those who fear God can say, What shall a
King, what shall men, what Devils do against us? But other men in their
straights, what shall they do for us? We are in a distressed condition, and
what shall they do for us? But the People of God are never in such a distressed
condition but they are able to say, What shall Men or Devils be able to do
against us? for God is our Protector.

Again sixthly, Obs. 6.
The more stoutness, and sinfulness, and creature-confidence there is in any,
the more do their hearts sink in desperation when they come to be crossed in
their hopes. They were very stout and full of creature confidence before they
were brought into misery, and now what low sordid spirits have they? now they
sink in desperation: There Is no men and women have their hearts sink in
desperation, more than those that in ruff of their pride are the most bold and
presumptuous against God and his Servants.

Again: Expos.
What shall a King do to us? Their hearts sink in regard of any hopes that they
have from their King. But yet you read nothing of their hearts being set upon
God, and mourning, and working toward God, when they are taken from the
creature they say not thus, Now we see our vain confidence in our King, and
what hopes we had of preferment in him, God has crossed us; well, we will go and
seek to make the King of Heaven to be our portion. No, there is no such thing
comes from them as this.

A Carnal heart when it is knocked off of creature confidence and sinks in
desperation in regard of the creature, Obs. 7.
it does not take advantage upon this, To have the heart work after God so much
the more; but there it lies sullen and sinking, it has no interest in God, and
cannot go to him to make up what it wants in the creature: But it is otherwise
with a gracious heart, that acknowledges the hand of God has taken off my
confidence in the creature, yea, but I hope it is in mercy to my soul, that my
heart might have the more confidence in God, and that God might have the more
glory from me, and therefore I hope that this taking off my heart from the
creature, will for ever unite my heart more to the Lord than ever heretofore it
has been. Yea, this is a gracious work indeed when the heart is taken off from
creature confidence and brought nearer unto the Lord. And thus much for the
third Verse. It follows.

VER. 4.
They have spoken words.
THEY are convinced of their sin, Expos. 1.
that they have not feared God, they cry out of their misery, what shall a King
do to them? But mark what follows? this follows upon it, they were not gained
to God ever a whit the more, But they have spoken Words, swearing falsely, in
making a Covenant.

When they are taken off from their hopes one way, Obs. 1.
see how they set upon another. Luther in loc. hebrasmus est, pro anxie
consultant.
Luther upon those words, says: it is an Hebraism; they have anxiously
consulted. It Is the way of the Hebrews so to express an anxious consultation,
and for that he quotes that place in Isa. 8. 10. Take counsel together, and it
shall come to naught etc. So then the meaning would be this: Isa. 8. 10.


They have spoken Words:] That is, they get together and contrive one with
another what they shall do in such a case as this, how they may any way help
themselves. As we read sometimes of the People of God in Malac. 3. 16. those
that feared God met one with another and spoke together; Mal. 3. 16
so these wicked wretches that were thus disappointed of their hopes, they met
together, and spoke one to another, some such kind of word as these:

Our Case is very sad, Oh! who would have thought come to pass what such
precise ones among us whose consciences would not submit to our ways and the
way of our King said, surely they cannot but look upon us as a most wretched
miserable forsaken people, now we are like to lose our Houses, Estates, Honors,
and all those delightful things that we hoped to have had, we shall lose all
those things that we hoped might have made our lives to have been brave, and
prosperous, and merry, and jocund, Oh! what shall we do in such a distressed
state as this? We had almost as good die as to endure such a miserable life as
we are like to live, to be at the mercy of such men whom we know scorn us and
hate us, Is there no way to help our selves? cannot we get some or other to
join with us? cannot we call in no help from any strangers, no matter what we
yield to them in. Thus they toss up and down, and wrig up and down, not knowing
what in the world to do in their conference.

Covenant.
If they will have us take the COVENANT, and nothing else will satisfy them,
we will do it; and when we have taken it, perhaps they may put some of us in
places of trust, and so we may privately work about our own ends that way, and
drive on our own designs that way better than in any hostile way, and if
together with their Covenant they will have Oaths, Animum in omnia versant,
ultro citroque sermones conferunt. Ternov. in loc.
we will take them too, and if we cannot agree to their Oaths or Covenant
hereafter we will say, we were forced to it, and therefore they do not bind us.
Some such kind of communication it is like they had. And could you hear the
communication of our Adversaries when they get together in those straights that
God has brought them into, it is like you would hear some such kind of stuff as
this is, they spoke these words one to another.

They have spoken Words.
According to others thus, Expos. 2.
They spoke words, that is, those (speaking words) has reference to the times
of the Prophets threatening, or when they saw their danger eminent and not fully
upon them, Loquentur verba violenta. Chald.
so some carry it: and I find the Chaldee Paraphrase has it thus, They spoke
violent words; and then the sense is thus; they rage, and fret, they speak
proud swelling words, they swear and curse; for so the curse in swearing
signifies, cursing, as well as swearing, they swear and curse; what, our Images
be broken down, what shall we be brought under and made to serve our enemies?
We scorn it, we defy all that shall have such a thought as this is, we will do
this and that, we will have our minds, we will die for it else, we will enter
into Leagues with such and such, we will get such and such to conjure together
with us, I Will warrant you we shall make our party thus and thus: thus they
speak great things that they will do, yea that they will: thus they speak
words, in making a Covenant with Oaths of Vanity (so you may read it.) And
indeed if men could prevail with great Words, and daring Expressions, and bold
Resolutions, and desperate Oaths, Obs.
and wicked Curses, then may some hope to prevail against the God of Heaven and
his Saints; but says he, These things shall do them no good. And indeed these
things should never move us, though we hear our Adversaries speak proud
swelling words, and say what they will do, threaten Monsterous things, let us
not be troubled at it, for they do but hasten the Wrath of God against
themselves. In the mean time while they are swearing, and cursing, and making
brags and boast what they will do, the counsels of the Lord they work their
ruin, and work the good of his people, they spoke words, such kind of Words.

They speak words, swaring falsely, in making a Covenant.
What has this reference to? Expos. 3.
What Covenant did they Jeroboam at the first, and so with his Successors; that
is thus, The People came to him and took their Oaths, and entered into solemn
League, that they would stand by him in the breach that he made from the house
of David, that they would stand by him in opposing those that would not yield
to him in the Alteration of Worship: For their Princes would not probably have
been so strongly set upon the Alteration of the ways of Worship, had not the
People joined themselves freely to him by way of Oaths and Covenant; now when
he saw that the People came in floking and willing to yield to the Oath which
he would give them, upon this he was confirmed in the way that he went in; and
so they took Oaths in Covenanting with Jeroboam which were but Oaths of vanity;
for so the same word that signifies False, (...) A. Mont. Vatabl.
signifies Vain in the Hebrew tongue: so I find Arias Montanus, and Vatablus
take the words as having reference to that.

But now others (and that more probably) understand this Covenant and Swearing
to be the Covenant that they took with the Assyrians, Expos. 4.
and with the Egyptians, the story of which you have in the fornamed place, 2
King. 17
in 2 King. 17. Hoshea sent Messengers to So King of Egypt, and brought no
present to the King of Assyria as he had done year by year. First, he had
Covenanted with the King of Assyria and that was broke, and then they would
Covenant with So King of Egypt, and so they swore falsely, in in making a
Covenant with the Assyrians, and the Egyptians.

Now the Observations are, Obs. 1.
That Carnal hearts in their straights have no God to go to, therefore they
take shifting courses; As a Dog that has lost his Master, will follow after
any for relief.

And secondly, Obs. 2.
It Is an evil thing in straights for men that profess Religion to combine with
wicked men. God professed he will not take the wicked by the hand, neither
should we; it is a sign the cause is evil, when men can have no other help but
by combining with wicked and ungodly men. Applic. to the Courtpartie.
Just thus it is for all the world with our adversaries (at this day) to the
Parliament, all men generally that have any profession of Godliness they see
they cannot have help that way, therefore combine and bring into Covenant Irish
Rebels, Papists, any People in the world, If it were Turks, or Jews, or any in
the world to help themselves withal; this is the wickedness of men's hearts.

And then thirdly, Obs. 3.
There is no trust to be had to wicked men in their Oaths and Covenants; let
their Protestations be never so solemn, their Oaths, their Covenants, it is but
only to gain time to work about some advantage, that they cannot work about for
the present while they have any opposition: If they have not things under their
power as they desire, they will promise you any thing in the world, but when
once they come to get power in their hands, then who shall require the
fulfilling of their Promises, their Oaths, their Covenants? And therefore
certainly, when we have to deal with those that we have had experience to be
false, we must ever retain this conclusion, except we see an apparent change in
their hearts, for that is not enough that they are willing to take Covenants,
that is no new thing; but till we see that God has wrought some mighty work
upon their hearts we must carry this conclusion, Certainly if they can they
will ruin us, therefore our condition cannot be safe but to be so as they can
do us no hurt. That Is the third Note. And then the fourth is this:

That, Obs. 4.
Breaking Covenant, though with wicked men, is a very great wickedness, God
will be revenged for it. I have heretofore spoken of falseness, and falseness
in Covenant, and Promises, and shown you the example of Saul and Zedekiah,
therefore I shall not look back to those things. God loves humane societies,
Fides commune hominis praesidium:
which cannot be preserved but by faithfulness; Faithfulness (it is the speech
of a Heathen) it is the common safety of all men. I remember I have read of the
Romans that they did so esteem of Faithfulness, by the light of Nature in
Covenants, Cicero.
that they accounted Faithfulness to be a Godess, Fidei templum struxit Numa,
sanctissimumque esse jusirandum voluit per fidem.
and they built, and dedicated a Temple unto fidelity as to a Godess, in which
Temple all their Leagues, Truces, Covenants, and Bargains were sworn, which
were so Religiously observed, that whosoever broke them, was to be held as a
cursed and damned creature, unworthy to live in humane societies. And the
Egyptians would punish Perjury with death. Among the Indians the fingers and
toes of Perjured persons were cut off. The Egyptians.
And I have likewise read when Tissaphernes the Persian warred against the
Grecians, Tissaphernes.
he broke Covenant with the Grecians. Agesialaus.
Now Agesilaus when he saw that they had broke their Covenant, he rejoiced at
it greatly, saying thus, Applicat.
For (says he) by this means he has made the gods to be his enemy, and our
friend; wherefore let us boldly give him battle. We know how our enemies have
broken their Covenants from time to time, and their Conditions that they have
made themselves, yea, even lately in that Town that we hear such good of now,
that we hope the Lord is even revenging himself upon them for breaking Covenant
even in that very place. Now my Brethren, that even Heathens themselves are
convinced of this great evil, that is so dreadful an evil; what cause have we
to lay our hands upon our hearts this day in respect of that part of our
Covenant, that concerns one another, for certainly since the time of our solemn
Covenant there was never more treachery than there has been in England, and in
Scotland too, there has been as much treachery since that time as ever yet
was, since either of them were a Nation; we have been false one to another so
far as it relates to our selves.

But I find that Calvin in his Notes upon this Scripture, Expos. 3. Calvin.
understands this Oath and Covenant not to be a Covenant to men, They did verba
da^e.
but their Covenant with God, in promising repentance and new obedience, and so
they spoke only words, Swearing falsely, they did but deceive him in swearing
and making a Covenant; and this indeed is a sore and dreadful evil to swear to
the high God, and to Covenant with him, to draw so nigh to him and yet to be
false, God threatens in Levit. 26. 25. Levil. 26. 25.
That he will send a sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant; and when we
see the sword rages so as it does, we may have cause to fear that the Lord
has a quarrel against us, Violation of the National Covenant punished with the
sword.
in avenging the late Covenant that has been made (I mean our falseness in it)
and that we may see further our guiltiness and evil in swearing falsely in
making a Covenant, we must know that many ways our hearts may be false in our
Covenants with God. It is a dreadful evil to be false any way in Covenant with
God; any of you that upon your sick beds have been solemnly promising to God
reformation if God restored you; if you be false, Oh know, that the Lord has a
quarrel against you, and he has a dreadful evil to charge upon your souls: How
many of you have been false in your private Covenants? Men may be false in
Covenant.
But to be false in public Covenants, that is most dreadful. But our hearts may
be false diverse ways. As,

First, 1. For politic ends only.
If we take our Covenant merely upon politic grounds, we make the solemn
Worship of God, wherein we express our fidelity for Reformation of Religion to
be merely subserviant to politic grounds, here is a falsness of heart, we are
false in swearing thus, and making a Covenant; we do not sanctify the Name of
God as we ought.

Or Secondly, 2. Putting false interpretations on it, to make it a snare.
If we put false Interpretations, we are false; when we shall make our Covenant
a mere (...) to our Brethren; let us consider how far any of us are guilty of
this, and let the Lord judge between us: I say, when we seek to make it a snare
even to our Brethren: How have those been accused for the breach of this Oath
which have not accorded in things that are in Controversy with our Brethren,
as if this Oath were put upon all men to determine most abstruse and difficult
points of Controversy, to bring men to submit to things as are very abstruse
and difficult to understand; this were to make an Oath a Snare, and to take the
Name of God in vain in a fearful manner: Certainly the Lord never would have
Oaths put to men to this end, that men that are of different ways and opinions
in Controversal things, for to be forced by way of an Oath to be of the same
judgment, and to do the same things; this is a great abuse of this Oath
wheresoever it is urged so far; Certainly there is no man guilty of the breach
of this Oath and Covenant, that shall but endeavor what he can to understand
what the mind of God is, and then to practice according as he understands,
though he should mistake, as in the point of Schism in that point of the
Covenant; Psalm. 119. 106. David swearing to keep all Gods Commandments
explained.
the thing its self being a sin, we may as well swear against it, as David did
to keep Gods Commandments: but now, if David did labor to understand Gods
Commandments, and do as far as he did understand; suppose he did not
understand all things aright, it might be his weakness, but not his perjury.
So, let us be in point of Schism, or any other point of the Covenant, if men do
endeavor to understand what is Schism by the Scripture, and accordingly do in
their several places, by what means their consciences tells them is lawful
endeavor to oppose it, though they should not think that to be Schism that
their Brethren do think, or perhaps is so, yet they are not forsworn: this is
evil, to make a Covenant to be a snare unto us, and our hearts so far are false
in it.

And then thirdly: 3. In not fulfilling it acording to the nature of it.
Then is the he heart false in making a Covenant, when it does not fulfill it
according to the nature of it, when it goes quite opposite against it. As since
our Covenant has been made; When was there ever greater divisions? Our
Covenant is for unity: When more ungodliness; our Covenant is against it; when
more injustice? Our Covenant is against all these, and yet since England was a
Nation there was never stronger cries came to Heaven for these sins than there
has been since our Covenant. And therefore certainly there is a great breach
between God and us in this regard.

And then fourthly, 4. When the Covenant is made a cloak for malignity.
When men make their Covenant to be a cloak for Malignity; that is, Though they
have Malignant and vile wicked spirits, yet they can but take the Covenant and
then all is well. Here they swear falsely in making a Covenant.

Thus Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field.
After this their Covenant there is a great deal of injustice among them. Obs.


Judgment.] Expos. 1.
By Judgment, some understand the Judgments of God, and then the sense is,
Those wicked ways of yours are the seeds that brings up Gods Judgments, that
is as Hemlock bitter and deadly; there is a truth in this Interpretation, though
I think it is not the full scope of the words here: but it may be the holy
Ghost, would hint some such thing unto us in it, That our actions are as seeds,
and what they are sown here they will bring forth according to the nature of
them. Wicked actions when they are sown, will bring forth bitter fruit, will
bring forth Hemlock. It may be (says he) you look for peace and prosperity,
but contrary to your expectation, behold Hemlock and bitterness. I beseech you
take heed of preparing your selves a potion of Hemlock against you lie sick and
are cast upon your death bed; A potion of Hemlock.
a man has sown his field, he thinks to have a good crop of Corn, but
Judgment, the Judgment of God comes up, and there is Hemlock instead of it.

But because I think this not to be the scope of the place, therefore I pass it
by, and rather think that by Judgment is here meant,

Righteousness, Expos. 2.
Equity, and Justice.
That whereas there should be Righteousness, Equity, and Justice, as it is
expected: behold instead of this there spings up a crop of Oppression,
Unrighteousness, and Injustice that is bitter as Hemlock; I rather think that
this must be the meaning, Injustice compared to Hemlock Amos 5. 7. Cap. 6. 12
because I find that in diverse Scriptures Injustice is compared to bitter
things, yea, to Hemlock its self, in Amos, 5. 7. Ye turn Judgment to Wormwood,
and leave off Righteousness in the Earth. And in Amos, 6. 12. Shall Horses run
upon the Rock? will one plow there with Oxen? I will not stand to open the
former text, but you see the Scripture charges the people by this expression,
of sinning against Judgment and Righteousness, that they turned it to Hemlock.

Now I find three things especially recorded of this herb.

First, The nature of Hemlock Plin lib. 25. cap. 13
It is a very venomous herb; therefore I find Pliny records of it in his 25.
Book, 13. Chap. of Natural History, that the Athenians did use to give this to
malefactors that were condemned to die to execute them withal. And Socrates
that was so wise a man among them, Socrates He died for maintaining there was
but one God.
yet he because he did not yield to their gods, but spoke against their false
gods, therefore they judged him to die, and he must drink a potion of Hemlock,
and so died.

And Secondly, I find the same Author says of it that, the leaves are somewhat
like to Coriander, but that they be more tender, and a strong stinking smell
they have with them: Injustice like to Justice sometimes.
and the seeds like to Annis. And so Justice seems to have a very fair pretense
sometimes, and may seem to do things that are very good; under very fair
pretenses men are very injust: the leaves when they come up one would think
there should be such a fine fruit, one would think to have Coriander, or Annis,
but the truth is, it comes to Hemlock at last.

And then the third thing is, Hierom in loc.
that which Hierom reports of it, and it is in his Comment upon my text, he
says that Hemlock grows up very stiff and full of joints, and at the joints
(he says) it puts forth a stalk, and that does not only sprout upwards and
bear fruit, but downwards to have a root, and he says that every branch, If it
has but a joint in it will serve instead of a seed, yea, every sprig of it
will serve instead of seed; yea, he says, if any pieces falls to the ground,
It will grow up, and so grow up as that it will be very hard to rid the ground
of it. And truly thus it does resemble Injustice, if it be let alone but a
little, Oh how it multiplies one to another and spreads through the whole Land
quickly.

And Pliny does observe many other things too, he says Unjust me^ hollow.
and so are the hearts of those that are injust, hollow hearts and unfit for
any thing.

And also he says, that the leaves are fit for swellings, God sanctifies to
his people the iniquity done upon them.
And God does turn even the injustice that is many times, among a people to be
medicines to his people against their swellings, and to open their sore eyes.

And he says, That if Hemlock be drank in Wine, it will certainly kill a man,
and there is no remedy. So if Those that delight in Injustice are in a
desperate condition.
and take pleasure in it, and scorn and contemn at those that they can oppress
by Injustice, those men are in a desperate condition indeed.

And then lastly, he does observe by this Herb that it kills by cold, those that
takes the leaves or seeds, if they get the Injustice kills by cooling.
and so die inwardly. Oh! how many who have been very hot and zealous, yet
having gotten power into their hands they have unrighteously used their power,
they have grown cold in what they were formerly zealous in, and still they grow
colder, and colder; and thus their unrighteousness is like to prove to be their
death.

In the furrows of the field.
Calvin puts this Question, Calvin.
Why does he not say, it springs up in the field, Expos.
but in the furrows of the field? And he gives this Answer to it; Cur potius
suprasulcos agri, quam in agro?
Where there are furrows in the field, there has the plow come that has
broken up the field, and it is to prepare for good seed when the field is laid
in furrows, and it is less tolerable for Hemlock to spring up there than in the
field that is not plowed, or in other places.

But when a field is plowed and prepared for seed, Obs.
and one would hope to have much advantage by his field; to have much Justice
and Righteousness in a Country, when we see there has been great works of God
to cast out those that were injust before, and the expectation of all the
people is, that certainly now there will be nothing but Righteousness, and
Judgment; but instead of that comes up Injustice, and Oppression, as Hemlock,
it springs up in such a field that is so prepared for Justice. Oh! this is
that which is a sore evil, that the Lord is so provoked against, and so
complains of, that Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field.

Thus Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field.
What the meaning of Hemlock in the furrows of the field is, you have heard
already: From whence the Note is this,

That People is in a sad condition, Obs. 1.
and it is a sign the Lord has forsaken them, that they are near ruin, when
those places where there is most likelihood of Justice and Equity, that there
should be Injustice and Oppression. Oppression and Injustice in places where
God expects Righteousness and Equity, is a sad Omen, a forerunner of great evil
to places. It Is Gods complaint in Isa. 5. Isa. 5.
Just before he threatened the utter spoiling of his Vinyard, he gives this
reason, I (says he) looked that it should bring forth Grapes; and behold, it
brought forth wild Grapes: and he mentions among the wild Grapes, Injustice:
there it is called wild Grapes, as Hemlock here, for both are very sour, and
bitter before the Lord; Injustice in places from whence Justice may be
expected, is by the Lord accounted a most fearful, Amos, 5. 12. explained.
a ruining sin: In Amos, 5. 12. I know (says the Lord) your manifold
transgressions, and your mighty sins. Now the word that is translated [mighty
sins] it is in the Hebrew your Boney sins, because the strength of a man it is
in his bones; and therefore he calls the strength of that sin boney; it is a
very strong sin, it cannot easily be resisted; your sins have great bones in
them (says he) and what are they? You afflict the Just, you take a Bribe, that
you may turn away the poor in the gate from their right: that is their great and
their mighty sins. Ier. 22. 15
In Jer. 22. 15. Did not thy Father do Judgment and Justice, and then it was
well with him? He judged the Cause of the poor and the needy, and then, it was
well with him again. And was not this to know me, says the Lord? Let men talk
never so much of Reformation, and of setting up the Worship of God, and of
casting out false Worship, yet if they rejoice in Injustice and Oppression
instead of that, God will not take himself as known; but says he, Thine eyes
and thy heart, are after covetousness, and for oppression, Amos. 5. 21.
and for violence; and in Amos, 5. 21. is a remarkable place for this, says
he, I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell to your solemn
Assemblies. You have many Feast days, Days of Thanksgiving.
and days of Thanksgiving, you bless me for what I do for you, but I will not
care for your days of Thanksgiving, Ver. 24.
(why?) in the 24. verse. Let Judgment run down as waters, and Righteousness as
a mighty river; as if he should say, keep as many days of Thanksgiving as you
will, I care for none of them, except Judgment run down as water, and
Righteousness as a mighty stream: Mark here the expression of the holy Ghost,
Judgment and Righteousness is compared to a River, that is, it should be common
for all, that the poorest might come and take of it as well as the richest,
explained.
it must not be like a Pond, or Well, enclosed for a man's private use; but
says he, Let Judgment run down as Water, and Righteousness as a River; it must
be as a River: now you know the Thames every poor body may come and fetch water
there for their relief: so Justice should be like the Water in the Thames that
the poorest of all may have it for the very fetching of it: But till then says
he, I regard none of your days of thanksgiving. And so in Isa. 58. Isa. 58.
there is one special reason why the days of Fasting were not regarded, it was,
because of their oppression of the poor, and their uncharitableness, and their
Injuriousness in the Courts of Justice. We have now many days of Fasting and
Thanksgiving more than ever yet England knew, and we may think that God will
smell a sweet savor, but Oh! this Hemlock coming up in the furrow of the field
will imbitter all, for if ever God did look for Righteousness and Judgment from
a people, then certainly he looks for Righteousness and Judgment from us at
this day; Oh! for us now, that stand in need of so much mercy, that cry for
mercy, and be oppressing at such a time as this is, it is a most dreadful
thing: What, is all the cost that God has bestowed upon us come to this, that
there should be no other fruit but Hemlock to come up in the furrows in the
field; all the cost of God and man, all the Works of God toward us, does it
come but to this issue, only to bring forth Hemlock? Was there ever more cries,
was there ever more bitter moans and complaints because of Injustice than of
late has been in this Land? Never were People so frustrated in their
expectations. When indeed such as were notoriously wicked were in place, then
we expected nothing but Hemlock: But now they are cast out of place, and others
are come in, we hoped that there had been such a preparation that nothing but
fruits of Righteousness would have come up. But now to be oppressed by them
that are in places of former oppressors, this is grievous. Lord, what is man?
In Isa. 59. 9. Therefore (says he) is Judgment far from us, Isa. 59. 9.
neither does Justice overtake us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity, for
brightness, but we walk in darkness, expounded
(this light it is especially spoken of the light of Justice) as if they should
say; the Land once indeed was dark, all the Courts of Judicature, and all the
men that had places to judge in, they were darkness, and we had nothing but
darkness; yea, but now we waited for light, we hoped now there would be
Reformation, it is spoken after their many days of Fasting and Prayer,
Illustratde further.
but yet behold darkness, behold oppression still, Oh! many who are come empty
into places of power suck harder than some former Oppressors did? And what will
be the end of these things? How many poor men travel many times far, expecting
fruits of Justice, but they meet with Hemlock? they sigh and lift up their eyes
and hearts to Heaven, sending up their moans to God, Lord, is this the fruit of
our labor? do our hopes come to this? What, must we go home with sad hearts and
be made a scorn and prey to those that are wicked round about us? Oh! these are
sad moans at such times as these are.

My Brethren, Some stalks of Hemlock in Engl. spring up since we hoped for
reformation
it were easy to name many stalks of Hemlock that there are come up instead of
Righteousness and Judgment among us. I Will name one or two. What do you think of
this.

First, 1. Malign. in Committees.
That such as have been notoriously Malignant, yea, such as have been upon
actual War should yet upon any slight acknowledgment or coming in* or for their
own ends taking Covenant, should get into Committees, and have power there over
the Well-affected party who have been most forward at the first, but now those
who hate them and have spirits full of bitterness against them, should have
power over them to tax them as they please. Power over their estates, their
liberty, power to order the affairs of the Country round about them, and that
now they should revenge themselves upon them because they were so forward in
the beginning; Oh! we may thank you, had it not been for such as you are, we
had never gone on so far in the Wars, If you had not come in so freely etc. And
now they have opportunity to revenge themselves upon them; What grows in the
furrows here but bitter and venomous Hemlock? Where the fault lies, that we
cannot determine, but such men, doing such things, in such places, It is
nothing but Hemlock in the furrows of the field.

Secondly; 2. The Officers pa^pred, while the poor Soldiers starve.
Here Is another stalk of Hemlock, That poor men taken from their families, who
were the only means by their livelihood to bring in a livelihood to their wives
and children, yet should be so without pay themselves, and wives and children
left destitute of bread and clothing; and Officers in an Army who were but
mean men heretofore and knew scarce how to live, now they live bravely, glister
in their Gold and Silver lace, what is this but Hemlock? Is not here Injustice
and Oppression? that thousands should want bread, that widows and children cry
out for bread that lived pretty well heretofore, The cry of Widows and Children.
and others which knew not how to live heretofore, yet now shall be brave in a
far higher way than ever formerly, Is not here Hemlock that grows up in the
furrows of the field? I know not neither where to charge this, but yet we see
Hemlock does come up.

But now though we might name many other stalks of Hemlock, yet certainly take
this Caution along with you.

Every man in such times of distraction wherein we live, Caution.
must account to suffer something, things cannot be carried on with that equity
as if all things were settled among us, therefore though we may in an humble and
peaceable way make our moans one to another, and seek to inform those that are
in Power, and Petition, yet it ought to be our care what ever we suffer in our
particular, The honor of our SVPREAM COURT should be kept up.
to preserve what we can the honor of our Supreme Court; better many
particulars suffer hard things than the honor of that should not be kept up;
for by not keeping up that we make way to suffer worse things than ever yet we
have done: for how would we have help when we meet with Wrong and Injustice?
Three ways to have right in our wrongs
Under God there are but three ways, two extremes, and one middle: for men to
have right in case of Injustice. The two extremes they are (besides our appeal
to God) I speak to men, whereby a man can have any thought to get help against
Injustice.

1. The one extreme is, The Kings prerogative
That which heretofore was the Kings Arbitrary Power, acted by those that are
about him. We have tasted enough of this Hemlock heretofore, Would we think to
have our help that way? We know what that Hemlock means.

The second extreme is, An Appeal to the People: which remedies are worse than
the disease.
The appeal to the People, that were

Therefore the third way of help in way of Injustice it is The Mean, By our
PARLIAMENTS (although sinful) are of only lawful way.
and that is by our Parliament, that is, as things are rise up among them; or
any seed fall down from them, but that they may be as the field which the Lord
has blessed, Full of the fruits of Justice and Righteousness, that themselves,
and this City, and the Kingdom may be the habitation of Justice, That Mercy and
Truth may meet together, that Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; that
Truth may spring out of the earth, and Righteousness may look down from Heaven;
Psa. 85. 9, 10, 11.
so you have it in Psalm. 85. 9, 10, 11. verses.

Now there is one Note more that I find Tremelius and Pareus and diverse others
have. Tremel.
The Furrows of the field (say they) there is in the latter end of the word
translated [field] a Jod: Pareus.
which by some is made paragogical [and an addition of form only] But others to
be an affix for the plural number, Agrorum meorum.
and so they translate it to be thus. [Hemlock in the furrows of my field] And
that is a great aggravation. If Hemlock should be be in the furrows of any
field it is evil, but what, my people! men that profess Godliness, what those
that profess to set up Reformation, yet Hemlock there in the furrows of my
field! Oh! this is sad and evil indeed. Ier. 31. 23
In Jer. 31. 23. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, As yet they
shall use this speech, in the Land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof; when I
shall bring again the Captivity thereof, The Lord bless thee O habitation of
Justice, and mountain of Holiness. When I bring their captivity again, when
I Will own them to be mine, then there shall be such eminent Justice and Holiness
that this speech shall be used, The Lord bless thee, O habitation of Justice,
and mountain of Holiness. So if we would have any evidence to our souls that
God does own us, Reformation cannot prosper without promotion of Justice, and
removing of Oppression.
and that we are his, and God indeed has delivered us from our Captivity, we
should labor that Justice and holiness may be so eminent that all the people
about us may say, The Lord bless this Land, the habitation of Justice, and
mountain of Holiness. Both must go together, we must not think to raise up the
Ordinances of God, and cast out superstition, but we must be the habitation of
Justice; of the Lord that the Lord has blessed. It follows.

VER. 5.
The Inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the Calves of Beth-aven.
YOU heard before that they were convinced in their consciences that they did
not fear God, For now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not
the Lord. They feared not God, but now they shall fear. From whence the Note is
this.

That those that fear God least, Obs. 1.
are most afraid of any thing else. Where the fear of God is not, other base
fear will be, and so much the more, the less we fear God. Oh! how much better
were it that our fear were set upon God, than upon other things? You must love
something; Were it not better that your love were placed upon God than any
thing else? And you must fear something; Were it not better that your fear were
upon God, than any thing else? And you must rejoice in something, and sorrow
and the like. Fear, it is a very troublesome affection, if it be misplaced; Oh!
learn to place your affections right, place them upon God: By the fear of God
you shall come to fear nothing else; Oh! how excellent is Gods fear! This one
thing sets out the excellency of the fear of God: That where the fear of God is
settled in the hearts of men and women, all other base fears are rooted out.
Would not you be glad to be delivered from creature fears, especially you that
have lived in many dangers a few months since? Oh! if you might be delivered
from the fears of the creature, how glad would you be? Here Is the only way;
Let the fear of God be strong in your hearts, and the fear of the creature will
not prevail with you.

You see it clearly in the example of Habakkuk, in Hab. 3. 16. Hab. 3. 16.
When I heard (God revea'd his will) my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the
voice; rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self. (But now
Habakkuk, why would you trouble your self with so much fear?) Mark, there was a
great good came to him by it, expounded
That I might rest in the day of trouble when he comes up unto the people:
When there shall be a coming up unto the people, and the enemy shall prevail,
and when the figtree shall not blossom, nor the fruit be in the Vine, the labor
of the Olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, when things
shall be brought into the most sad condition, that men shall be at their wits
end and know not what in the world to do, then (says he) I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. When God spoke, Then my belly
trembled, and my lips quivered at the voice. Yea, but when men came in the
greatest rage, and when all things were dark and dismal, and black abroad, yet
then did I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation, all fear
was gone then. Men can rejoice in the time of their prosperity, but in times of
afflictions then they fear? Whereas those that fear the Lord in their
prosperity, in the times of their affliction then they most rejoice. It Is a
notable speech I remember I have read in Nazianzen in his 12. Oration (says
he) This is our care, (...).
That we are afraid of nothing more, than that we should fear any thing more
than God, That Is his expression. Here Is an excellent fear, here is fear rightly
set; Would you fear? fear to fear any thing more than God, and then your fear
is set right: but if you do not, etc. Though men that have no fear of God they
may seem to have bold spirits, Nazian.
and it seems to come through the greatness of their spirits, Orat. 12.
that they will not fear God, yet these men in the time of danger are the most
base cowardly men in the world. I Will give you a notable instance for this,
Manasses he was as proud an insolent man, that seemed to be fearless of any
threatening of God, scorned his Prophets; 2 Chronicles. 33. 11.
But mark, when he came into danger, in 2 Chronicles. 33. 11. where did they find
Manasses? he was run into the bushes, this brave bold spirited man that dared
God and his Prophets, and cared not for what was said, yet when he came into
any danger, what a base low spirit he had? he runs and hides himself in a
company of Bushes and Briars.

This is the temper and guize of the spirits of men that will not fear God.

They shall fear, because of the Calves of Beth-aven.
You know what they were, those that Jeroboam set up in Dan and Bethel, the
golden Calves.

Luther upon the place moves a Question, What a wonderful thing is it (says
he) that Jeroboam should be so bold, to set up Calves to worship, when there is
that eminent story of Gods revenging himself for the peoples worshipping a Calf
that Aaron set up, that at one time cost the lives of twenty three thousand men
which were slain, and yet that Jeroboam should presume to set up Calves again
to worship? It was a strange bold attempt says Luther, it was a wonderful
thing that he should be so bold, and that he should prevail with the people.
Luther gives the Answer to this Question, thus: The people will follow great
ones Si impioru^ principum studiu^^ et exemptum accedat.


The truth is, there is nothing so horrible and vile but people in a little
time will be brought to yield to it, if great ones by their example, and by
their endeavor labor to set it up, it will be set up be it never so vile, never
so abominable, yet people will be brought to it: that is his Answer.

And truly we find it so, that set people seem to abhor things never so much,
Luther.
yet if they find it be the sway of great ones, and if it be once set up in a
way of power they yield to it: One would think it an impossible thing that now
God having cast so much odium upon our Prelates, The Prelates.
one would think it impossible for the People of England ever to be brought to
yield to them, and I make no question but many of you say so when you meet
together; but do not deceive your selves, if so be that those had prevailed
that sought to prevail against us, we should quickly have the spirits of people
turned in a moment, and as much for Prelates and Ceremonies, and Altars (for
the generality of the People I mean) as here they did to these Calves again,
though they had that sad story in their ears continually, of so many thousands
that were slain for Calves before.

They shall fear, because of the Calves of Beth-aven.
Why, were there many Calves at Beth-aven? Indeed there were Calves at Dan and
Bethel, but there was but one at each of them. Here Beth-aven and Bethel was
all one, Jeroboam was so subtle to set up the Calf at Bethel because the place
took its name from God, but here the holy Ghost calls it a House of Beth-aven,
because it signifies a house of Vanity, or Iniquity, God calls it by another
name: We may call things by names that may hold up some honor and respect, but
God will give another name to these things that we would fain put an honor upon.

He calls it Beth-aven, and the Calves of Beth-aven. Why, was there many Calves
at Beth-aven?

Now the Answer that some give is this: Expos. 1.
There was but one at Bethel indeed; but both Bethel and Dan may have the name
Bath-aven, (for they are both houses of vanity) and so called Calves in respect
of them both.

Or others thus; 2.
The Calves of Beth-aven: As if the Prophet should say, Set up as many Calves
as you will, they shall not help you if you had a thousand of them.

Or rather as I find some, 3. preferred.
Arias Montanus with others, They are called the Calves of Beth-aven, because
according to the example of the Calf that was set up at Beth-aven, A. Mont.
their workmen did make other little ones, to be in their houses; like as
Demetrius that was the Silver-Smith for Diana, made Shrines for Diana's Temple,
it was Demetrius's trade to make little kind of Temples in Silver, either to
hang about their necks, or to be in their houses, or ornaments: So it was
probable that the Calf that was set up at Bethaven had so much honor put upon
it, as to have little things made with Silver or Gold according to their
estates; perhaps for mean men, little things made with Wood; and Gentlemen with
Silver, and others with Gold, like to those Calves, and so had them in their
families; and therefore they are called Calves in the plural number. And if
this were so, we might have a good Note from that:

That the true Worshipers of God should labor to bring the true Worship of God
into their families. They would bring the Calf into their families, or houses;
so should we bring the Ordinances of God into our families, bring the Worship
of God into our families, and not content our selves with public Worship, but
have private Worship too; they did not content themselves with a Calf abroad,
but had them at home in their houses or families.

And further there is a Note from it, They are called the Calves in the
feminine gender, the she Calves, that is in a way of Contempt of them.

The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the Calves of BETH-AVEN.
Why the inhabitants of Samariah? The Calves were not there. Samaria was their
chief City; as London is to England, so Samaria was the chief City to the ten
Tribes: And Samaria shall fear. Samaria was a very strong City: And when the
Assyrians came and carried away the ten Tribes captive, they took all the
Country round about before they took Samaria: it was with Samaria as with
London in these sad times: when there has bin wars round about in England,
London has bin safe for these three years together: And so when there was wars
in all Israel, yet Samaria continued safe; yea, not only when some Towns, but
when every Town was taken, Samaria was so strong as to be able to endure a
siege for three years together: thus you shall find in 2 King. 17. 5. 2 King.
17. 5.
That the King of Assyria came and besieged Samaria three years: yet this it
was, and yet the text says, The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of
the Calves of Beth-aven. That is, though they were a strong City, yet when we
heard that their gods were taken away, yea, when they did but hear that Bethel
and Dan were in danger to have their gods taken away, Oh! they were sensible of
this, though they were safe for their outward condition for the present, and
had strength enough to resist the Enemies, yet they were afraid: that is, there
was a solicitous fear in them about the Calves of Bethaven before they were
taken, and when they were taken their hearts were daunted, and knew not what in
the world to do. So you see the meaning of the words: from whence the Note is
this:

First, Obs. 1.
That in times of danger our hearts should be most solicitous about the Worship
of God. It was so in the time of their danger, their hearts were especially
solicitous about Bethel, Oh! that was the place where they had the Worship of
their Gods. So, are Idolaters solicitous in time of danger, not so much because
of their outward peace, (it is not said that they were afraid because the
enemies would come and take their Corn, or their Estates) but Beth-aven, where
the Calves were, they were afraid of that. When there is any danger that should
go next to our hearts, The honor of God, 1 Samuel 4. 13.
his Church, his Ordinances: Thus it was with old Eli in 1 Samuel 4. 13. the text
says, Eli's example urged.
That Eli sat upon a seat by the way side watching; for his heart trembled for
the Ark of God: Why, he had his sons in the Army, his heart did not tremble for
them, and that if the enemies should prevail he was like to lose his estate,
and there would come woeful misery upon the Land for the outward condition of
it, No, but his heart trembled not for that, but for the Ark of God. I appeal
to you what was that which your hearts trembled most for in the time of our
greatest danger? Was it for the Ark of God? was it because of his Ordinances?
Oh! if they prevail they will trample the Ordinances of the Lord and the Saints
of God under feet, the true Worship of God, and the Power of Godliness, did
your hearts tremble because of this? Certainly if your hearts were right they
would do so: What, shall Idolaters tremble because of their Calves, and shall
not we have our hearts tremble because of our God? 1 King. 8. 44. enlightened
1 King. 8. 44. If thy People go out to battle against their enemies,
whithersoever thou shall send them, (what should they do?) and look toward the
City which thou have chosen, and toward the House that I have built for thy
Name; then hear thou in Heaven. They when they are in prayer must look toward
the City and the Temple; for the Temple was a type of Christ, so the City was a
type of Gods Ordinances where the people went up to Worship. Oh! what should
encourage us to fight.
that should be in our eyes, the City where the Ordinances of God are, when we
go to War let that be in our eyes, and let that make us fight valiantly, and
when we are praying to God, let us not pray so much that we may be delivered
from our Adversaries, as that the Temple and the City of our God may be
preserved.

Again, further; In that it is said, the Inhabitants of Samaria should thus
fear. From thence the Note is.

That Cities that are strong and safe themselves, Obs. 2.
should be sensible of the miseries of others. Oh! God knows how far we have
been wanting in this very thing; If a stranger should have come out of another
Country into London, and walk about the streets, could he have imagined that
there were such Civil Wars in this ^and as there is, such wonderful desolations
as has been made in other parts? Oh! how little did we lay the afflictions of
others to heart, because they were at some distance from us? Oh! the mercy of
our God that has not brought us into the same evils and miseries, this one sin
had been enough to have provoked God against us, because we were so little
sensible of other Countries and Cities that were about us. This wicked Samaria,
yet when they heard that Bethel and Dan, and their other Cities, when they
heard what dangers they were in, Oh! they were mightily affected with it. Learn
we from hence to be humbled for our want this way, and if ever the Lord should
yet try us further, let us learn to be sensible of the miseries of others that
are about us.

Lastly, They are afraid because of their Calves: When their Calves are gone,
all their Confidence is gone, and then their hearts are overwhelmed with fear.
There is no staidness of heart in resting upon any thing but upon the living
God. They that stay themselves upon any thing else, if any afflictions or
dangers falls out, their hearts are filled with fear presently. When men have
nothing to rest upon but their own inventions, their own ways, no mervail
though they fear in times of danger: They begin to bethink now that all is
vanity to them that they rested upon; yea, the service of God that men in times
of prosperity can rest upon and can satisfy their consciences withal, yet in
time of danger it will not do, no inventions of men, nor no external duties of
Religion, especially such as are mixed with superstition, they will not uphold
the heart in times of danger, but the heart will be overwhelmed; it is only the
confidence in the living God, the union of our souls with Jesus Christ, and
enjoyment of communion with him in his own Ordinances that can comfort our
souls in time of danger. But it is said of the Godly in Psalm. 112. 7. Ps. 112. 7.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord. His heart is established and he shall not be afraid. It Is again repeated,
let evil tidings, come what will, his heart is fixed, because he trusts in the
Lord. It follows.

For the people thereof shall mourn over it.
The people thereof] Here he speaks about the Calf of Beth-aven in the singular
Number, Expos.
for so I find it is referred by most Interpreters, The people of the Calf. (Of
it) not of Samaria.

From thence the Note would be thus, Obs.
That wicked men, Idolaters did dedicate themselves to their Idols, they are
the people of the Idol. Those that were the very peculiar of God and his
Treasure, the People of God, now they are called the people of the Calf, for
they have none to go to for help but only that Idol of theirs; they had
forsaken God.

And it is said, That they yet mourn over it. Though certainly at first, the
setting up of the Calf could not but be a very strange thing to the people of
Israel, yet within a while after they were used to it, they did worship it, and
it took their very consciences, so as they loved it, and when it was taken away
they mourned and were in extreme distress and trouble. Idolaters they do mourn
when their false worship is taken from them. At this day, my Brethren, how do
many mourn after their superstitious vanities, Prelates, Service Book, and
Altars, all some men's Religion.
their superstitious customs that they were wont to have? Now Prelates, and
Service Book, and Altars, and such kind of things are taken away, when they
come to meet together, Oh! now all Religion is gone: So they persuade poor
people in remote parts, that the Parliament has taken away all Religion; and
there is a great mourning in their spirits, they think they know not how in the
world to serve God if their Book be taken away from them: and I make no
question it has been a cause that many have taken up Arms, merely to defend
such superstitious vanities and customs that they were wont to have. Their
Burialls for the dead as they were wont to have, Oh! they mourn for this, and
they would almost as lieve lose their lives as such kind of things as these
are. I remember I have read of the Indians that were wont to worship an Apes
Tooth, An Apes Tooth.
it was a Religious Relick among them, and it was taken from them, and there
was a great mourning among them, so that they came and offered a very great
price, that was valued at thousands to redeem but their Apes Tooth that was
taken from them, because it was a Religious Relick. And so we have men this
day, though their superstitious vanities and customs be no better than a very
Apes Tooth, yet they mourn over them and would be willing to part with a great
proportion of their estate to redeem them again, they mourn after their Calves.

Oh! We should mourn after the true Worship.
how should we mourn after the true Worship of God then, how deer should that
be to our souls? For Calves, Superstitious Relics, and Customs, Apes Teeth,
and such things be so deer to Idolaters, Oh! those Ordinances of God in which
our souls have met with so much soul-refreshings, and communion with God, and
so much of the Spirit of God let out to our souls through them. Such
enlightenings by them, Oh! how should we mourn after them? You that have gotten
any thing by the Word. by the Ordinances of God, that ever has known what it
has been to have communion with God in them, you should think with your
selves, If these should be taken from me, then I should have cause to mourn
indeed: I have lost much of my estate, and my friends many of them are lost,
and these are cause of mourning, Oh! but if I should lose the Ordinances, and
Worship of God, Oh! what cause would there be then of mourning? It follows.

And the Priests thereof that rejoiced on it.
The Priests they especially mourn. The word that is here translated Priests,
(...) Chemarim what it signifies
it is in the Hebrew Chemarims, and I find it signifies three things the word
from whence it comes.

Chemar signifies to sound out, and so some think that it is they are called
Chemarims, because of their clamorous sounds that they were wont to have in
their superstitious worship: Just as we were wont to have Bellowing in their
Cathedrals, so they were wont to have, and therefore they were called
Chemarims, because of their mighty noises and sounds that they were wont to
have.

Secondly, It signifies, to burn, or to be hot. And so Luther Chemarims from
their burning desires after their ways of false worship.

But I rather think there is a third, that signifies to be Black from burning;
because those things that are burnt, they are made black. When the flame first
takes hold upon a thing it makes it black: and so Chemarims are as much as
black ones, Black-Coats.
or indeed Black Coats; they were wont to be known by their black garments, and
therefore they are called by the name Chemarims, [This is the Rabbis
interpretation of the word (and they apply it to the Popish Munks and Nuns)
which Calvin rejects, and expounds it to signify either their clamorous noise
in worshipping, as 1 King. 18. 27. or to be a common name whereby those
Idolatrous Priests were known as 2 King. 23. on which place see Munster's
Annotations.]
because of their black garments that they were wont to use: and I find in 2
King. 23. 5. that this word that is here Priests, is there Idolatrous Priests,
it is the same word. Those Black-Coats that were then, they accounted it a kind
of Religion to go in Black, from thence they would have the name. And though
certainly it is fit for the Ministers of the Gospel to go gravely, and decently,
and not to express lightness and vanity in their garments, yet to put a kind of
superstition upon black, as upon necessity they must wear black Coats, and no
other garments will serve the turn: As heretofore th^re was a kind of
superstitious vanity put on it. Now though gravity be required in their very
^arments, yet to stand so much upon the very color there may be danger in it,
and those that are looked upon as Religious men that should differ any way from
others, that they should be tied and bound to it, I say, this there is an evil
in it* they were wont to do so here: and so almost all your Heathens and
superstitious people they had always a special color for the garments of
their Priests; as the Turks have their green for the color of the garments of
their Priests. But thus much only for the name Chemarims.

Their Priests that rejoiced.
Rejoyce] that is, They that did exult over the Calves, Oh! the Priests, the
Calves made for them, they got the King to be on their side, and they made the
Calves brave, and they had brave kind of Worship about it, and many pompous
Ceremonies about it, and the Priests they gloried in this, for they had a
special hand in all, and because they had the countenance of Authority for
their Calves, that they were able to crush any that spoke against them, they
exulted the text says.

But now there is a threatening, That they shall mourn, those Priests that did so
glory in their Calves, as who were they that did glory so much in pompous
Altars and other braveries but your Priests? they exulted and had all under
them, and would quickly crush a man that should not yield to them, they did
even brave it over all, and did even call themselves sometimes the Triumphant
Clergy, just like your Chemarims; but now here they were like to lose all, and
they should mourn over them.

Polanus upon this very place, Polanus in loc.
for their fat Livings, and Parsonages, and such places, our Prelates, for
their Prebendaries, and Deanaries, and Bishoprics, and such kind of
Preferments: Oh! how do they mourn this day for the loss of these things? Thus
they that did so rejoice to expect Preferment, they are gone now, Oh! the world
is at an end with them, and they mourn one to another because of the loss of
such things as these are: and long may they mourn upon this ground. Revel. 18.
applied.
We read in Revel. 18. these kind of people just set forth, that upon the fall
of Babylon the text says, That the Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn
over her: for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more. And then in the 14.
verse, The fruits that thy soul lusts after are departed from thee: and in
the 15. verse, The Merchants of these things which were made rich by her, stood
a far off, weeping and wailing. who mourns most for superstitious places.
Those that were made rich by the Whore of Babylon stand a far off, weeping and
wailing. And so those that were made rich by the Prelates, and Superstitious
vanities, they stand a far off, weeping and wailing; and blessed be God that we
see them to mourn that did so triumph and rejoice over the people of God, but
God has made such a change of things as now they hang down their heads and
mourn, even because of their Calves that are taken from them.

For the glory thereof is departed.
They sought to make them as glorious as they could, Obs.
and they accounted them very glorious. Now shall wicked men, Idolaters account
their Idol Worship glorious, Oh! how glorious should the Worship of God be in
our eyes, the true Spiritual Worship of God? Let the true Ministers of God
learn not to glory in the flesh, but desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified.

The Glory thereof is departed.] For diverse years together the worship of the
Calves had a great deal of glory put upon them, but it went away. And so you
know what glory was upon our Prelates and such kind of Worship, as they of late
set up, but the glory is departed. And look to it, what ever inventions of men
are, if it be not Gods, the glory will depart from it.

VER. 6.
It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a Present to King Jareb.
WHAT King Jareb was you heard in the fifth Chapter: Jareb.
and his name signifies an Helper, as a Trophe. As now the King of France, The
most Christian King. And so our King, The Defender of the Faith. And so King
Jareb, the Helper. Now the Calves are to be sent to King Jareb, that was their
help. Some think that they sent it for a Present; but the text will not bear
that, but his Soldiers taking Dan and Bethel they rejoiced in getting the
Calves, and sends them to King Jareb as a Trophe unto him, as that which they
knew he would much rejoice in, They rested much upon King Jareb as a help unto
them, and now their kind of Religion, their very Religion is at Jarebs dispose,
for he has now the Calves in his hand to do with them what he will.

From thence briefly our Note is this: Obs.
Our depending upon men for help, is deerly bought, if it comes to that, that
they shall have the dispose of our Religion. Jareb was their Helper, and they
would have him to help them; but now their Calves are sent to him for a
Present, and Jareb has the dispose of them for their Religion that they had.

And then the second Note is this. In that they were sent to the King as a
Present that he would rejoice in.

That it is the way of Idolaters, Obs.
to rejoice much when they get one another gods. As when the Philistims got
the Ark, they rejoiced much, Applied to England.
they carried it to Dagons Temple. Also the enemies of the Church will rejoice
much if they can get the power to trample upon our Religion; they will rejoice
much if they can get your estates, but they will rejoice more if they can do
what they will with you in the point of your Religion, Oh! this would be that
which would make them glad at the very heart that they could dispose of us for
our Religion, Oh! let us know this beforehand that may make us cry to God the
more earnestly, that the Lord what ever he gives them power over, that he would
not give them power over our Religion; for that is the thing that they most aim
at.

Ephraim shall receive shame.
Hierom upon the place has this tradition of the Jews. Hierom.
(I Will but name it to you) he says, (that it was received among them) That the
Priests of the Calves had taken away the golden Calves and put up Calves of
brass instead of them and only gilt them over with Gold, See Schickards
Prodromus, or his Bechinath Haperuchim.
and now the King of Israel when he was in straights sent these Calves to King
Jareb for a Present to pacify his anger, now when he had sent these Calves the
King of Assyria made account that they were Calves of Gold, but afterward when
he found that they were of brass, he sent messengers to the King of Israel to
tell him how he had but cozened him, and upon that, Oh the King and all the
People were ashamed. But this is but a tradition of theirs, and not very
probable. But this I rather take to be the truth of it.

They were ashamed because of their own Counsels.
That is, Expos.
their hopes first shall fail them, and they shall see their counsels that they
took shall come to nothing, and this shall cause shame and confusion of face
upon them. The ten Tribes shall receive shame. Failing in our hopes that make
us to be ashamed. They had good hopes they should prevail because of their
Calves, Job. 6. 20.
but now their Calves are taken from them, and now they are ashamed, In Job. 6.
20. They were confounded, because they had hoped; they came thither, and were
ashamed: they hoped to have relief, but had not, and therefore they were
ashamed; the disappointment of hopes causes great shame. Oh then! what shame
and confusion will there be at the great day when we shall be disappointed of
our last hopes? If we had been disappointed of our hopes now in respect of our
Adversaries, Oh! what shame would have been upon the People of God, our
Adversaries they would have cast shame upon us, and said, What Is become of your
fastings and prayers? As it is like the Assyrians did when they took the Calves,
Oh! now we have got your Gods (say they) and upon this the people were ashamed:
and so if our Adversaries had prevailed they would have scorned in the like
manner. My Brethren, we have cause to bless the Lord from our souls that he
has delivered us from such a temptation, from such a temptation lest we should
be ashamed of our hopes, though the truth is, If we had right we should not
have been ashamed, for our hopes was not so much in the saving of our estates
as this, That God would own his Cause in the conclusion, and so our hopes would
not have failed; I but if our hopes had but seemed to have failed in outward
appearance, that the Enemy should have prevailed, I say, it would have been a
mighty temptation for us to have been ashamed of our hopes, Oh! blessed be God
for preventing this, that the Lord has not made his People to be ashamed of
their hopes, Ministers may be glad*
and prayers. The Ministers of God can stand up and look comfortably in the
Congregations, because they put on people, and encouraged the hearts of people
in this Cause; And (if always faithful to the Public Cause) they may take
comfort.
and they have comfort to their souls in this, That when things were at the
lowest yet still they could have their hopes in God, and believe yet in God
that he would go on in such a Cause as this is, and the Lord has not caused
the expectation of his poor people to fail. But if it be shame (I say) now for
the present to be disappointed of some hopes, Oh! remember upon all your
disappointment of hopes, Oh! what shame would it be before men and Angels if it
should prove that any soul in this place should be so disappointed of their
last hopes? Thou have hope of salvation, and of eternal life, and if it should
prove when all secrets are to be made public before the Lord Jesus and his
Angels, if then it should prove that all thy hopes were dashed, what would
become of thee? It is the prayer of David, O Lord, let me not be disappointed
of my hope. Let that be thy prayer, especially in regard of thy last hopes. 1
Ioh. 2. 28.
In 1 John 2. 28. Abide in him, that when he shall appear we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Oh! that is the comfort
of the Saints, that they shall not be ashamed at the coming of Jesus Christ:
and many that are not ashamed now yet at the coming of Jesus Christ, Oh! the
shame that shall be cast upon them? But the main emphasis lies in the words
that follow.

Israel shall be ashamed of his own Counsels.
Now what was that Counsel? Expos.
What? why it was this counsel: 1. The Counsel that was between Jeroboam and
his

And secondly, For the forcing of al men that belonged Jerusalem. This was
thought a notable Plot, a notable Counsel, they thought this was the only
Counsel to keep things in peace among them. Why (say they) if we shall suffer
men, that every one that has a fancy in his head, that they shall go to
Jerusalem to worship, we shall have nothing but confusion, and therefore let us
take such a course that people shall have a place to worship in, that they
worship thus; it is but only some people that are so strict that they must
needs worship in Jerusalem, A Geographical description of Politic Councels in
Religion
and therefore let us determine this, That we will have a constant way that
every one shall be bound unto, and we will have no more going to this Jerusalem
to worship, but they shall be content to worship at Dan and Bethel, and this
will keep things in peace. Now this counsel seemed to be a fine plot to keep
things in order. But says the Lord, They shall be ashamed of it; though they
think they have wise men, that do thus advise, sage men, and some men it may be
that seem to have some good in them too, and stand for peace: thus it was a
Counsel cried up mightily, yet the Lord he sits in Heaven and laughs at this
Counsel, and says he, They shall be ashamed of their Counsels; perhaps now
whilst they are let go on and carry all before them, they bless themselves in
their Counsel, and think it is a very excellent plot, and God favors it; but
when my time shall come, when they shall see what evil it brings upon them,
then they shall be ashamed of their Counsels. From thence there is these two
Notes;

First, Obs. 1.
That men's own Counsels bring them to shame, especially in matters of Religion.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
That men are strong in their own Counsels, till they see some eminent evil to
come of them, and then they will be convinced and ashamed, but not before.

To speak a little of each of these.

Men's own Counsels bring shame to them, 1 Doct.
especially in Religion. For men naturally are very blind in the things of God,
they do not see far in them; men's hearts are full of corruption, they are
biased by their corruptions; seeing there is much self-love in men.

If there be any appearance that is men's own, Reas. 1.
that is much regarded, a great deal more than truth that is another man's; if it
be their own they mind that, but let another man speak that which has truth,
that is little regarded. There is in men's hearts much violence to maintain their
own Counsels, and therefore very like that their Counsels will bring them to
shame. There Is nothing that men can bear to be contradicted in, less than in
their Counsels. And the more men are set upon their own Counsels the more it is
like to bring shame in the conclusion.

And besides, Reas. 2.
There Is a Judgment of God upon men's spirits, that if they will set upon their
own Counsels, I say, there is ordinarily a Judgment of God upon men to leave
them to folly when they rest upon their own Counsels: and it is threatened in
Psalm. 81. 12. as a great Jugment of God upon men, Ps. 81. 12
to give them up to their Counsels. Says God, They would not hearken to my
Counsel, therefore did I give them up to their own Counsel: Oh! it is a terrible
place: I beseech you consider of it; These are times wherein every one is
plotting, Oh! tremble at that text; I gave them up unto their OWN COVNSELS:
Men's own Counsels bring them to shame, often times they come to nothing; after
they have made a great deal of do, and they will do this, and they will go on;
at length it comes to nothing, so that they are fain to sit down and there is an
end of all their labor and stir, perhaps they have labored to put on their
Counsels by much evil, much sin, much heart burning, and when it comes to all,
there it lies, there is an end of it; thus they are ashamed of their counsels.
Men's own Counsels ensnare the^ Instanced in the late Enemy, And the Prelates.
Yea, many times the Counsels of men work quite contrary; God does much glory
in this, in making use of men's own Counsels to bring them into snares. What
has brought our Adversaries into snares but their own Counsels? What brought
the Prelates down but their own Counsels? So that they would bite their very
fingers for what they did in their Protestation. God has been pleased to deal
thus graciously for us, to bring our enemies into snares by their own Counsels:
Job, 18. 7.
In Job, 18. 7. it is verified of many that their own Counsels have cast them
down. Psa. 9. 16.
And Psalm. 9. toward the latter end, The wicked is snared in the work of his
OWN HANDS: Higgajon Selah. You have not those two words put together in all the
Book of God besides. That is, Oh! it is a thing to be meditated on very much,
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Oh! think of this, consider
of this, Oh! the work of God in bringing men down by their own Counsels (says
the text.)

And just it may be so; Reas. 3
for men provoke God by their Counsels, Psalm. 106. 43.
in Psalm. 106. 43. Oh! the Lord looks upon the Counsels of men, and is much
provoked by them, and therefore just it is with him to make their Counsels to
be a snare so to them, as that they should be ashamed of them at the last. It
concerns us therefore (my Brethren) to look to our Counsels what they are. I Will
give you a few Rules about your Counsels that you may not be ashamed of them.
1, What to avoid.


First, Keep out from your Counsels those things that would hinder you. 1.
False principles.


1. Be sure to keep out of your Counsels your false Principles, be not acted in
your Counsels by false Principles.

2. Keep out of your Counsels wicked men, 2. Wicked men.
take heed that they do not join with you in your Counsels, Job, 21. 16.
in Job. 21. 16. Their good is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is
far from me. Cap. 22. 18
and so in Job, 22. 18. Oh! keep out wicked men from your Counsels.

3. Keep out your Own Ends, 3. Selfends
take heed how they come in: If any of a man's Ends come into his Counsels, they
will warp then.

4. Keep out of your Counsels Conceiptedness, 4. Conceiptedness
and Pride; when you come to Counsel, Oh take heed of a conceited spirit, in
leaning to your own understanding; God does use to blast such.

5. Keep out of your Counsels flesh and blood. 5. Flesh and blood.
I consulted not with flesh and blood, says Paul in the first Chap. to the
Galatians: I did not look unto carnal excellency, but laid aside all carnal
kind of excellency; they would have advised me to this and this, and I should
never have done as I did if I had consulted with flesh and blood.

6. Yea, 6. Passion and Frowardness.
keep out of your Counsels Passion and frowardness. In Job, 5. 13. He takes
the wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel of the froward is carried
headlong. Job, 5. 13.
If once you find in your Counsels your hearts begin to be hot, Resolve on
nothing in heat.
rather break off; take heed of such resolutions in your Counsels as are in a
heat: It Is a safe way for you if you would consult about business of Moment,
as soon as there begins to be a heat, rather fall to prayer; we had need of cool
and quiet spirits when we are consulting: As if you would weigh a thing exactly
with Gold Scals (as in Councels we should weigh things very exactly) you would
not weigh in the midst of a wind: simile.
when men's passions begin to be up they weigh things as a man should weigh Gold
abroad in the wind: but you cannot weigh exactly. Oh! take heed of passion in
your Councels.

Diverse other things there are that spoil our Councels that we should be aware
of. 2, What we should attend in our Counsels.
And if we would have our Councels right, then observe these further Rules in
your Councels:

1. Be sure to look up first to Jesus Christ that great Counselor. 1. Look to
Christ.
He is called in Isa. 9. THE COVNSELLOR: it is he that is wonderful in Counsel:
Isa 9. 6.
God has given a style to his Son to be The Counselor, he is to be the
Counselor of thy Soul for thy Eternal Estate, yea, and to be thy Counselor
for all matters of Religion, and the Worship of God, look up to him.

And pray much. 2. Pray much.
If you would not have your Counsels miscarry, pray much. In Prove. 8. 14.
Counsel is mine (says Wisdom.) Prove. 8. 14
It Is spoken of Christ. It Is very observable that some note of the Counsel of
Achitophel, and the Counsel of Hushai: The Counsel of Achitophel, the truth is,
if we examine it, it was the wiser Counsel of both, and Absalom loved
Achitophel exceedingly, and his Counsel was ordinarily accounted as the Oracle
of God, yet at such a time (because God had an intent to bring down his
Counsel) that was rejected, and the Counsel of Hushai was embraced, and he did
hear the prayer of David when he prayed* Lord turn the Counsel of Achitophel
into folly. And let us pray much that God would be with our COUNSELORS, that
there may be none there that may be like those that are spoken of in Ezekiel. 11.
2. Ezekiel. 11. 2*
These are they that give evil Counsel in the City, and that likewise the Lord
would sway Counsels, and that men may yield to that that is the safest and the
best Counsel, to that that is best in the eyes of God. Many times when a
Company meet together, there are some things that are darted in that are
neglected by the Company, whereas if God were with them, to guide them, that
thing (it may be) would sway all their Counsels: and pray much, Guide me with
thy Counsel, Ps. 73. 24
and so bring me to glory, Psalm. 73. 24. Oh! especially in matters that
concern our Souls and Religion, we should pray much that God would guide us by
his Counsel, and so bring us to Glory.

3. If you would have your Counsels right, 3. Let the fear of God be strong.
Let the fear of God be strong in your hearts when you come to counsel. Oh!
it is a good thing when any are going to Counsel about matters of consequence,
that they would prepare their hearts before they go with the possession of the
fear of the great God upon their hearts, and then they will counsel well: you
have a notable Scripture for this in Ezra, 10. 3. Come, let us go to do
according to the Counsel of my Lord, Ezr. 10. 3.
and of those that tremble at the Commandment of our God. It may be there are
some that have deeper reaches than they have; I, but have they the fear of God
in them? there is hope that they are guided by the Lord, and therefore let us
do according to the Counsel of those that tremble at Gods Word; Do you see a
man whose heart is possessed with the fear of God and his Word? if his parts be
but ordinary you may expect that God will be with him rather than with those
that are bold and presumptuous, and slight the Word of God.

4. In your Counsels (especially in matters of Religion) be sure to look at the
Word; 4. Look at the Word, especially in matters of Religion.
and think not thus, In way of reason and prudence such a way were better, and
would conduce for peace: As I remember Luther has such an expression, Reason
is a most deadly enemy even to Faith, it is dangerous to reason matter of
Faith. And so in the matters of the Worship of God, there is a great deal of
danger. Keep to the Word therefore in all your Counsels, and labor for
sincerity of heart in all your Counsels: this is that that makes men miscarry
in their Counsels, their hearts are biased with some lust or other, and
therefore when any thing is spoken to them that is suitable to what they have a
mind to, that they embrace; and if any thing be spoken to them that is
otherwise, that they reject: Oh! it is just with God to answer thee according to
the Idol that is set up in thy own heart.

5. In all thy Counsels, 5. Be not put off with shows of Reason.
Take heed of being put off with some fair shows. When the Lord is leaving any,
yet he will suffer those that give evil Counsel to mix a great many good things
with that which is evil: As some that will put a few brass shillings into a
great bag of money, the other is all good current money, yea but here is some
brass shillings put amongst it. So sometimes in the midst of a great deal of
good Counsel, there is a little mixture that may turn all: therefore those that
would counsel, especially the public affairs, they had need have their eyes
about them, and poise every word and line, and examine every particular, or
otherwise they may quickly come to be ashamed of their own Counsel.

There are many Rules might further be given.

6. God has promised to direct the humble, 6. Be humble.
therefore come with humility in your counsels, and be sure in what is right to
follow: and then you may with the more confidence expect God should help you in
other things.

7. Consult with indifferent judgment.

8. If the thing touch others, think what we would

9. Whether it may not cost too dear, though good. (non deliberand. de
necessariis) the rubs attending it may show it is not good at this time, or not
thus, or not for me.

They shall be ashamed of their own Counsels.
When they are come to times of affliction they shall be ashamed of their own
Counsels. 2. Doct.
Times of affliction makes men ashamed of what they would not be ashamed of
before, Jer. 2. 26. Zeph. 3. 11. I remember a notable expression that Sr.
Walter Rawleigh has in his Story; Sr Walter Rawlegh
When death comes (says he) which hates men and destroies men, when that
comes, that is believed; But God that loves men, and makes men, he is not
regarded. Oh Eloquent! Oh! Mighty Death! whom none could advise, thou art able
to persuade. That Is thus, men that would never be persuaded by any thing else
to believe that they were not right, yet when death appears that can persuade
them: now afflictions are an evil, but how eloquent are afflictions? what power
have afflictions to persuade men that they were wrong, that would not be
persuaded by all the arguments in the world before? Then they shall be ashamed
of their own Counsels. Oh! I beseech you let us take heed of this, let not us
go on headily in our own Counsels till God bring us into misery, and then we
should be forced to cry out of our own Counsels and be ashamed of them.

VER. 7.
As for Samaria her King is cut off, as the foam upon the water.
AS for Samaria her King is cut off, as the foam upon the waters.

Before God threatened that they should be ashamed of their Counsels, Expos.
and what that Counsel was I told you. Ashamed of our Counsel, we hope not, we
shall maintain it, our King is for us, he will venture his life, his Kingdom,
but he will maintain us in our way.

Your King (says the Prophet) he shall be as foam upon the water, even the
King of Samaria.

Yea, but our King is in a strong Town, in Samaria, a great City, and such a
strong City as was able to hold siege for three years together; and yet the
King of Samaria though he had gotten the chief City in the Kingdom to be fully
for him, and so much victuals and strength as he could hold out for three
years, yet (says the Lord) He shall be as the foam upon the Waters.

As foam.
The word that is translated Foam, (...)
sometimes signifies the foam that is in a man that is extremely angry, so you
have it in Zach. 1. 2. Zach. 1. 2.
Oh the King when he was crossed he was in a foam. Your King that is crossed and
does foam in anger when he is crossed, he shall be as foam upon the water (says
God.) Now the Note that is from hence it is this;

That ungodly men in their greatest power and rage, Obser.
yet if God comes upon them, are nothing but as foam, are poor weak creatures
that vanish and come to nothing. The foam when the waters makes a noise, is
above it, and has a great show above the waters, but stay a while and it is
vanished and comes to nothing. Your King that rages and is above others, and
thinks he has a great deal of power; stay a while he comes to nothing. The
Scripture compares men in their greatest power to things of the greatest
vanity; there are in Scripture, that I Will mention to you, a matter of 19. or
20. several particulars wherein the Scripture compares men in their greatest
power, unto that which has nothing but vanity: The benefit of observing the
Scriptures expressions touching the vanity of great persons.
yea there are such expressions in Scripture, to set out the meanness,
vileness, and baseness of men in the greatest power, that it would make
Christians that understand Scripture, and that is of the same judgment with
their Father, with God, as he has revealed himself in his Word, never to be
afraid of the power of men. I Will name them distinctly to you thus:

A mere noise, nothing more, in Jeremiah, 46. 17. Pharaoh King of Egypt, is
but a noise. That Is the first.

Secondly, They are but as small dust, in Isa. 29. 5. The multitude of thy
strangers shall be like small dust.

Yea, Thirdly, They are but as chaff, in the same place Isa. 29. 5. The
terrible ones shall be as chaff that passes away in an instant. Who would be
afraid of a noise, small dust, and chaff?

Fourthly, They are as nothing, in Isa. 41. 11. Behold, all they that are
incensed against thee, shall be as nothing.

Tow; put a little fire to Tow and it quickly comes to nothing. In Isa. 1. 31.

Sixthly, They are as dung, in Psalm. 83. 10. As the dung of the Earth.

Seventhly, They are as straw that is trodden for dung, in Isa. 25. 10. As straw
trodden for the dunghill.

hook in his nostrils, in Isa. 37. 20 God will put a hook in his nostrils; now
who would be afraid of a beast that has a hook put into his nostrils?

stubble, and as stubble fully dry, ready for the fire, in Nahum. 1. 10.

Tenthly, They are as rottenness, and their root is rottenness Isa. 5. 24.

And then, they are as scum, in Ezekiel. 24. 12. And as scum ready for the fire.

smoke in Psalm. 68. 2. they are as smoke that is dry.

And then they are as Grass, as green grass, as grass on the house tops, and as
Corn blasted before it is grown up; all these you have together in Isa. 37. 27.

And then they are as Wax that melts before the fire, in Psalm. 68. 2.

Yea, They are as the fat of Lambs, in Psalm. 37. 20.

They are as a worm, in Job, 25. 6.

They are vanity, Lighter than vanity, altogether in their Psalm. 39. 5.

They are as snow melting before the Sun. In Job, 24.

They are as the light of a Candle that is presently put out Prove. 24. 20.

And then lastly, They are a Lie: even great men and Psalm. 62. 9.

Thus my Brethren, we see how the Scripture heaps up expression upon
expression. It might have been very profitable to have insisted upon al these
particulars, and to have opened them, to show you how contemptibly the
Holy Ghost does speak of men in their great power.

Now if we could gather these Scriptures together, Use.
and put them all into one, and so present the power of great men to us, and by
these things have the same judgment of them that God has, it would mightily
help us from the fears of men. As for Samaria her King is cut off as the foam
upon the waters.

VER. 8.
The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel shall be dedestroyed: the
Thorn and the Thistle shall come up upon their Altars.
I Confess from th^se words to the end of the Eleventh Verse, there appears at
the first reading, much obscurity; yet they are like unto a Mine, that the
outside of it is barren, but dig within, and you shall find rich Treasure.

Israel, Two prop^ of Isreal's false confidence.
the ten Tribes did confide in two things, and so strengthened themselves
against what the Prophet could say against them; the first was in the power of
their King, now that is gone, that is as foam, says God, never confide there in
the power of the King, and think that will bear you out, for he shall be as
foam.

But the second was their Sacrifices that they offered, and their Devotion,
their Religion, they were a Religious people, and they were very costly in
their Devotion, they confided much in that: Well for the second, says the
Lord, The high places of Aven, the sin of Israel shall be destroyed, the Thorn
and the Thistle shall come up on their Altars. Though they were never so
pompous in their eyes, yet they are the high places of Aven; Bethaven.
they were called before Beth-aven [the house of Vanity,] Aven.
now it is called Aven, Bethel.
[vanitie it self:] That place was no other than Bethel, whose name signified
the house of God, where one of the Ca^ves was set up; Now the name of this
place did a great deal of hurt among the people; Oh! to go up to Bethel, the
house of God; therefore God would take away that name, and calls it Beth-aven
first, and then calls it Aven, that is, instead of calling it the house of God,
Vanitas (...) iniquitas, labor.
I will have it called the house vanity, yea, vanity it self. Aven signifies
vanity, yea iniquity it self; from whence note, That God stands much upon
taking people off from specious and glorious names, that are put upon any
things that are made use of in ways of false worship, Obs. 1.
he stands much upon it For, whereas before he had changed it from Bethel to
Beth-aven, he changes it now from Beth-aven to Aven; God would obliterate the
name of Bethel, and would make it to be accounted by the people to be nothing
but iniquity and vanity. As for The high places, we have spoken to formerly.

The sin of Israel.
The sin, that is, in the very abstract, sin; it is more than if he should say,
the sinful things of Israel, the very sin of Israel.

The more any thing comes to have the nature of sin, Obs. 2.
the more vile and abominable it is. Therefore God expresses it by an
expression that should come as near the nature of sin it self, as he could to
make it abominable. Their sin, that is their Idolatrous worship.

Their false worship, Obs. 3.
it is the great sin; and it was the greater sin in Isrrel, because that their
holiness did especially consist in instituted worship, their holiness was
typical, and much stood in instituted worship; it is true, God would have true
holiness if ever they came to Heaven, but that holiness upon which they were
called, a holy people, it was in their instituted worship, and it was typical,
to set forth the true holiness that should be in all the Members of the Church
now, therefore God was much provoked with their polutions in instituted
worship, their holiness consisted so much in it.

And then further, In that their Idols, and their creatures that they abused to
sin are here called, Their Sin, the Sin of Israel.

You may note that, Obs. 4.
We may so abuse the creatures of God as not only to make them sinful to us,
but even to turn them into sin (as it were;) thus many men abuse their bodies
so that they may be called sin its self.

Well, that which they accounted holy you see God he accounts not only sinful,
but sin, and says it shall be destroyed.

It shall be destroyed.
When any Ordinances of God are abused, Obs. 5.
they are but to be purged. But if they be inventions of men they are to be
destroyed. They shall be destroyed, The sin of Israel shall be destroyed. We
must learn for ever to take heed of meddling with, or putting any thing of our
own in the place of Gods Worship, we may think in reason this may be good, as
well as that, we see no evil in this, why may not this way be as good as that
way? Yea, but God he looks upon things according as he himself requires them:
and therefore Calvin I remember upon this place (says) God he pronounces that
sin and sacriledg, Calvin in loc.
and would have it destroyed, those things that may please us; let us therefore
rest in his judgment, it is not our part to dispute (says he) about matters of
Worship, we must not dispute, and say, Why may not this be? and this may be for
a good use, and a great deal of good may come of it, we must not stand
disputing with God, and debating the matter with God, for though it may be very
specious in our eyes, yet it may be very odious and abominable to the eyes of
God.

It shall be destroyed.
Even all those things that evil men makes use of for sin shall one day be
taken from them, Obs. 6.
you shall not always have the creatures of God to abuse them to sin, there
will be a time when God will deliver his creatures from this vanity that they
are subject to. And then lastly.

They shall be destroyed.
Man's sin brings destruction upon the creatures. Obs. 7.
It is as poison in a glass that causes the glass to be broken and cast upon
the dunghill.

The Thorn and the Thistle shall come up on their Altars.
Bethel: (especially, Samaria being besieged for 3. years together.) The
enemies had Bethel in their own hands and they manifested their rage upon their
Altars, Expos.
and upon all their Religious things presently, they pulled them down and made
them lie in heaps of rubbish, that in the space of three years the very
thistles and thorns grew up in the place where they had their Alters. It Is a
usual expression of the devastation of a place, that the grass shall grow where
their houses were, shall Corn grow where the City was, here there shall be
Thistles and thorns grow where their Altars were.

And secondly, It Is an expression of indignation, as if God should have said,
I Will take more delight to see the Thorns and Thistles grow out of the very
rubbish of the Altars than of all the Images and brave pictures and gildings
that are about them. Just as if it should have been said about the
Service Book, Oh now you honor it much, and it must be bound bravely, and gilt
bravely, and strung curiously, if one should have said about seven or eight
years ago, This that you do so Idolize now, within a while it shall be but wast
papers, it shall be thrown to the Mice and Rats to eat, this would have been an
expression of indignation against it.

Obs. Obs. 1.
First, If it be sad that places of false worship should not be frequented as
formerly they were wont to be, how much more sad is it that places of true
worship should be neglected? as thus, They were wont to go to Bethel to worship
with their Altars: yea, but says God, they shall go no more thither, but those
places shall be filled with Nettles, Thorns, and and Thistles; they accounted
that sad. Yea, but we should account it sad that the paths to the true Worship
of God should not be beaten, as in former times where there was an Altar (as it
were) for the Worship of God, those places that were frequented much; but had
our Adversaries had their wills we should have had those paths that were wont
to be beaten to the true Worship of God, to have had Nettles and Thorns grown
up in them.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
If it be so sad to have such an ill succession here in false worship, sad to
false worshipers, what sadness is there for the true Worshipers of God to have
an ill succession in the Church? Truly much like me thinks it is, when there
has been in a place a godly and a powerful Ministry, and afterward for the
sins of the people God takes it away, and instead of a powerful Ministry there
comes up a pricking Thorn, a Bryar, a Thistle, a Nettle, there comes an
unworthy man of no gifts or gra^es, but only can gall and prick, and do hurt
and mischief, this is a succession like to the succession that God here
threatened, that there should be Thistles and Thorns succeed their Altars. And
Hierom upon the place seems to hint some such kind of meditation, he says,
instead of true Doctrine, Solitudo pessimae doctrinae.
there shall be a wilderness of very corrupt Doctrine, where there was true
Doctrine taught, now it shall lie wast as a wilderness, Hier. in loc.
and corrupt Doctrine shall be taught instead of true.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
God does account the ruin of the most glorious things abused to sin, a more
pleasing object, than when those things were in the greatest pomp and glory.
Brave building, and brave Altars when they were rubbish and grown over with
Thorns, and Briars, Men's abused bodies.
God looked upon them as more glorious. And so if a man has a very beautiful
comely body and abuse it to sin, when God shall strike him, and he shall be a
filthy rotten carcass that the worms shall be gnawing upon, when he shall be
covered with worms as a filthy carcass, God will look upon that as a more
lovely sight than to see his body decked with all kind of ornaments. Better the
creature perish than be abused.
Better that the creature perish than to have it abused to sin, though it be
the most glorious creature in the world.

And then lastly, Obs. 4
Those things that men account highly of in the matters of Worship, when God
lets in their enemies they contemn them. They accounted highly of their Calves,
but when the Assyrians came they contemned them, and pulled them down, and made
them rubbish. It Is not only so in matters of false worship, but in matters of
true; those things that we highly esteem and bless God for, and we think what
infinite pity it is that they should not be continued, yet if God should let
our Adversaries in they would scorn us. As now, such liberties as these are,
what infinite pity were it that people should be deprived of them, but if God
should let our Adversaries in upon us they would scorn and contemn these
things, as the Assyrians did contemn those things that the Israelites did
account to be as God. It follows.

They shall say to the Mountains, Cover us, and to the Hills, Fall on us.
This is an expression to show, Expos. 1.
First, the dreadfulness of their misery. It should be such a great misery as
should make them be weary of their lives, should make them rather desire death
than life.

Secondly, It is to note the wonderful desperation that in the apprehension and
sense of this their misery they had no whither to go for help, but their hearts
should despair, and all the help that they should expect was, to have the
Mountains fall upon them, and the Hills to cover them. Now this expression I
find Christ makes use of in the setting out the misery of the destruction of
the Jews by the Romans afterward, Luke, 23. 30.
in Luke, 23. 30. and so I find the holy Ghost in expressing the misery of the
Antichristian party, when the wrath of God should come out upon them, their
misery shall be so great, as to cry to the Mountains to fall upon them, Rev. 6.
16
and the Hills to cover them, in Revel. 6. 16. there the Princes and the great
men, and mighty men, and Captains, they call upon the Mountains to fall upon
them and the Hills to cover them. I remember reverend Mr. Brightman upon that
very Scripture interpreting, the great men, See Mr Brightm. in Revel. 6. 16.
and the mighty men calling to the mountains to fall upon them, and the hills
to cover them, he says, That it was fulfilled in the time of Constantine, when
the Heathen Emperors were vanquished, and he does interpret it upon Dioclesian
that he was so terrified in apprehension of the wrath of the Lamb that Christ
did appear against him, that he drank poison and killed himself. And Maximian
ended his life with a haltar, and hanged himself. Galerius died of a most
noisome and filthy disease. Maximinus that he might prevent his death he
likewise murdered himself. And so Maxentius ran into the bottom of Tiberis to
hide himself there. And thus they did seek by several ways to hide themselves
from the sight of the Lamb by violent deaths.

I suppose all of you do understand clearly that it is meant an expression of
great anguish and desperation; but yet that we may see why the holy Ghost makes
use of this expression rather than others, and to find out the reason of it,
you must know that the expression does arise from hence; The Land of Canaan.
the Land of Canaan (where the Prophet here Prophesies) it was a Land full of
Mountains and Hills, and these Mountains were stony and rocky (many of them)
and they were wont therefore to dig places in the mountains that were stony and
rocky for safety in case they should be in any great danger, The custom of the
Jews in time of danger.
to dig such holes that they may run into, and that by their narrow passage
they might be able to keep out an enemy from them; and therefore I remember I
find in Josephus 14. Josephus Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 27 De Bello Iudaic. lib. 1,
cap. 12.
Book of Antiquities, 27. Chap. and so his Book of the Jewish Wars, the 1.
Book, and 12. Chap. he says, That those that were Thieves and Robbers they
would make use of such Caves and Dens in the Mountains and Hills; and now to
these the Scripture does allude, and by this you may be helped to understand
diverse places of Scripture, Isa. 2. 19. ^llustrated
in Isa. 2. 19. And they shall go into the holes of the Rocks, and into the
caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty,
when he arises to shake terribly the Earth. They should go then into the holes
of the Rocks and caves of the Earth, for they were wont to use such things
there much. Ps. 11. 1. also.
And so that Scripture in Psalm. 11. 1. In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye
to my soul, Flee as a bird to your Mountain? In times of danger they were wont
to flee to those Mountains. Ps. 121. 1 in like manner.
And so in Psalm. 121. 1. I will lift up mine eyes unto the Hills from whence
comes my help: not only to the Temple, but to the Hills, because in time of
danger they were wont to think of the Hills: But (says David) I lift up my
heart to God, and that shall be to me instead of an hundred holes in Hills. Ps.
36. 6. by the same.
And in Psalm. 36. 6. Thy Righteousness is like the great Mountains. It Is not
only because the Mountains stand steadily and strongly, but because the
Mountains were places of refuge and shelter. So the Saints have refuge in the
faithfulness of God, as they did run to the holes in the Mountains, and
therefore God is called a strong Rock that the Righteous run to; why? not only
because a Rock is strong and cannot be removed, yea, but what safety is there:
Suppose a man run to the Rock, cannot the enemies follow him and take him in
the Rock? Therefore it is not only meant when it is said, God is as a Rock, not
only because the faithfulness of God is steady as a Rock, but because they had
caves and holes in the Rocks that they were wont to run to in time of danger,
therefore God is called a Rock. And Psalm. 95. 4.
And so, The strength of the Hills is his also, in Psalm. 95. 4. These
Scriptures we may understand by this, by understanding the manner what they
were wont to do in their Mountains. with Psalm. 94. 22,
In Psalm. 94. 22. But the Lord is my defense, and my God is the Rock of my
refuge.

But yet further, that we may understand the meaning of this expression:
Because when in times of danger they ran to the Mountains, and to the Rocks,
and Holes, into their Caves, they considered when they were there, Oh! the
enemy if he should come upon us, how sad would our condition be? Oh! that
rather this Mountain that is now over us, I would rather that it should sink
down and fall upon me than the enemy should take me, and this Hill that I am
got into a hole of, for my refuge, it were well if this should sink down and
press me to nothing. This I take to be the meaning of this Phrase, and the rise
of it; they despised the Mountain of God, the going up to his Mountain, but now
they would be glad to have so much use of these Mountains that they might crush
them in pieces. From thence there are these Notes.

First, Obs. 1.
Oh! the Alteration that God can make in Cities and Kingdoms: They who were
proud and scornful ere while, are now so distressed as would think themselves
happy to be crushed by Mountains and Hills.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
Hence we may learn how great is the misery of falling into the hands of our
enemies, for that is the meaning; when the Assyrians should come against them,
and they were besieged for three years together, they knew how savigely the
Enemies had used others in the Country, so that they desired to die under the
Mountains rather than to fall into their hands; the great misery there is in
falling into the hands of Enemies. Josephus.
And I remember Josephus in one of the forenamed places gives us a notable
story of this, he tells us of some that did run into the Mountains and Holes for
safety, and Herod he pursued them, and among others there was an old man, and
he had seven Children and his Wife with him, A lamentable story.
but rather than he would fall into Herod's hands, he called his Children one by
one unto the mouth of the Cave that he had made in the Mountain, and when one
came he killed that before the Enemy, and he called another and killed him, and
so he did till he had killed all the seven, and killed them Himself, and
afterward his Wife, and when he had cast their dead bodies down the Rock, he
threw himself down headlong after them, and so he slew himself, and all this
rather than he would fall into the hands of his Enemies. Certainly there is
wonderful misery. Some of you perhaps have seen or felt somewhat, but that that
you have felt and seen has been nothing to what was like to be, had the
Enemies gotten full power; He was fain to deal fairly to get people to himself,
but cruelty does break out now and then, and by that you may see what should
have been generally if the Lord should deliver you into the power of the Enemy:
Let us bless God then that we are delivered from that, that we have no such
cause to cry out to the Mountains to cover us and the Hills to fall upon us.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
The wrath of God, Oh! how dreadful is it? there is nothing so fearful as the
wrath of God: One would think that, that which these poor people should desire
here should be dreadful enough, to have the Mountains fall upon them, and the
Hills to cover them: Oh! but it is not so dreadful as Gods wrath; take all the
terrors in the world they are nothing to the wrath of the Almighty when that is
apprehended: sometimes the wrath of God lies more heavy upon a man's Conscience
than a thousand Mountains: And (my brethren) if it be so dreadful in outward
judgments, how dreadful is it like to be when it shall come to be fully powered
out upon the wicked and ungodly? In Revel. 9. 6. Rev. 9. 6.
They shall seek for death, and shall not find it; they shall desire to die,
and death shall flee from them (says the text) Oh! when Gods wrath appears
against the ungodly, it will be dreadful, especially when the full vials of it
comes to be powered out.

And further, Obs. 4.
To live in misery is worse than present dreadful death: to live in a lingering
way of misery is worse than present death even in this world. Suetonius L. 3.
C. 6. Nondum tecum in gratiam redii.
I remember Suetonius tells of Tiberius Caesar, that there was one that he had
adjudged to death, and he that was adjudged to die, petitioned to him, that he
might have his dispatch. He answers him thus, Sir, you and I are not friends
yet, you must not die, you must be kept in misery. It is worse than death many
times to be kept in a lingering way of misery, it is so, even in regard of the
miseries of this world, Oh! how much worse than death is it then to be kept
under the wrath of God to all eternity? How fearful is it to live in misery for
ever then, and never to die? Why it is better, certainly Sense would apprehend
it better for a man to be dispacht presently than to live in lingering misery:
yet, if we did know all, it were better to live in the greatest misery in the
world (for a wicked man) than to die the fairest death; thou were better to
live as a Dog, a Toad, yea, as a stock-log at the back of the fire (if it were
possible) than to die, if thou knew all (being a wicked man) but however
hereafter in Hell, then it were better if it were possible to perish than to
live so as thou have, yet then thou shall not die, though it would be the
greatest happiness to thee; if thou should after a thousand years cry to
God, Oh Lord, that Mountains might fall upon me! The Lord would answer: You and
I are not friends yet; and if after a thousand years more thou should cry,
Oh Lord that I might be crushed to pieces: the Lord would answer you still, You
and I are not yet friends. Bernard lib. 5. de consid. c. 12
Says Bernard, Oh! I tremble to think of that, that I should fall into the
hands of living death, and of dying life, where men do not die, that they might
for ever die (says he) they do die that they may for ever die, they are
always dying, A dreadful consideration.
but never die, but are kept by the Almighty power of God on purpose that they
might be fuel for his wrath, and subjects for his revenging Justice to strike
upon. Use to the impatient.
Oh! consider of this you that are so ready to desire death, because you are in
a lingering misery at any time. Is a lingering misery so evil? Then what will
be the lingering evil of eternity?

Fifthly observe, Obs. 5
The wonderful misery of wicked men in their affliction, they have no whither
to go for help, they have not God, they have no refuge, but to the mountains
and hills, and what is their refuge there but that they may fall upon them? Oh
the difference between a Saint of God and a wicked man in times of affliction?
When in times of affliction thou (if thou be wicked) shall rage and be mad
and know not whither to go, and the uttermost help that thou can think to
have is from the Hills and Mountains to fall upon thee, but then the Saints of
God shall be able to look up to Heaven, and Cry, Heaven is open for us, open to
receive my soul, Angels come and guide it, and bear it in, Oh Arms of Mercy,
Bowels of Mercy, spread open your selves to embrace me: here is a difference.
And is not this better than to cry to mountains to fall upon thee, and hills to
cover thee? And yet such a difference in men's estates does sin and godliness
make.

And then the last is, Obs. 6.
Oh the wonderful evil of despair! what a dreadful thing is desperation? It
suggests nothing else, the greatest benefit it does suggest it is to be crushed
in pieces: Despair chooses crushing, strangling, stabbing, drowning, etc.
so the help that many have, it is a halter to strangle them, a knife to murder
them, the water to drown them. Oh desperation is a dreadful thing. Francis
Spira feeling the dreadfulness of desperation, Cries out, Verily desperation is
Hell its self. Upon all this Luther concludes with this exhortation: Oh let us
stir up our selves to the fear of God, Fr. Spira. Luther in loc.
let us fly Idolatry, let us beautify the Word by our holy lives, and pray to
Christ that we might escape such things as these are, that God inflicts upon
the contemners of his Word. If you would not come into this wonderful
despairing condition, Oh learn to fall down before the Word, fear God now that
you may not despair; you that contemn, and slight, and scorn the Word now, this
may prove to be your portion ere long, that this desperate cry may be the
greatest ease that your forsaken souls can have.

VER. 9.
O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah.
O ISRAEL, I am speaking this to you, it merely concerns you, you have sinned
from the days of Gibeah, you think there is no great matter in your sin why
there should be these dreadful threatenings, that you should come to this
desperate condition; Why (say the men of Isrrel) what means the Prophet to be
so terrible in his threatenings? pray what is our sin? Yes, you have sinned, as
in the days of Gibeah. (...) de, ex, a, ab are notes of comparison Ezekiel. 16.
52.
From the days of Gibeah, so it is in your Books, or it may be read, Beyond
the days of Gibeah, or more than in them, as Ezekiel. 16. 52. From the days of
Gibeah; From what time was that? You may read the story of Gibeah if you read
the 19. and 20. of Judges, and their sin. I shall not need to spend much time
now in opening what Gibeah was, or the sin of Gibeah was, because that in the
9. Chapter of this Prophecy, and the 9. Verse, there I met with those words;
that, they had corrupted themselves as in the days of Gibeah. But it is not
only the 19. and 20. Chapters where we have the story of that horrible
wickedness of the abusing of the Levites Concubine, but likewise that that we
have in the 18. touching their Idolatry that there was among the people, there
was Micahs Idol, so that the Prophet has reference to the 18, 19, and 20.
Chapters of the Book of Judges. Judges 18, 19, and 20. Chapters referred to the
Text.
Now you have sinned, as in the days of Gibeah: that is, you take it from the
days of Gibeah that is of old: Oh your forefathers of old have committed
Idolatry and sin against me, and you are grown rooted in your sin, When the
story of the Levites concubine seems to have happened.
and have taken it from your forefathers, for it was very ancient, that sin of
the Levites Concubine: It does seem to be before the time of the Judges, it
seems to be committed between the time of Joshua and the time of the Judges.
(For though things be set in Scripture so that one seems to be after another,
yet it is not always so in the time.) But my reason why that sin of the
Levites Concubine seems to have been then, is this: because you find in that
story of the 19. of Judges, when the Levite was passing on, his servant would
have had him gone into Jebus, but his master said unto him, Judge. 1.
We will not turn aside hither into the City of a stranger that is not of the
Children of Israel, we will pass over to Gibeah. So that it seems Jerusalem was
not taken in by the children of Israel; but if you read the 1. of Judges you
shall find that Jerusalem was taken, it was taken before you read of any
particular Judge, therefore this sin was very ancient that was in the days of
Gibeah. You have sinned of old (says he) and you have continued in the
succession of sin of old; that is the first, if you take it, From the days of
Gibeah.

But it is rather I think to be taken Pre than otherwise, Expos. 2. Pre
preferred.
i.e. Your sin is more than the days of Gibeah, it is greater, what ever you
think of your sin, you think you worship and serve God. Yet the truth is, was
that sin horrible that a whole City should come together to force a Levites
Concubine till she was dead at the door, was that a horrible sin? Yea, and was
it horrible for them to stand to defend it? Confirmed
Your sin is greater.

Your sin is greater; why? for first, That was but one

And then secondly, That sin was a sin but of some few

Thirdly, That sin they had not so much means against Gibeah.

Yea further, Your sin is greater, because that you continuing

But that their sin was either from the days of Gibeah, or More than the days
of Gibeah. From thence the Notes are.

First, Obs. 1.
That the same sins continued in from Ancestors are greater than theirs were.
We are ready to excuse our sin and say, Why, we do nothing but that our
forefathers did. I, but it may be greater than the sins of thy forefathers,
because they had not such means. This would answer those that plead for old
superstitious vanities: Use.
Why should we be wiser than our forefathers? But know, that if you continue in
their sins, it is worse to you than to them.

But this is the special Note from hence, Obs. 2.
That God takes it very ill that those men, or the posterity of those men whom
he does use as instruments to punish sin in others, and to reform others, yet
should be guilty of the same sin themselves, or greater. Oh! (says the
Prophet) you may justly expect to have the Mountains to fall upon you, and the
Hills to cover you, for you are more wicked than in the days of Gibeah, though
I did use your forfathers to punish that great sin, yet you continue to be
viler and worse than they were that were punished by your forfathers. Oh my
brethren, God cannot endure to see that wickedness continued in men, that they
shall be made use of to punish in others: What shall we be used, or any in this
generation be used for to execute the anger of God, the displeasure of God upon
superstitious people, and shall we continue in the sin of Superstition? shall
we be used to cast out men's inventions, and shall we bring in men's inventions?
yea, shall we be used to punish Oppression and Tyranny, and Injustice, and
shall we continue in Oppression, Tyranny, and Injustice? Oh! this cries to
Heaven when it shall be said, Well, God stirred up you to make you an
instrument to cast out such Oppressing Courts, such Tyranny, and such and men
that were so cruel to godly people, you were used to cast out them, and you
come and succeed them in such Oppressions and Tyranny, and Injustice, and you
make my Saints cry to Heaven for the burdens that you lay upon them. Oh! this
would be very heavy. Take we heed that when God uses us, or our forfathers to
reform any evil, take heed that it be never said, that those evils continue in
their Children after them.

There has been much ado in our REFORMATION, Applied to these times
as there was much ado in the punishment of the sin of Gibeah; it cost much
blood to punish that sin; and so it has cost much blood to punish Oppressors,
to bring in Delinquents, to cast out those that have been burdens to the people
of God. Therefore it was worse in their posterity to continue in that sin that
had cost so much blood to have it punished. And so the more it costs to cast
out our oppressing Courts, etc. the more fearful will our sin be if we continue
in Oppression our selves. You complain sometimes of Ministers if they reprove
sins, Ministers.
and be guilty of the same sins they reprove you of, you account that very
evil, and so indeed it is. Magistrates
So it may be as well said of Magistrates, for them to punish sins, and yet
continue in them themselves.

There they stood, the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did
not overtake them.
There they stood] Either this must be meant of the men of Gibeah, Expos. 1.
that they stood, and the battle did not overtake the children of iniquity.

Or else according to others, it is to be interpreted of the men of Israel,
there the men of Israel stood, and their battle did not overtake the children
of iniquity.

If it be meant of the men of Gibeah, there they stood, then it notes their
stoutness, they would stand it out, There they stood. Though they had committed
such a horrible wickedness, and there was a desire but to have those that were
Delinquents to be broughts forth for punishment, yet they combine together and
would stand it out, they stood stoutly to maintain the wickedness that was
committed, especially after their first success, they fought, and in both the
days they slew forty thousand; now having the first day, this did hearten
them, yea, they had the day the second time, and that made them stout in their
way: Success will make men stand it out in their wickedness. God gives succes
sometimes in judgment.
God many times gives success on purpose to harden the hearts of men that they
may stand it out unto their ruin, for so it proved to the Benjamites.

Be not troubled at the success of Adversaries, Expos. 2.
God gives them success to harden their hearts, to stand it out that they may
be ruined at last.

Or, if you take it for the men of Israel, There they stood.

I find abundance of strange apprehensions of Interpreters and variety about
this, Variety of Interpreters.
and it would cost one a great deal of time, the opening of this Verse, to
compose but the several Interpretations that men have upon this Text, but I Will
only give you what I think may be the scope of the holy Ghost, or at least what
may be fairly hinted from the words.

The men of Israel stood.
That is, (according to some,) when they saw in their battle at Gibeah they did
not prevail at first, Expos. 1.
they saw their brethren stood out stoutly, and they lost so many thousand men,
upon this they were at a stand; There they stood, they knew not what in the
world to do, to think that so good a Cause, and a work that they had warrant
from God to do, yet they should have such ill success, there they stood.

Men had need be very well grounded in a good Cause when they meet with much
difficulty. I believe since this Cause that we have been about in England has
bin begun, Applied to England.
many through unbeleef and cowardice have bin at a stand, they stood and knew
not which way to go, Lord, is this the Cause of God? is this the Truth of God?
what, to have such ill success. Many are lost in their spirits only by success.

Or thus,

There they stood] that is, Expos. 2.
Though they were at a stand, and somewhat troubled, yet they persisted in
their work, notwithstanding any difficulties they met withal, they would not
fly off, but there they stood to it, they were resolved whatever ill success
they had, to go on in the work that God had called them to.

The battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake them.
When they did fight against the children of iniquity, yet this battle did not
overtake them [to wit, the Benjamites] not the first day, nor the second day,
but they were foiled twice: Though I know others do give other Interpretations
of this word, yet this seems to be more genuine.

But why does the Prophet bring it in here? The men of Israel (to whom Hosea
did prophecy) might say, You tell us that our sin is as in the days of
Gibeah, yea, but may we have the first day, and the second day, we hope we
shall do well enough. Expos.
Nay (says the Prophet) your sin is worse, you may not think that your case is
so good as the Benjamites, the Battle did not overtake them, but it shall
overtake you; and upon this ground the Prophet brings in this, that the Battle
did not overtake them, granting that which they would object, yet so as it
should not make for them, but to take away their hopes to escape. And thus you
have the meaning. The Observations are:

First, Obs. 1.
That the children of iniquity may escape once, and again: Though men be
children of iniquity, yet the Battle may not overtake them. It Is as famous a
story to take away the seeming success in an ill cause, and disappointment in a
good Cause, as any I know in all the Book of God: it did not overtake them at
first: Gods wrath follows many men in this world, and yet for a long time
overtakes them not, Ps. 78. 38
but God calls it back, Psalm. 78. 38. He being full of compassion, forgave
their iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his anger
away and did not stir up all his wrath. Zach. 1. 6.
But at length Gods wrath overtakes men. In Zach. 1. 6. Did not my words take
hold upon your fathers? I sent out my threatening words and you escaped a long
time, simile.
but at length my word caught hold of them. As the Dog that follows the Hare
barking a great while, but at length he overtakes it and ceases upon it and
tears it: So, did not my Word take hold upon your forefathers?

Calvin he gives another Interpretation of these words, Calvin in loc.
and some other Notes upon it, but I think that this is the main and Genuine
scope of them.

VER. 10.
It is in my desire that I should chastise them.
IT is in my desire.] God speaks here as one that has forborne a long time, and
now longs to satisfy himself.

Tremelius upon the place notes, pro (...) a A communi regula discedit,
fortasse voluit inusitatum inuere castigationis modum, insolita verbi forma,
Tremel.
that the form of the word for chastising here, it is unusual, because (says
he) perhaps God would express some more than ordinary way of punishing them.
And Luther renders it, (...) [In desiderio meo, and castigabo eos] Valde cupide
eos castigabo, So Luther. See Buxtorf. Lexic. Heh. in (...).
Exceeding desirously will I chastise them. It is in my will to chastise them.
Oh! blessed God, do not we find in thy Word that the Works of thy Justice are
said to be thy strange Works, and that thou art not willing to grieve the
children of men, that mercy pleases thee? but where do we ever find that
Justice was so pleasing to thee?

It Is true, though at first God seems to forbear the execution of Justice as a
thing he has no mind to, yet if sin be continued in, in a stubborn way, now
God desires it as a thing that there is nothing more pleasing to him. He is
burdened with men's sins, and desires to bring punishments upon them; as a man
under a great burden desires to be eased; Isa. 1.
In Isa. 1. Oh! I will ease me of mine Adversaries. And in Ezekiel. 5. 13. Ezekiel.
5. 13. 15.
you shall find there that God in threatening of wrath says, that he would do
thus, and thus, and he would be comforted: Prove. 1.
and in Prove. 1. he laughs at the destruction of wicked men, it is a thing that
rejoices him at the very heart. Rev. 14. 10. explicated.
And in the Revelations the wrath of God is called the wine of his wrath,
because he takes so much pleasure in the execution of it.

1. Gods Justice is God himself as well as any other Attribute. Reas. 1.


2. God he does delight to vindicate his honor, therefore the word that is for
Chastisement, it signifies sometimes, the vindication of a man's honor: the honor
of God is dear to him: Your peace and comforts may be dear to you; I, but my
honor is more dear to me.

3. In Chastisements God fulfils his Word, the Word of God would be slighted
and contemned else: Now this pleases me therefore to chastise them to fulfill my
Word upon them.

Oh! Use.
the fearful evil of sin that brings the creature into such a condition, as
Gods heart is delighted in every evil that sinful creatures suffer: this must
needs be a sad condition indeed, for the merciful God that delights so much in
doing of mercy, yet now to look upon a sinner under his wrath, and delights in
it, and loves it, and is well pleased to see the creature, even the work of his
own hands to be under his wrath. Hereafter there will be pure Justice, God will
delight in the destruction of sinners in Hell, in the execution of his Justice
upon them, he will there do nothing else but rejoice in it, there shall be
nothing but joy in Gods heart to see the execution of his Justice upon sinners
to all eternity, yea, and God will call all the Angels and Saints to come to
rejoice with him, Come ye Angels and Saints and rejoice with me, here is a
wretched sinner that was stubborn and rebellious against me in the time of his
life, and see how my Power has overtaken him, see the dreadfulness of my
wrath, come and rejoice with me for ever in this wrath of mine. This will be
the condition of sinners eternally in Hell.

Consider this, you that have a desire to sin, a mind to sin, to delight in
sin, Use of admonition to those in whose will it is to sin.
that are comforted in sin? Is it in your will to sin? It is Gods will to
punish: Can you rejoice in sin? God can rejoice in the execution of his wrath:
Are you resolute upon your sin? God can be resolute in the ways of his wrath.
When God chastises his Servants for their infirmities, he does it as a thing he
has no mind at all to, 1 Pet. 1. 6.
and therefore says the Apostle, If need be, we fall into many temptations,
and it is but seeming grievous: And himself is afflicted in all their
afflictions. David would have Joab go against Absalom, but says he, Use the
young man kindly, for my sake. So when God does chastise his Servants, he sends
an affliction, Go (says he) and scourge such an one, yea, but use him kindly
for my sake, for all that.

The bowels of David did yern toward Absalom, even when he sent Joab to fight
against him. So the bowels of God do yern toward his People when he sends
afflictions upon them. But when he comes to deal with wicked and ungodly men, I
will do it to purpose (says God) I will delight in it, I will be comforted in
it, it is my desire, etc.

The People shall be gathered against them.
That is, Expos. 1.
I will chastise them after this way, By gathering of people against them. The
Assyrians when they gathered against them, they did it merely out of their own
ends. Yea, but says God, I have an hand in it, I will gather them against
them. And certainly God had a mind to chastise them, when he would gather
enemies against them, the Assyrians it is like would never have dared to presume
to come against Israel if God had not had an hand in it: And certainly we could
never have imagined that it were possible that so many should be gathered
together in this Public Cause in this Land to maintain wickedness, and to
fight to make themselves slaves, but only that God had a mind to chastise
England.

But I find by others that it is read thus: Expos. 2. of the former part of the
Verse.


I will chastise them according to my mind, and so the word will bear it.

The Septuagint they read it, (...), 70. Iuxta desiderium meum corripiam eos.
vulg.
According to my desire.

So Oecolampadius upon the place, Oecolampad. in loc.
says, God prescribed a certain time to have this people come in and repent,
but says God, you shall not prescribe me how long I shall stay, but I will do it
when I please, both for the time of the chastisment, and for the degree of the
chastisement.

God when he has a mind to bring about a thing, Obs.
he will gather the people when his mind is come. I remember it is said in the
life of Pompey, a proud speech he was wont to have, when they asked him what
they should do when the enemies came against them? Oh (says he) let me but
stamp upon the ground of Italy and I shall have men enough; that was a proud
speech of him, but it is a true one in God, let him but stamp with his feet and
he can gather people enough together.

And then further, God will choose with what rod he will scurge us, according to
his mind, for the degree, and the kind too. Many afflictions when they are upon
us we mourn and repine, and these discontented expressions comes from us, Oh! I
could bear any thing but that.

But is it fit for thee to choose thine own rod? God might have said also, I had
rather you had committed some other sin. It may be, because that is the
affliction that is most cross to thy spirit, therefore God will have it, God sees
that that is more for his honor, and perhaps for thy good, because it is the
crossest affliction that God could find out, therefore thou have that
affliction that God might strike thee in the master-vain. We may not choose our
sin and our rod too.
Therefore let us learn to submit to the will of God. Is it fit that thou
should choose thy sin and thy rod too? No, stay there; If thou will choose thy
sin, God will have liberty to choose thy rod.

When they shall bind themselves in their two furrows.
These words have very great obscurity in the first view of them, The Text very
difficult.
and I find a mighty deal of puzling among Interpreters about them. The
difficulty is in the word that is here translated Furrows, (...) In vincire eos
in duobus aut succis, aut pecatis, aut occulis, aut fontibus scribetur per
(...) legitur a masorethis per (...)
the same letters of the word, take away the points of the Hebrew, and they may
be for these two sins, or their two eyes, there is a little difference in the
Vau and the Jod which are much like one another. And in all these three ways
according to to the signification of the word, Sulci (...) iniquitates (...)
oculi (...) fontes (...)
Either Furrows, Sins, or Eyes, the sense may go reasonable well. As thus:

First, For Sins. And they shall bind themselves. You may turn it as well of
Gods Threatening what he would do; Vid. Buxtori^. Lexicon Heb. in (...) Arias
Montanus In corripere eos propter duas iniquitatis.
for it is, bind them, or, in binding them, so it is translated by others, in
binding them for their two sins: I will bind them for their two sins, so I find
Arias Montanus has it, Bind them for their two sins.

And I find the Septuagint translate it so too, (...), 70.
Chastise them for their two sins, for so it may be, Chastise as well as Bind,
for the words are very near together that signifies either binding, Vincire
(...) Catigare (...) But in some Moods and Tenses they are hardly differenced.
Propter geminum peccatum ipsorum. Luther.
or chastising.

I will chastise them for their two sins: When he binds them he will chastise
them. And so I find that Luther has it, for he doubles these.

And then they think that it has reference to the two Qui erant ut (...) oculi
eoru^ seu amasij. Buxtor^ in (...)
Calves of Dan and Bethel: Or the two Sins, of Bodily and Spiritual Adultery:
Or otherwise it has the same sense with that in Jer. 2* 13. My people have
committed two sins: They have forsaken me the fountain of Living Waters, Ier.
2. 13. Hier. in loc. See Diod. in loc.
and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water.

Or if you will have it in the second place, according as it is in your books,
Expos. 2.
They shall bind themselves in their two furrows, then the meaning of it is
this, That I will bring their Enemies upon them, and they shall yoke them like
Oxen that are yoked to plow, they shall bring them into servitude, and into
bondage, they shall make them plow in their two furrows, Polanus in loc.
(double work.) So Polanus, because they shall put double work upon them and
make them work in a servile way. And the rather do I think this is the meaning
of it, because the holy Ghost does follow the metaphor of it, An Heifer, as it
follows;

And Ephraim is as an Heifer that is taught and loves to tread out the Corn.
And so take it in the third way, Expos. 3. (...)
the word that signifies an eye, only altering the letter Vau for Jod, and then
this is the sense; they shall yoke them as the Oxen are yoked eye to eye. They
yoke the Oxen even and set eye to eye; so the enemies shall come and yoke them
so that they shall be like beasts to do their work, and this shall be the
condition of Ephraim that has this fair neck. I find others that take this;

They shall bind themselves in their two furrows.
That is, Expos. 4. (Calvin]
They shall Covenant together. When the enemy comes upon them then they shall
Covenant together and join together, as Oxen that are yoked together, and Judah
and Israel shall join together, and they shall be in their furrows, As Engl.
and Scotl. in the late war.
in their trenches, as in reference to us: that when the people are gathered
together, England and Scotland shall bind themselves together, and lie together
in their several Trenches. So I find others take it.

But rather from the chief and genuine scope, I suppose the meaning is this,
That they shall be brought into miserable bondage, they shall be like Oxen: and
so says one Interpreter upon the place, When you see Oxen yoked together then
be put in mind of the yoke of the enemies; you live daintily and bravely now,
but when God shall let out the enemies upon you, you shall serve as slaves,
yea, as beasts.

VER. 11.
And Ephraim is as an Heifer that is taught and loves to tread out the Corn:
but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride: Judah shall
plow, Jacob shall break his clods.
IN the 2. verse you heard much of the divisions of Ephraim, and of the ten
Tribes; but in the latter end of the 10. verse you heard how God would join
them together: But how should they be joined? it should be in their bondage,
they should be bound together in their furrows: now though it be in your books,
They shall bind themselves, which has likewise a sense which we spoke to then,
yet you may as well read the words, They shall bind them together, and so
carry the sense, That they should be bound in their furrows, like Oxen in the
Plough, there they should be yoked; they would not come in together under Gods
yoke, but they shall come intogether under the yoke of the Adversaries: and
that I think is the principal scope of the words, They shall bind them in their
two furrows.

They that were so divided in their prosperity, when they come into bondage
there they shall by their enemies be bound together. Obs.
It was said of Ridly and Hooper, Hooper and Ridley
they could not agree together till they were in Prison, and then they could
agree together. And so when we were heretofore in our bondage we could agree
better together than now, Applied to professors now.
Oh! it were just with God to bring us again under the bondage of our enemies,
and bind us in our furrows together.

But Ephraim thought her self far from this. No, Ephraim is not for plowing
work, Ephraim loves to tread out the Corn, Expos.
but not to plow. They were wont in those times instead of threshing out the
seed from the chaff, to have beasts to tread out the seed, or to draw
instruments whereby the seed was separated from the husk. Now it was the
Command of God, that while he was treading out the Corn that they should not
muzzel the mouth of the Ox. Deuteronomy. 25. 4.


First, There was no yoke upon them while they were treading out the Corn.

And secondly, then they were not to be muzzel'd but to feed all the while as
they pleased, while they were treading out the Corn; this by the Command of
God. Now this was a very easy work for them to be without yoke, to run up and
down in the Corn and so they could feed themselves fat; They had enough to feed
on, certain food, and present food, whereas those Heifers that went to plow
were fain to be abroad in the storms and cold and wind, and work all day long,
and it may be not have a bit of meat till night, and this was a hard work, and
Ephraim did not love that work; and it seems to have reference to some of the
ten Tribes who would stay in their Country, and worship at Dan and Bethel,
Applied to the ten Tribes.
and would not go to Jerusalem, Oh! that was hard, and it was better for them
to stay in the Land where they might enjoy their possessions, their shops,
their tradings, their friends, that was easy, but for them to go to Jerusalem
that might cost them their estates, it would raise an opposition against them,
and they must leave all and go for the Worship of God, to worship him according
to his own way; this was a plowing-work in respect of the other. Now Ephraim,
those that live among the ten Tribes, they loved no such hard work as that was.
From whence there are many excellent points observable. As,

The first, Obs. 1.
It Is a sign of a carnal heart for to be set upon easy work in Gods service,
and to avoid any work that God calls to because it is difficult. [Ephraim loves
to tread out the Corn.] It Is a dangerous thing to desire more easy in Gods
Work than God would have us.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
Those services that bring present contentment, and present comfort, that there
is present encouragement goes along with, even such as are carnal and
Hypocrites can be content withal; for when they tread out the Corn, there was
present supply. So it is with men, when they can have present supply in
maintenance.

I remember it is a speech of a learned man, even upon this very Scripture,
says he, Where men see not present gain coming in, they despise Christ there.
It Is a speech of Iernovius, Vbi non vident quaestu^, rident Christum, ubi datur
ut edant, adduci possunt ut credant, Ternov. in loc.
Where they may have to eat for the present, there they may be easily brought
to believe such a way of service and worship that is countenanced, by the State
for the present, Numb. 7. 9. 2 Samuel 6. God allowed no Cart to the children of
Kohath to carry the Ark, and that was their sin in putting it upon one, 1 Samuel
6. And where men may enjoy certain comings in whether they work or no, or
whether they work negligently or no, there is a great temptation lies in this;
there is not such a temptation lies in a man's enjoying encouragement if it be
upon uncertainties, and that he shall have it no longer than he does labor, and
labor to purpose; but when men shall have their estates coming in in a certain
way though they labor by themselves, or other, or though negligently, or
industriously, here is a great temptation in this.

And then further; Obs. 3.
For it is a sign of a carnal heart, only to mind things presently, to labor
for an accommodation to themselves for the present. A generous spirit will
labor for the posterity that is to come; All our life we should plow in hope.
If none should plow, how would there be Corn to tread out? We must be willing
to plow though we have not present food, though we should have nothing till
night, yea, though we should have nothing till the night of death, yea, in all
our lives we should be willing to plow in hope. Ephraim loved not that work.
That Is a generous spirit that is willing to endure difficulty here though he
finds no present comings in, though it be for afterward.

And it may be applied it to soul-work, In Duties we should persevere thouh
there be no present comfort*
in our seeking to God: Many men and women they are content to pray, and follow
God and his Ordinances so long as they may have present comfort, but if that
fails they have no heart to the duty. Now we should be willing to plow, that
is, to endure difficulty though we have nothing coming in.

This is that which caused so many to perish in the world, they must have that
which is present content; whereas the Saints of God are willing to trust God
though they have nothing in this world, to trust him to have their wages in the
world to come. This ^1th Verse of special use.
It Is a Scripture of very excellent use unto us. It follows.

But I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride.
But I passed over upon her fair neck:

By her easy work in treading out the Corn, and not having the yoke upon her
neck to plow, she became to be very delicate, her skin was white and tender,
Her fair neck: The Goodness of her Neck, (...)
so it is in the Hebrew, or her goodly white Skin, delicate and tender she was.
The meaning of it is, Expos.
by her fair Neck, is the beauty of her prosperity; and so the delicacy of her
Neck, through her prosperity, nothing must trouble her, let works that are
troublesome and hard let others come to them if they will, But for her part she
was tender and delicate and must endure no burdens at all, nor no difficulty at
all.

First, Her fair Neck.

Many are proud of their fair Necks and Skins, Obs.
so proud as they grow extreme wanton by reason of it, The evil of Bare necks
and breasts*
they must lay open therefore their fair necks that others may see them, see
how white they are, Black Patches*
what fair Skins they have, and put black Patches likewise to set out their
beauty and the whiteness of their fair Skins, and if that will not serve, even
laying over a paint to make it fair if it be not otherwise so; And painted
faces.
nothing but Ease, and Delicacy, and pleasure is for them, as if they came into
the world for no other end but to live bravely and be looked upon, as if
mankind and all creatures must work and suffer to provide for these nice and
delicate wantons, who yet are of no use at all in the world, certainly, God
never gave any great estates in the world for no other use but only to be brave
withal, and keep their Skin white. Whatsoever estates men and women have, Great
Estates ill used.
yet except they endeavor to be useful in the world in a proportionable way
unto those estates that they have they can have little true comfort of what
they do enjoy, the comfort of the lives of rational creatures certainly it is
not in a fair Skin, in a white Skin, their comfort is in being useful in the
places where God has set them, Every one bound to labor.
their good consists in that. Man is born to labor, and there must be labor one
way or other, every one is bound to labor; Fair Skins foul Souls oftimes.
these fair white Skins, and fair Necks, Oh! what foul souls many of them have,
their beauty is but Skin-deep. Oh! filthy and abominable in the eyes of God,
and in the eyes of those that know the corruptions of their hearts. How would
these fair necks be able to bear Iron chains for Christ? to be naild to the
stake, to have such a Neckkercher put upon them as Alice Driver had? Alice
Drivers Neckkercher.
You have it in the story of the Book of Martyrs, when they put the chain about
her neck to nail her to the stake, Act. and Monum.
she gloried in it, and blessed God for it: I but this Alice Driver was wont to
plow, (for so she says a little before in the story) her father did bring her
up to plow, Hard breeding fittest for Christian suffering.
she was not brought up so delicately as others were, and she could endure an
iron chain upon her neck for Christ. It follows:

But I passed over upon her fair Neck.
Some carry the words as expressing Gods indulgence, Expos. 1.
as if he was content to let Ephraim to prosper and thrive in their way, and
not to bring any hard bondage upon them, but it is more like the other way that
I find others to go. i.e.

I came upon her fair neck, and made the yoke to pass over.

So Hierom upon the place, says when it is spoken of God (this Phrase, to pass
over) Quando a Deo dicetur semper plagas and adversa significat.
It Is not only meant here in a way of threatening, but it is always so meant in
Scripture, in a way of threatening of Gods passing over, (...)
and it may very well be here a threatening expression following the similitude,
for God is in a way of Allegory expressing himself after the manner of
Husbandry, as when he threatens that they shall be yoked.

And then Ephraim is compared to a Heifer that is taught, as if he should say,
he would not willingly work. From whence the Note is,

That, Obs.
God looks upon dainty, tender, delicate people that mind nothing but their
ease and delicacie with INDIGNATION. What! Ephraim must be so tender and
delicate that nothing must come upon her neck! I Will make the yoke to come upon
it (says God.) When people through their delicacy they must live in the world
and altogether be tended, and all things must be serviceable to them, and they
of no use at all, God cannot bear it. And as for the eminency of any of you,
either in estates, or honors in the world above others, it ought not to be the
cause of envy, for it is God that puts the difference between one and the
other; we do not envy that some should go finer than others, but this is that
which neither God nor man can endure, That men and women should have so much in
the world, and yet be so little useful to the world, A caution.
should be through their delicacy as if they were born for nothing else but
like Babies to play withal. Says God, I Will make the yoke to pass over them.
But now, there are other manner of works, than servile works, though you do not
put your hands to servile labor; But then you through your delicacy, if you
meet with any hard work, will do nothing for God, the Lord looks upon such
dispositions as sinful, and with Indignation, and God has his time to bring
them to hardness, Examples in our time of the truth of the text.
as he has done to many. How many delicate and fair necks that could not
endure any difficulty has God brought the yoke upon in these days, that were
so nice and tender, and complaining of every little difficulty in any work that
God would have them to do? God has made the yoke to pass over there heads, and
to lie heavy upon their necks; God threatens this to the Daughters of Babylon,
to the Antichristian party especially, Isa. 47. 1. 2*
in Isa. 47. 1, 2. Come down, and sit in the dust, O Virgin, Daughter of
Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no Throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans; for
thou shall no more be called, Tender, and Delicate. Take the Millstones and
grind meal; uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, Verse. 3.
pass over the rivers. And then in the 3. verse. Thy nakedness shall be
uncovered, yea thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not
meet thee as a man. That which you cannot endure so much as to hear of now,
Tender ears.
(your very ears are so delicate, as well as your necks) that I Will bring upon
you. Christ's yoke easier than the yoke of the Enemy*
Oh my Brethren! how much better is it to be willing to endure hardships for
God, than to be brought to hardships by our Adversaries? And rather to put our
necks under the yoke of Jesus Christ, than to have God put our necks under the
yoke of his wrath and displeasure. But God has his time to bring upon them
hard things, and therefore though God spares you for your bodies, that you need
not put your bodies to that servileness that others do; Ladies-work.
yet be so much the more willing to do service for God otherwise, venture your
selves among your kindred, that is the work that God calls Ladies to do: You
meet with carnal friends that are honorable and of great rank in the world, now
for one to appear in the midst of them for the Cause of God, this is as hard a
work as to labor with ones hands, and they may do a great deal more service by
such work as this, to speak for those that are Godly. When you come in company
that is carnal, be willing to put forth your selves to endure hardships in that
way that God calls thee to, and God accepts of it; but if thou through the
delicacy and niceness of thy spirit, Tender spirits.
thy spirit comes to be as delicate as thy skin is, and thou must not displease
any, nor suffer any thing for God, it is just with God to bring thee to suffer
in spite of thy heart. But it follows;

I Will make Ephraim to ride.
Still take this in a way of threatening; in Scripture it is applied both to a
way of Mercy and Judgment, Isa. 58. 14.
in Isa. 58. 14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth. And I find it in a way of
Judgment, Job, 30. 21, 22.
in Job, 30. 21, 22. With thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against me,
thou liftest me up to the wind, thou causest me to Ride upon it, and dissolvest
my substance. And so there might be shown other Scriptures where this
expression is in a way of Judgment, and so it is thought by Interpreters that it
has reference to the speedy captivity of the ten Tribes that they shall be
carried out of their own Country. As if God should say, by his ease, and by his
much feeding, in treading out the Corn he is grown so fat and lusty that
there is no ruling of him; yea, but says God, Expos.
I will ride him: though he kicks and spurns and is so unruly with his fat
feeding, yet I Will put such a Curb into his mouth, as I Will order him and rule
him according as I please. Vide Pagnin, Thesaur. Majo^. in (...) and*
He is so fierce; for so I find that the word in the Hebrew that is for
fierceness, tumultuousness, and insolency, it is by diverse taken for the word
that signifies, to be at Peace, because that Peace, and Ease, and Rest makes
the hearts of men and women insolent. It was so with Ephraim, just like a
pampered horse that is kept at full feeding, none can ride him; I but, I Will
cause him to ride, says God.

God has ways to curb men and women that through their prosperity are
delicate and unruly, Obs.
though they may champ upon the bit, and foam at the mouth, and stamp again,
yet God will rule them; I Will cause Ephraim to ride.

And Judah shall plow.
That is, Expos.
Judah shall take pains and go through many difficulties in the ways of my
Worship, and shall suffer much while Ephraim lives delicately for a long time,
yet Judah suffered more difficulty, Judah suffered much more difficulty and
hardship than the ten Tribes did. And I think that this Scripture has
reference to those two Scriptures that we find, 2 King. 18. 3-9. with 2 Chapter 28.
6.
the first is in 2 King. 18. from ver. 3. to ver. 9. and the other Scripture is
in 2 Chronicles. 28. 6. Judah shall plow and be kept in a great deal of hardship in
that time when Ephraim was so frolic as he was. In 2 King. 18. you shall find
the great Reformation that Hezekiah made in the Worship of God in Judah, and
Jerusalem: And then for his suffering that you have in 2 Chronicles. 28. 6. and 2
King. 14. 13. 2 Chr. 28. 6. a strange Scripture.
In 2 Chronicles. 28. 6. it is said, That Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an
hundred and twenty thousand in one day, which were all valiant men. It Is a very
strange Scripture, Israel, the ten Tribes they were worse than Judah: Israel
forsook the true Worship of God; Judah kept themselves to the true Worship; and
yet God let Israel so prosper that they did prevail against Judah and the Tribe
of Benjamin, so as to slay in one day an hundred and twenty thousand valiant
men. Oh! what crying and shreeking was there in the Country then, that of two
Tribes an hundred and twenty thousand valiant men should be slain in one day.
We think it is a dreadful battle to have three thousand slain in the Field, but
here is a battle of an hundred and twenty thousand slain in one day, and that of
two Tribes. And in 2 King. 14. 13. Hoshea King of Israel took Amaziah King of
Judah, the son of Jehoash, son the of Ahaziah at Bethshemesh, and came to
Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem etc. Here they were put to a
great deal of trouble even by Ephraim; Judah and Benjamin those two Trib^ that
kept to the Worship of God were to put a great deal of afflictions by Ephraim
(the ten Tribes) that did forsake the Worship of God; in the forenamed place, 2
King. 18. there you may see how these reformed, and yet they suffered much
difficulty. Strange is the Counsels of God concerning men.

For the first, Expos. 1.
That Judah is said to plow. That is, They shall endure a great deal of trouble
in the reforming what is amiss among them. From whence our Note is this:

That it is an honor for men to labor and go through difficulties for God while
others are laboring for taking their ease: Obs. 1.
Be not troubled that you see other people can take liberty to themselves to
provide for their estates and comings in, Use for workers.
and to live bravely, Does God give you an heart in the mean time to be willing
to go through hard work for God? Envy not at them, thou art in the better
condition, thou art plowing for God; while they are providing for their own
ease, thou art doing God service, and they are only providing for themselves,
Oh! thou art far the happier man, the happier woman.

And then in the second place, Expos. 2.
Take the plowing for the hard things they suffered for God, as well as the hard
things they did for God. Then the Note of Observation is this:

Let no men boast they live more at ease than others. Obs. 2.
Others suffer more hardship than thou; do not think that God loves thee more
than others: God loved Judah at this time more than Ephraim, and yet Ephraim
lived bravely, and prevailed over Judah, and Judah was brought under in such a
manner as this; Judah was Gods true Church, and Israel did apostatize from God,
and yet one had more outward prosperity than the other. Us. for the afflicted.
Thus many times those upon whom Gods heart is more set, they suffer hard
afflictions: And those that Gods heart is not so much upon, they enjoy their
prosperity.

Oh! The sufferings in the West.
I beseech you consider of this point; for at this day, how many of our
Brethren in the Western parts, Oh! the Plowers have plowed deep furrows upon
their backs, while we have been here (as it were) treading out the Corn; let
not us think that God loves us more than them, they may be more dear to God
than we; Judah was far more dear to God than Israel, and yet Israel must live
jocundly and bravely.

Oh! A Consideration for men of quality.
consider of this you that are of greater rank, all your life is treading out
the Corn, you see your poor neighbors endure much hardship, Oh think not that
you are higher in Gods thoughts than they, they may be more dear to God than
you, and yet they may be put to difficulties, and you may live bravely all your
lives.

But that that may seem to weaken this Note, Object. against the Observatio^
Answered.
is only this: viz. They shall plow. But the Hebrews do ordinarily make use of
the Tenses, the Future and the Preter promiscuously; but if you put it to the
Future, that they shall plow hereafter, they interpret it to signify the
Captivity of Judah, that they shall be carried into Captivity, and so be brought
under by the Babylonians. Yea, but,

Jacob shall break his clods.
By Jacob, we must understand the ten Tribes. As if God should say here, That
Judah shall be put to some difficulties, Expos. 1. (...).
yet Jacob, the ten Tribes must be put to more; Judah shall be carried into
Captivity; yea, but Jacob shall break the clods. Though Judah shall plow, yet
the breaking the clods is worse than the plowing, Occabit ei Jacob. 70.
for that is more servil, For the Work-Master he is the chief, he goes on in
plowing, but it is his Servant or Boy he may set to break the clods after him.
So, though Judah shall be brought to difficulties, yet Jacob shall be put to
more difficulties; for the Captivity of Judah was great, yet it was not so
great as Jacobs.

Or others thus:

Judah shall plow, Expos. 2.
and Jacob shall break her clods.

That is, [Judahs clods] The expression we have here, with the reference it
has to Judah, seems to carry this with it, That there shall be a time, though
now you that are the ten Tribes, you are so delicate and proud above Judah,
Judah is lower than you, and you despise them, yet time shall come that you
shall be glad to join with Judah, and be as a servant to Judah, to break her
clods, when God shall restore his people again; Judah shall return from his
captivity and shall be taking pains in the Service of God; and it shall be well
for you if you can but come and be as their servant.

Those that do forsake the true Worship of God, Obs.
though God may have mercy upon them afterward to join them with his People,
yet it is well if they may come to be in the meanest condition among Gods
People, they should be willing to submit unto it; those that have dishonored
God and shamed themselves in times of trial, to forsake the Truths of God, it is
mercy that ever God will bring them to join with his Church again; But if he
does bring them to join with his Church they should think it a great mercy and
be willing to be in the meanest condition, what must those men think to be
Masters and Lords that have forsaken God and his Truth and have been very false
for their own ends, to save themselves and states in time of trial, shall they
think in times of Reformation to bear all before them? Oh! it is mercy if they
may be but admitted to break the clods, to join with those Servants of God that
have been faithful and willing to serve him through difficulties. It follows.

VER. 12.
Sow to your selves in Righteousness, reap in Mercy.
THE holy Ghost still goes on in this Allegory of Husbandry, continuing the
metaphor that he had in the Threatening, when he comes to exhortation. In the
midst of his threats he falls to exhorting.

Though the sins of a people be great, Obs.
and Judgments near, yet who knows what an exhortation may do? who knows what
an exhortation may do to the worst people in the world? Oh! there were many
things spoken concerning Israel that one would have thought it should have
discouraged the Prophe to meddle with Exhortation. But God would have him yet
exhort, one cannot tell what an Exhortation may do, in the most desperate
hardness of men's hearts, and pride and stoutness of men's spirits, therefore the
Prophet exhorts them, as if he should say, Well, if you would not plow, if you
would not come under the yoke and be put into the furrows as you were threatened
before, why then, sow to your selves, Oh! be willing to break up the fallow
ground of your hearts, and sow to your selves in Righteousness, and so you
shall reap in Mercy.

Sow in Righteousness, and reap in Mercy.
I find some of the Ancients they interpret this somewhat wildly. The
Exposition of Hierom too much on the left hand, Seminent in justitia i.e. in
lege: metant in misericordia; id est, in gratia Evangelij.


Sow in Righteousness: that is, (says Hierom upon the place) Sow in the Law,
in obedience to the Law, and reap in the Grace of the Gospel; that is his
Interpretation; you shall sow in the works of the Law, and reap in the Gospel.
This is far fetched.

I find Luther upon the place, as Hierom goes somewhat too legal, (so Luther)
because his heart was much in the Gospel; and he brings all Scriptures to the
uttermost he can for expressing the Grace of the Gospel, he goes somewhat at
the furthest the other way:

Sow in Righteousness: what is the seeds of Righteousness? that is, Luther too
much on the right.
says he, The Doctrine of the Gospel tendering the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ: the attending unto this Doctrine of the Gospel, and embracing this,
that there is Righteousness in Jesus Christ alone, this is sowing in
Righteousness: for (says he) what other Righteousness is there but this? When
Reason would come to the highest degree of Righteousness, what is it that it
does, only this, to conclude Righteousness to be, to depart from evil, and do
things that are good, but what Righteousness is this? But the Scripture
Righteousness is this: for a man to know that he has no good at all in
himself, that all his evil is pardoned in Jesus Christ, this is the
Righteousness of the Gospel, and this is the seed, the seed of all good works:
I name this, though I can hardly think that this is the scope of the Prophet at
this time, yet there is a very good meditation from this which I see that
useful man in the Church of God [Luther] goes on in, says he, What madness and
blindness in the Adversary is there, that will urge people to sow, and yet they
do reject and cast off this seed that they should sow? That is the Doctrine of
the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ by faith, why says he, in all
Pulpits there is crying out to men for good works, that they would sow in
Righteousness, but (says he) where have they their seed? The thing certainly
is an excellent truth that he has upon the place: how vain is it for men to be
taught to sow good works till they have got the seed? And the seed of all good
works is, The Righteousness that we have by Jesus Christ; and therefore he
falls a rebuking those that shall blame the Doctrine of the Gospel as the means
of licentiousness, says he, there is a great many when we preach of the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, think that we preach licentiousness, and that
men may live as they list, it is quite contrary, when we preach the
Righteousness of Jesu Christ, we preach the seed of all good works, and those
that have this seed, good works will come out of them. But says he further,
They would have Righteousness, but what? they slight the Righteousness of God
making, the Righteousness of his Son, but they must have Righteousness of their
own to tender up to God and then when they come to good works they will slight
Gods good works, and they will be giving to God of their good works, the world
does neglect those as light things, that is, the works of mercy, to receive the
Saints etc. No, but they will have other brave works, to build Churches, and
Temples, and Monastries, and to lavish out gold about them, and they are the
chief good works: they will not come to do the work as it were of a Servant,
but rather the work of a Benefactor to God, for in relieving thy poor brother
when none but thy self and God knows it thou do the work of a servant then,
but to build brave Temples, and Monastries, and lavish out Gold upon them; this
is for you to be a Benefactor to God. But thus much for his speech.

Sow in Righteousness.
We know that the Prophet, The genuine meaning.
though he would lead the People to Christ, yet his preaching was most in a
Legal way, Sow Righteousness: that is, Go on in the works of Righteousness,
those works that are right, and just, and equal, such as you may give a good
account of them before God and man; The Text paraphrased.
as if he should say, Do not you think to put me off merely with outward
services, with offering sacrifices, and with this kind of pompous worship, in
this superstitious way, I will never accept of these things; but let me have
Righteousness, let there be the works of Righteousness, according to the Rules
of Righteousness, so work. And the Jews if they did but perform the the
external works of Righteousness, they might have external Mercies, if so be
there were a proportion between one work and another. If indeed they did some
works of Righteousness, and not the other, then they could not expect mercy
from God; but though there were no saving Grace in them, yet if they did but
perform external works of Righteousness, and there was a proportion between one
and another; there does seem to be an external Covenant that they were under
for outward Mercies that they should have for their outward Righteousness;
Caution.
Not but that I think for Heaven there they must have true Grace and Godliness,
as the Saints must have now; but external Mercies were more annexed to external
Duties than now among us.

You will say, Quest.
We have external Promises too.

Yea, Answ,
but that is made to Godliness in Christ Jesus.

Now from the words we may note,

First, That the Actions of men they are Seeds; such seeds as will certainly
come up: Obs. 1.
other seeds may die in the ground and rot and never come up; but there is
never an Action that thou performest, but it will come up one way or other, it
will come up to something.

And secondly, Obs. 2.
It will come up in the same kind; the seeds of Tares will not come up to
Wheat; but it will be a Tare; and so the Wheat a Wheat: all our actions will
come up in the same kind. Men neglect their actions, and think that when they
have done, it is over, they forget what they did yesterday or the day before;
but though you may forget it, yet it will come up in the same kind, though you
think not of it: Pliny.
I remember Pliny reports of some parts in Africa, that when they sow their
seeds, they go away and never look after it for many months together: So ^t is
in many men they sow but they never mind what they have done, and quite forget
what they have done till they must come to reap. But certainly thy actions
there they lie and will grow up to something.

Thirdly, Obs. 3.
The seed lies in the ground rotting a while, but afterward comes up: so it is
in our actions, they seem as if they were quite forgotten, but they will come
up, yea, and good actions they seem as if they were wholly lost many times;
well, though the seed does rot, rot in the ground for a time, yet it will come
up afterward.

Fourthly, Obs. 4.
The seed when it is sown it comes up through the blessing of God upon it; it is
no endeavor of the Husbandman can make the seed come up, but he must leave it
to the blessing of God. So the seeds of our Actions must be left to God, Gods
Justice will make the seeds of the wicked come up, and his goodness and mercy
will make the seeds of the Saints to come up; leave thy actions to the blessing
of God.

Fifthly, Obs. 5.
The better the seed, is for the most part the longer it lies under ground.
When you sow Wheat and Rye you sow it at this Preached in October.
time of the year, but when you sow Barley and Oats you sow them in the Spring
time, but that endures not frost and snow as the Wheat does. And so the best of
our actions lies longest under ground.

The Minister of God they are Sowers of the Seed of the Word; Obs. 6.
and the Hearers they should be Sowers too. The Ministers sows the Word in thy
ears, and then thou should take it from thence and sow it in thy heart, thy
life and conversation.

If our actions be seeds that we sow, Obs. 7.
then large opportunities of doing much service for God should be our riches:
like a large field, that is sown with good grain, if thou have a heart to
improve those opportunities.

Oh! Use.
that we would but consider of this, That when the Lord gives to men and women
a large opportunity for service, God lets them out so much Land, Go (says God)
you must husband so much Land, and sow it for mine advantage: Many of you that
are poor people you have not a foot of Land in the world, and you think that
those that are Landed-men they are happy men; Does God give you opportunity of
service to honor him? Oh! thou have got a great deal of Land, the meanest of
you that have opportunities of Service, God lets you out his Land, you have
abundance of Land and Ground that God gives to you, and a man should account
himself rich according to the opportunity of his Service: As men in the Country
account themselves rich according to the Land that they have to plow and sow,
Levit. 27. 16.
in Levit. 27. 16. If a man shall sanctify unto the Lord some part of a field
of his possession, then thy estemation shall be according to the seed thereof.
The meaning is, That if a man will sanctify a piece of Land to God, well, what
is this Land worth? Why (says the holy Ghost) you shall prize it according to
the seed thereof, if it be a great piece of Land, yet if it be not fit to bear
so much seed you must account it worth but little, but if it be a less piece of
Land yet if it be fit to receive so much seed, then it is worth so much, thou
shall prize it according to the seed thereof: so the opportunities that are fit
to receive much seed, Applied.
Oh! those opportunities should be rich opportunities; and we should account
the price of our lives to be according to the seed thereof: Thou live such a
year, what is thy life worth? it is according to the seed thereof. And so for
these four or five last years, Oh! what opportunities have we had for service
for God? Now they are to be prized according to the seed thereof, that is, as
we might do service and work in these years. Then certainly if we must make the
estimation of our lives according to the advantage of service that we might do
for God, then these last five years we may reckon for fifty. It Is a great
blessing to have a good seed time; the Lord has blessed us with this good
seed-time. Oh now, what a folly were it for a man out of base penuriousness to
save his seed, that he will not sow his ground, because he is loath to venture
it, or through love of his ease he is loath to go abroad, it is somewhat cold,
and he will keep by the fire side, and will not go abroad to sow his seed. Oh!
thus it is with us, we through our base unbelief, we will venture nothing for
God, we are loath to put our selves upon any difficulty, Oh this is our folly.

Well, Obs. 8.
It is not every seed will serve the turn. Ps. 126. 6.
Be sowers, but sow in Righteousness, let it be Righteousness, let it be
precious seed, In Psalm, 126. 6. They shall bear precious seed with them: Oh!
there is many that sow venomous seed, that will bring forth poysonful fruit, all
their days they have been sowing nothing but seed of unrighteousness, yea,
this field that God has given to us, of opportunity of service for him, What
have many done? what have they sown? they have sown salt in it: that is, They
have sown their Passions, they have sown Contention, and they have sown the
seeds of Discord, for that has been the cause that our field that we have had,
those opportunities that we have enjoyed for God has bin so barren, there has
been so much salt, the salt spirits of men and women have been so manifested in
their Passion and Frowardness, and their Contentions one against another, that
it has made us barren: Prove. 6. 14. 19.
In Prove. 6. 14. Frowardness is in his heart; he devises mischief continually,
he sows discord. And verse. 19. it is made one of the things that the Soul of
God does hate, That a man should sow Discord. Chap. 16. 28.
And so in Prove. 16. 28. Froward men sow strife. Oh! how many are there amongst
us that go from one place to another, and tell you such a tale, and such a
report, and sow nothing but strife and discord? Oh! it is that that the Lord
hates. What! in such a time as this is to sow Discord! there could never have
been a time wherein the sowing of Discord could have been so abominable as in
such a time as this is; This time most unfit to sow the tares of discord.
Oh! let men take heed of sowing Discord; God calls for the seed of
Righteousness.

And reap in Mercy.
For the opening of this, Expos. 1.
I find many carry it, Mercy to men: that is, Do you sow the seeds of
Righteousness, and let the fruits of Mercy be abundant amongst you. But to
carry it according to that that is more like to be the scope of the holy Ghost.

By Mercy, Expos. 2.
we are to understand, the Mercy of God. Now there is Two things that is to be
observed in this phrase.

First, Opened.
That it is in the Imparative Mood, Reap in Mercy, not, Ye shall reap in Mercy.

Secondly, (...) ad os misericordiae.
In the Original it is, The Mouth of Mercy.

Now for the opening of the words according to these phrases.

For the First, That it is in the Imparative Mood, Reap in Mercy; not, Ye shall
reap in Mercy.

This signifies these two things.

1. The certainty of the Mercy they shall have. And

2. The readiness of the mercy, that it is ready at hand for them to possess;
just as if one should say to you in your shops, Let me have this commodity and
here take your money, that is, here is your money ready and certain.

And then, from the other word, In the mouth of Mercy.

Now if the Translators had translated it thus, Sow in Righteousness, and reap
in the mouth of Mercy, it would have been obscure: but those that understand
the Hebrew tongue, know the meaning of this Phrase to be nothing but thus much.
The mouth of a thing is used for the proportion and measure of a thing, Levit.
27. 16.
you shall have it thus in Lev. 27. 16. (the same Scripture that I quoted
before for another purpose) Thy estimation shall be according to the seed
thereof. Now the word in the Hebrew is, The estimation shall be to the mouth of
the seed, that is, according to the proportion of the seed so shall the
estimation be. And so you have it in Exodus 16. 16. Gather every man according
to what he shall eat. Exodus 16. 16.
It is the same here, To the mouth of every man, in a proportion according to
what is fit for every man.

You shall sow in Righteousness.
Thus, Sow in Righteousness, it is a poor seed that we shall sow: now God does
not say, you shall reap in Righteousness, but in Mercy, from the mouth of
Mercy. You take out of the mouth of the sack, and sow, but your poor proportion
that you sow, when you come to reap (if you be faithful) you shall reap
according to the proportion of Mercy, what is fit for a merciful God to do,
what is suitable to the infiniteness of my Mercy, so you shall reap, not suitable
to what you do and your proportion, but look what is suitable to the
infiniteness of my mercy that you shall reap: It was so toward the Jews, if
their obedience was but external, yet they should have mercy beyond their
outward obedience: but if it be applied to those that live in the times of the
Gospel, indeed that which comes from you being so mixed as it is, is but poor,
yet you may expect to reap, Men that are in mean imployme^ts encouraged.
not according to what you do, but according to what may manifest the infinite
mercy of an infinite God; every man that shall in the uprightness of his heart,
that is never so weak, and is employed in very poor, and mean services, yet if
their hearts be upright they shall not reap according to the meanness of the
work, but look what glory and happiness is suitable for an infinite God in way
of infinite Mercy to bestow, that they shall have in the mouth of Mercy,
suitable to Mercy. Thus you have the meaning of the word.

Now observe: Obs. 1.
First, As a man sows so shall he reap; Though he shall reap more than he sows,
yet he shall reap in the same kind; if he sows wickedness, he shall not reap
mercy; but he that sows righteousness, he shall reap mercy. It is a mocking of
God, for men to think that though they sow wickedness yet they shall reap
mercy, Gal. 6. 7.
therefore says the Apostle in Gal. 6. 7. As a man sows, so shall he reap. God
is not mocked, if thou think to reap mercy when thou sowest wickedness, thou
mockest God to his very face; If a man should go and sow Tares and say, I shall
have a good crop of Wheat, would not you think that man mad, or he should think
you a fool to tell you so and you believe him? So for you to think that either
God or man should believe that you should have mercy when you sow not
righteousness (I say) it is to mock God, and know, God is not mocked, for what
a man sows, that shall he also reap, and they fruit shall be another manner of
fruit, Thou shall rent that which shall be bound in bundels, and thou bound
together with it, and cast into unquenchable fire: But those that sow
righteousness, there is never a seed of theirs shall be lost, they shall be
recompensed for all their pains, Ps. 126. 6.
and labor, and sufferings, for so says the Lord, Ps. 126. 6. That those that
sow in tears, they shall reap in joy, there shall be an assuring fruit to those
that sow in Righteousness, for Righteousnss it is the most precious thing in
the world, Gospel-Righteousnesse the most precious thing in the world*
if it be true Gospel Righteousness, it is (I say) more worth, one right act is
more worth than Heaven and Earth; God will not lose that seed, it is precious
seed, there is more of God in one righteous Act of a Godly man than there is in
all the works of Creation and Providence, (except Angels and Saints) than in
all the whole frame of Creation.

The reason is this, The Reason.
Because in all the Creation Gods Glory is there but passively, God works there
and it is passively, and holds forth his glory; But now, when it comes to the
Righteous Acts of the Saints, there is an Active way of glorifying God, there is
an act of Gods life, There Is an Act of the very Image of God, and the Life of
God, and the Divine Nature is there, and therefore there is more of God in the
working of Righteousness than in any thing else besides.

Oh! Use.
let the Saints get a price upon the actions of Righteousness, though there be
much evil mingled, yet there is a great deal of the glory of God in every
Action. If we were but grounded in this principle it would make us abound in
the work of the Lord; so in the morning and in the evening let not thy hand
rest, trust God with thy seed, do not be deterred with this difficulty and the
other, Eccl. 11. 6*
He that observes the wind (in Eccles. 11.) he shall not sow; and he that
regards the clouds, he shall not reap. Is it a duty that God requires of thee;
do not think, Oh! but it is windy weather, and ill weather: no, but sow it, Sow
it in righteousness, and commit it to God, and thou shall reap. Oh! blessed are
those who have sown much for God in their life time, Oh! the glorious harvest
that these shall have, the very Angels shall help them to take in their Harvest
at the great day, and they need not take thought for Barns, the very Heavens
shall be their Barns, and Oh the joy that there shall be in that Harvest, and
the Angels will help to sing the Harvest song that they shall sing that have
been Sowers in Righteousness; but the confusion of face which will be upon
those that were not willing to endure difficulty in plowing and sowing, Pro.
20. 4.
The sluggard will not plow because it is cold: and therefore shall beg in
Harvest, and shall have nothing: in Harvest he will be crying for mercy, Lord,
mercy now; But what fruits of Righteousness? No fruits of Righteousness, no
Mercy. Oh! Reap in Mercy, that is a very observable expression as we have in all
the Book of God, Not reap in Righteousness, but reap in Mercy.

From whence our Note is, That after all we do, yet we have need of Mercy. Let
us be the most plentiful in sowing the seeds of Righteousness, yet we are
unprofitable servants after we have done all.

It is true, Object.
An Act of Righteousness has much in it.

Yea, Answ.
but it is Gods, so much as there is in it, it is bad, and after we have done all
we had need come to God as beggars to cry for mercy; those men that have lived
the most holy lives that ever men did live in this world, yet woe to them if
they have not mercy; if they have not a Righteousness beyond their own, If
mercy comes not in to plead for them, woe to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob if mercy
comes not in to plead for them, if at the great day if they have nothing to
tender up to God but their own righteousness they are certainly lost and undone
for ever. All that we can do is infinitely unworthy of the Majesty of God, Oh!
the text that you have in 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
when the people did offer so much to God for the building of his Tabernacle,
Mark how David was affected with it, Who am I (says David?) and what is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all
things came of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Chap. 22. 14.
And when David in 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. when David had provided a thousand thousand
Talents of silver, and an hundred thousand talents of gold for the building of
the Temple of God, besides brass and iron, without weight, Arias Mont.
translated (...) in paupertate afflictione mea^.
yet when all comes to all, Out of my poverty have I offered this; so Arias
Montanus turns it: In your books it is, In my trouble have I done this, but the
same word that signifies trouble and affliction, signifies poverty likewise,
and says David, after all this, yet in my poverty have I done this; whereas
this was a mighty thing that was offered. I remember Sir Walter Rawlegh^ it is
in the 17. Chap. of his 2d Part, Rawleighs Hist. of the World part 2. C. 17. 9.
and 9th Sect. he reckons up the sum of what David did there prepare for the
Temple of the Lord, and he makes it more than any King in the world is worth,
he makes it to come to three thousand, The quantity of treasure that David
offered.
three hundred and thirty, and three Cart-load of Silver, allowing two thousand
weight of Silver, or six thousand pound sterling, to every Cartload; besides
threescore and seventeen Millions of French Crowns: and yet when he had done
all, Out of my poverty have I done this. 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. interpreted.
As if he should say, Lord, what is this in respect of thee who art the great
God? If thou will but accept of this, I shall be infinitely bound to thee.

Oh my brethren, Use.
let us learn for ever after all our duties not to be proud, keep your hearts
low and humble before God; Has God enabled thee to sow in Righteousness? our
hearts are puffed up presently: Oh no, thou must keep thy heart still under.
Alas! such is the proudness of our spirits, if we be but enlarged a little in
Prayer we are ready to be puffed up presently: Oh! what is this to the service
that a creature owes to the blessed and eternal God? had thou spent all thy
days since thou had any understanding, night and day in the work and service
of God, had thou been the greatest Instrument of Gods service that ever was
in the world, yet thou have cause to lie down at Gods Mercy-seat and cry,
Mercy, Lord, Mercy for a poor wretched vile Creature after thou have done al,
Ipsa gratiarum actio Luth.
we are so unable to do any thing our selves. It Is an expression of Luther, The
very Act of Thanksgiving is from God: And therefore be humbled, and cry, Grace,
grace to all that has been: And let all Public Instruments not take too much
upon them, but lie low, And there is a man that is worth his weight in Gold, that
can be an Instrument of great and public work, and yet lie low before the
Lord. Oh! did we but know God we would be so after our duties, we would be low.

There Is a notable story I find concerning Cyprian when he came to suffer
martyrdom, Cyprian's prayer at his Martyrdom.
and (you will say) that was a great service, to lay down his life for God: In
his last prayer he had these two expressions, which are remarkable in it. The
first expression was this, Paratus sum propter nomen tuum victimam sanguinis
fundere, and quodcunque tormentum sustinere, Cum el^vav^ris confringere terra^,
sub qua fissura terrar^^ me absconsurus sum? cui monti dicturus sum, eadit
super me? cui coll^, tege me?
Lord (says he) I am prepared to power forth the very sacrifice of my blood for
thy Name sake, yea, Lord, I am prepared here to suffer any torment whatsoever.
These two expressions he had. You will say, Now surely this man might stand
upon his terms with God. (But he goes on) But when thou do lift up thy self
to shake the Earth, Lord (says he) under what clift of the rock shall I hide
my self, to what mountain shall I speak even to fall upon me? As if he should
say, Lord, though I be here ready to give up my body to be massacred for thee,
to give up my blood to be an offering, and to suffer any torment, yet when I
consider what a God I have to do withal, if thou should deal with me as I am
in my self, Oh! I must cry to the Rocks to cover me, and the Hills to fall upon
me. Oh! this should teach us to keep our hearts low and humble after we have
done the greatest work whatsoever. I remember one of the Germane Devines when
he was full of fears and doubts, when he was to die: say some to him, You have
been so employed, A German Ministers speech at his death*
and have been so faithful, why should you fear? Oh! (he gives this Answer) The
Judgments of man and the Judgments of God are different; I am to go before the
great and Al-seeing God: though it is true, God would not have us daunted with
any terrible apprehensions of him, but yet he would have us be possessed with
reverence so as to be humbled when we think what a God it is we have to do
withal: you must reap in mercy, Oh! this shall be the song of the Saints to all
eternity, Mercy, Mercy: Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
the praise.

And then the other Note from that expression that we have there is, Obs. 2.
That God will give abundantly above our works. Oh! it is a point that has very
much encouragement to poor troubled sinners that are low; raise up thy faith,
it is not what thy work is, though it be low and mean, and though there be many
failings in thy work, yet is there uprightness, are they seeds of Righteousness
that thou have sown, thou shall reap according to what shall honor the mercy of
an infinite God at last. Alexander*
I remember Alexander when he was giving a gift to a poor man, Oh! the poor man
dared not receive it, it was too great: yea, but says he, though that be too
great for thee to receive, yet it is not too great for me to give. So I may say
to poor souls, when they hear of the glorious promises to poor people, Oh!
their hearts are ready to think, this is too good news to be true, it is too
great a mercy for thee to receive, as thou art in thy self, but if God will
give according to the proportion of his mercy, it is not too great for him to
give.

Now that is the way that God will deal with those that are in Covenant with
him, that have all their fruit to come from the seed of righteousness: Christ
in the heart. I say there the Lord will deal according to the proportion of
infinite Grace.

Take this one Meditation, That where there is any uprightness when thou shall
come to reap from God thou shall reap so much from God as must manifest to all
Angels and Saints to all eternity, An encoraging meditation to poor souls in
their mean endeavors*
what the infinite Mercy of an infinite God can do, and that'^ enough one would
think; the poorest Christian that does but the least for God when he comes to
reap shall have an Harvest that must manifest the infinite riches of the
infinite mercy of God, and what he is able to do for the raising up of a
Creature to glory. Comfort thy self in this, in thy poor low condition in which
thou art, and in the performing of thy poor services. Thus for the manner of
the Phrase.

Break your fallow ground; for it is time to seek the Lord till he come and
rain Righteousness upon you.
Break up your fallow ground etc.] The Prophet exhorted them in the words
before, to sow in Righteousness, that they might reap Mercy.

But you must not sow without plowing, Expos. The Coherence.
that were a preposterous way, therefore though the words come after, yet the
thing is to be done before. Look that you plow up the fallow ground: you have
been sinful and ungodly in your way, It will not be enough for you now to set
upon some good actions, we will do better, we will do such and such good things
that God requires of us: No, that is not the first work you must fall upon, but
it must be to plow, to plow up your fallow grounds.

In this expression you have here employed, Obs. 1.
first, That the hearts of men naturally are as follow grounds, nothing but
thorns and briars grows upon them, they are unfit for the Seed of the Word. And
by this word is here meant these three things; when he bids them plow up their
fallow grounds.

First, The work of humiliation, the Truths of God, both of the Law and of the
Gospel must get into their hearts, and rend up their hearts, even rend it up as
the plow does rend up the ground.

And secondly, That weeds, thorns, and briars must be turned up by the roots,
the heart must be cleared of them; It is not enough to weed out a weed here and
there, and to pluck out a thorn here and there, but plow up the ground, turn
all upside down, and get up all the baggagely stuff and thorns that was in your
hearts heretofore.

And then thirdly, Get a softness to be in your hearts; as when the ground is
plowed, that which was before hard on the outside, and baked by the heat of the
Sun, being now turned up there is a soft mould of the ground, and so by the
softness of the mould of the ground it is prepared to receive seed.

There are many evils in us that we would reform, See Nath. Rogers's letter out
of New England concerning this point.
but we have not been humbled for them, for our ceremonies, and subjection to
Subjection is either passive and involuntary; or active and willing. Again,
Government may be false essentially and of it self, or per accidents and by
reason of some adjuncts. Lastly some things are such as the corruptions of
them, may be sooner discerned by a conscientious eye: others such as, by reason
of their similitude to Divine Institution or practice, and their Antiquity and
Prescription, cannot so soon, if at all, be certainly concluded evil; see Mr.
John Cottons Letter in New England to Mr. Williams, printed London 1643. for
Benjamin Allen in Popes-head-Alley.
false Government of the Church, Who has bin humbled for these things, as sin?
We reform them as things inconvenient, Printed in Land. for Christoph. Meredith
in Pauls-yard.
but not being humbled for them as sin, the very roots of these things are in
the hearts of many, so as if times should change, a distinction would serve
their turn to come and submit to them again, so that we sow before we plow.
Jer. 4. 3.
I find in Jer. 4. 3. you have this exhortation even in termiminis, That, They
must plow up the fallow-ground of their hearts (only expressed a little further)
They must not sow among thorns. They must not think to mingle that which is
good with that which is evil, it may be a few good seeds are brought into a
business, yea, but there is a great deal of evil. My Brethren, take heed of
being deceived that way; many though they do not intend to deceive you, yet
they may deceive you by mixing some good things with a great many evil, and
therefore examine things. But I note this place in Jeremiah the rather from the
consideration of the time of Jeremiahs Prophecy. You shall find that the time
of Jeremiahs Prophecy was in Josiahs time. Now the time of Josiah was a time
of great reformation, there was very much reformation in his time, yea, but
says Jeremia^, What though you did reform, what though you do many things, you
sow among thorns, you do not plow up the ground, you are not humbled, the roots
of your sin are not got out of you, and therefore though there be a great deal
of ill stuff that seems to be cast out, and many good things are set upon in
the Worship of God that was not formerly, yet you must plow, plow up your
fallow grounds. The holy Ghost joining of them together, Sow Righteousness, and
plow up your fallow ground.

This Note I would have you observe, That there are some that do Sow, and not
Plow, and there are others that do Plow, and not Sow, but we must join both
together.

There are that do Plow, and not Sow; that is, They (it may be) are troubled
for their sin, it may be much humbled for their sin, but they do not reform,
after their Humiliation there does not follow Reformation.

Now as Reformation, where Humiliation has not gone before, usually comes to
little purpose, so Humiliation where Reformation follows not after, comes
likewise to little purpose. Isa. 28. 24.
In Isa. 28. 24. Does the Husbandman plow all day to sow?

The text is brought to note thus much, explained.
That God observes his times; and that is the scope of the text, that we must
not be offended because that the Lord does not do things as we would have him
always, that is, he lets wicked men prosper sometimes, and the godly suffer
afflictions, but as if the holy Ghost should say here, let God alone with his
work, God observes his times and seasons, as the Plowman does, he does not
always plow; so God has his times and seasons and knows when to relieve his
Church and afflict his Church, and when the wicked shall prosper and be brought
into adversity, God instructs the Plowman to know his season, and so does he,
and therefore be not offended. And so should we know our seasons, we should
observe our times to be humbled and reform, to reform and be humbled. But this
for the Reformation of a State.

But the plowing of the heart, that is the thing that is here especially
intended, and I desire to apply it particularly to every man and woman. Those
who have such sore necks who cannot bear the yoke, yet you must be Plow-men and
Plow-women, for Alice Driver that I told you of, her father brought her up to
plow, and both men and women, the daintiest Ladies of all must hold this plow
that is here spoken of. Now for this plowing of humbling your hearts it is for
the getting in of Truths into your spirits, that may rend up your hearts, I Will
name some few Truths that are as it were the Plow-share, that you must not only
know them, but labor to get them into your hearts.

As first, That such is the vileness of every sin, as it seperates the soul
from God and puts it under an eternal Curse. This one Truth, you must get this
into your hearts, and get it deep into your hearts, it will help to unloosen
the roots of the thorns and briars that are there, the settled apprehension of
this Truth.

And then secondly, This Truth: That, there is such a breach between God and my
soul by sin, that all the power in all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth is not
able to make up this breach, here is a sharp plow-share to get into the heart.

And then thirdly, This Truth, that by nature I am full of this sin, my heart
is full of it, all the faculties of my soul are filled with sin that is of such
an heinous nature. Here is a sharp plow-share to get into the heart.

And then fourthly, That every action that ever I have done in all my life, in
my unregenerate estate, it is nothing else but sin, nothing else but sin that
has such a vile nature.

Yea further, That if any sin be pardoned to me it is by virtue of a price paid
that is more worth than ten thousand worlds: This Truth. Now here is the Gospel
as well as the Law, for the plowing is but the spiritualness of the Law, the
Truths of the Law in a Gospel way, for you must take notice that the Law [as
Law] accepts of no humiliation for sin, it is as it is revealed in a Gospel
way, in a Gospel way it does tend to humiliation, for let men be humbled never
so much, the Law never accepts of them for their humiliation, but the Law in a
Gospel way so it comes to humble the soul so as to do it good. Now therefore
the Consideration of the Truths that the Law requires, having reference to the
Gospel they serve for the humbling of the soul; Now get in these truths and see
what they will do in thy Soul, you must work them in, And let conscience be put
on to draw this plow, These are as the Plow-share, and the working of
Conscience is the drawing of this plow; while the plow stops (as when it meets
with a thorn and bryar) now a strong Conscience will draw it on, and will make
the thorns and briars to be rent up by the roots, if the Conscience be put upon
with strength to draw these Truths in the soul; and though they put you to
pain, yet you must be content to draw them on in the soul; And if these and the
like Truths be got into thy soul, and thou be at plow, and thy Conscience be
drawing, This is that I shall say, God speed the Plow, yea, God speed these
Truths that Conscience is drawing on in the soul, for it may tend to a great
deal of good, to prepare thee for the seed that may bring forth Righteousness
and Mercy to thy soul for ever. I confess it is a hard work to be thus plowing;
Indeed for men and women only to hear Sermons, and be talking and conferring of
good things, these things are pretty easy, but to go to plow, to plow with
such Truths as these are, to get up the thorns and briars by the roots, this is
a very hard task; but we must be willing to do it, and to continue plowing; as
the fallow ground must not only be plowed once, We must continue plowing,
but (it may be) it may stand in need of plowing the second and third time
before it may be fit for the seed to be cast in, and so it must be with our
hearts. It may be some of you have got in some Truths, else weeds will grow again,
and you have been plowing; yea, but since that time you have had many weeds
and thorns grown up, and you must to plowing again; it may be it is diverse
years ago since you have been thus plowing, though many years after.
and your hearts have lain fallow all this while, do not think it enough that
once you have been humbled, but be often plowing up this fallow ground, you
were as good have the plow get into your hearts though it be sharp, as to have
the Sword of Gods Justice be upon you. We have in these times a wanton
generation that have risen up, that cannot endure to go to plow, they would be
doing nothing but taking in the sweet, (as I told you before in a former
Exercise) Treading ^ut the Corn. But this plowing they cry out of merely
through a wantonness, and tenderness of their spirits, a sinful tenderness,
because they would have nothing but jolity and licentiousness in their hearts
and ways, Luke 9. 62* Ministers are the ylowmen*
yet the Scripture in Luke, 9. 62. compares the Ministers of the Gospel to the
plow, He that puts his haud to the plow and looks back, is not fit for the
Kingdom of God, not fit to be employed in the administration of the Gospel.
Though these men cry out so much of humiliation for sin, which is as strange a
Generation as ever have risen up, that should cry out of that, when there is
nothing more humbles for sin than the price that was paid for sin in the blood
of Jesus Christ, and there is no such sharp plow-share as that. If I were to
preach one Sermon in all my life for the humbling of men for sin, I would take
a text that might show the great price that was paid for it, and therein open
the breach that sin has made between God and man's soul. But they will not make
use of the Gospel neither, so much as to be a plow to plow the heart for the
work of humiliation.

Well, The probatum est, of preaching the Law, and pressing humiliation.
God has prospered this work heretofore, and notwithstanding all the wantoness
of men's spirits this way, yet (I say) still, God speed the plow, God speed this
way of plowing the hearts of men, and getting in those Truths that do humble
the hearts of men for their sins; these were the Truths that God has blessed in
former times, and there is none that ever did live to the honor of the Gospel so
much: for this generation that is come up, they talk of the Gospel, but they
live not to the honor of it, the Gospel has not honor by them, nor Jesus
Christ has not honor by them. But the former generation of men, though in some
things they might fail, yet certainly God blessed them in their way so far as it
was according to Truth.

No mervail though these men bring forth such little fruit of Righteousness,
The Reason*
it is, because they sow among thorns, [This whole discourse is opposite to
that, whereby some would comfort believers in their sins and sorrows: The sum
is, that of our Lord Christ: Repent, and believe the Gospel: and of the
Apostle, Repentance from dead works and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ.
Mark. 1. 15. Act. 20. 21. Heb. 6. 1. Romans 7. 24. 1 Cor. 11. 31. 2 Cor. 7. 9.
10. Chap. 12. 21.]
presently they are up at the top, and so confident presently in their way,
their seed is among thorns and therefore it does not prosper. And thus much for
this expression about the plowing up of fallow grounds, both in reference to
general Reformation, and Humiliation, and concerning men's Souls in particular.
It follows;

For it is time to seek the Lord.
It is time. Expos. 1.


First, To have time to seek the Lord, a great mercy.
Yet you have time to seek the Lord; It Is well for you that you have time to
seek the Lord; It is mercy that there is any time at al to seek the Lord. It
might have been past time with you for seeking the Lord, God might have forced
his honor from you in another way, have fech't out his glory from you in your
eternal ruin, Oh! it is mercy that God will be sought of you, Use*
and therefore plow up your fallow ground, and sow in Righteousness; for it is
time to seek the Lord. Oh! you that are the oldest and wickedest, and yet live
still, Oh! remember this Scripture; yet, you have time to seek the Lord, It is
mercy that you have any time to seek the Lord: If you did but understand what
this mercy were, ye would fall down with your faces upon the ground and bless
the Lord that you have yet time to seek him. What do you think those damned
creatures in Hell would now give, if it might be said of them, That they have
time to seek the Lord, if they might have but one hour more to seek the Lord
with any hope to obtain mercy from him? What you are now, they were not long
since: Oh! do you fear and tremble, lest, if you not seeking the Lord, you ere
long be, as now they are, that it shall be said of you, Time is gone, time to
seek the Lord is past; I will not now be sought of you; Seek the Lord while he
may be found, and call upon him while he is near, It was a speech once of a
woman in terror of Conscience, The saying of a dispai^ing woman in Cambridge*
when diverse came to her (it was in Cambridge) diverse Ministers and others
coming to her in way of comforting of her, she looks with a ghastly countenance
upon them, and gives them only this Answer, Call time again: If you can call
time again, than there may be hope for me: but time is gone.

Oh! that we had hearts to prize our time, to seek the Lord therefore while he
may be found. And when thou go home, fall down upon thy face before the
Lord, and bless him that yet it is time to seek the Lord. It is time for the
public, through Gods mercy it is time, yet for us to seek the Lord. It might
have been past time; and who almost that did desire to know any thing of Gods
mind for seven or eight years ago or more, but did think that Englands time was
even gone of seeking God? But the Lord has been pleased to lengthen out our
time to seek Him; and this we should prize and make use of.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
It is high time to seek the Lord.
For first, Reas. 1.
God has been long time patient toward you. He has been long suffering,
there is a time that the Lord says, He will be weary with forbearing, and
therefore the Lord having suffered so long, it is high time for you to seek
him, for you to look about you, lest the Lord should say, That he would be
weary in forbearing, and forbear no more. It is fit you should seek the Lord at
all times, but now it is high time when God has been so long suffering toward
you; how do you know but that the time for the end of patience is at an end?
And that is the second consideration, God has been long patient.

And 2. Reas. 2.
Mercy it is even going, for Judgments are now threatened by the Prophet: as if
the Prophet should say, if ever you will seek him, seek him now, God is going,
and Judgments are at hand, and therefore it is high time for you to seek the
Lord. As a Prisoner when he is at the Bar, he is pleading a great while when
the Judge is at the Bench, simile*
but if he sees the Judges ready to rise off the Bench, and if they be gone,
then he is gone and undone for ever, then he lifts up his voice, and cries out,
Mercy, mercy. So it is high time to seek the Lord, high time, Mercy is going,
Judgment is at hand; God as the Judge is going off the Bench, now cry, cry out
for your lives or you are undone for ever.

Oh! Applicat.
this may well be applied to us both in the general, and in the particular, it
is high time, God has shown himself to be going and departing from us, only
there has a company of his Saints been crying, and as the Lord has been going
from us yet they have lifted up their voice and cried to the Lord, so yet he
grants us time.

And then thirdly, Obs. 3.
It is an acceptable time, because now God calls upon you, and he holds forth
the Scepter of his Grace toward you, therefore it is now acceptable to seek
God, seek him now and he will be found, 2 Cor. 6. Now is the accepted time, 2
Cor. 6.
the day of salvation, while you do enjoy the means of Grace, while God is
offering mercy in the Gospel it is the accepted time, therefore now is the time
to seek the Lord, The misery of man is great upon him for not knowing his time,
Eccl. 8. 6*
in Eccles. 8. 6. There the wise man says, There is a time for all things, but
therefore is the misery of man great, because he knows not his time. Oh! it is
true in this regard, we know not our time and therefore is our misery great
upon us. Luke 19. 24.
O that thou hadest known at least in this thy day those things that concern
thy peace; missing of time is a dangerous thing; That may be done at one time
with ease, that cannot be done at another time with all the labor that possibly
may be: ex hoc momento Aeternitas.
Thou can not tell what may depend upon one day, upon one minute, perhaps
even eternity may depend upon this moment, upon this day. A man goes abroad
from his family and gets into company, perhaps into an Alehouse, or Tavern to
drink, and there spends the day in wickedness; thou do not know but upon
that time the day of thy eternity may depend, it may be cast upon that day; as
Saul was cast upon that act of his, says Samuel to him, The Lord had thought
to have established thy Kingdom, but now he will not; so God may say, Well,
notwithstanding all thy former sins I would have been content to have past by
them, if thou hadest sought me upon this day: The consideration of this would
make us take heed how we spend our time, how one spends any day in ones life. A
Mariner may do that at one time that he cannot possibly do at another. An apt
simile.
He has a gale of wind and now he may quickly get over Sea, but if he stays
till another time, if he would give his heart blood to get over he cannot: and
so sometimes thou have such gales of the Spirit of God as may do good to thy
soul for ever, take heed thou do not lose them, if thou losest them thou
may be undone for ever. Oh! it is fit to wait upon God for our time, and if
God gives us time take heed we do not trifle and say, we shall have time
hereafter: therefore in Phil. 2. 12. the Apostle says, Phil. 2. 12* opened.
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: (and it follows) for it
is God that works in you, both to will and to do. What a connection is there?
If God work the will and the deed, what need I work at all? Nay, the connection
is thus, Do you work out your salvation with fear and trembling, take all
opportunities you can, let the fear of God be upon you, so as to omit no
opportunity, for you do absolutely depend upon God, that if he does withdraw
himself from you, you are undone for ever, for you can do nothing of your
selves, for it is God that works the Will and the Deed. illustrated by a
simile*
As if we should say to a Mariner, Be careful, take your wind and sail, for all
your Voyage depends upon God, if you neglect your opportunity you are gone. It
is time for the youngest of all to seek the Lord, As soon as ever you begin to
have the dawning of reason it is time for you then to seek the Lord, Oh! that
you did but know your time. Oh! but what time is it for old ones, for those
that have neglected seeking the Lord the most part of their lives; Is it not
high time for you to seek the Lord, who have spent so much of the time of your
lives in vanity and folly as you have done? The remainer of the time you have
is uncertain, and yet suppose you should have so long a time as in the course
of nature you are like to live, yet many of you cannot have so much time to
seek the Lord as you have had in departing from God, you cannot have so much
time to honor God as you have had to dishonor him: and therefore is it not time
for you to seek the Lord? I remember it is said of Themistocles, that he died
about an hundred and seven years of age, Themistocles saying at his death.
and when he was to die, he was grieved upon this ground, Now I am to die
(says he) when I begin to be wise. And certainly it cannot but be a grief to a
man or woman, though they should be godly, to think, Why through Gods mercy,
the Lord has begun to work Grace (I hope) in my heart, yea, but as soon as I
begin to know God, and have any heart to serve him in this world, I must be
taken out of this world: It was a proverbial speech once, Graviora eras. Plut.
Weighty things to morrow: you shall find it in Plutarchs lives. Oh! take heed
this proverb be not fulfilled concerning you, Weighty things to morrow, take
weighty things, things of infinite consequence while you have time, Let weighty
things be regarded then.

It is time to seek the Lord.
Time, Time for England to seek God.
Certainly our time is now for the public as much as ever to seek the Lord,
for never did God give us such an opportunity for honoring him as of late.

Never any Nation in the world had a greater opportunity

And certainly it is time in a more special manner now





Till I come and rain Righteousness upon you.
The word that is here translated [Rain] it does sometime signify to Teach,
(...) jacere. docere.
it is of the same root; and the Scripture makes use of that similitude of
Rain, for Doctrine; because of the likeness of Doctrines distilling as the
Rain, therefore one word in the Hebrew is used for both. Expos. 1.
And therefore I find diverse in Interpreters go that way, Ply the work until he
teaches Righteousness; and so it is a Prophecy of the Messiah, do you Sow
Righteousness, and plow up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek the Lord,
till the Messiah shall come and teach you the Righteousness of God. So they
carry it. But take it is it is here.

Until he rain Righteousness. 2 preferred.
And then there is these things in it.

First, I Will open what is meant by Righteousness, and then Rain.

By Righteousness is meant, Righteousness, what?
First, That God will deliver them from oppression, that though they have
unrighteous dealing with men, yet they shall have righteous dealing with him.
And this is a great mercy to a people that God shall undertake that there shall
be nothing but righteous dealings betwixt them and himself.

Secondly, By Righteousness is meant, The fruit of Gods faithfulness in the
fulfilling of all those promises of his for good unto them, wherein the Lord
does style himself Righteous. (Says he) If you will now plow up your fallow
ground, and seek the Lord, the Lord will deliver you from oppression, and the
Lord will make good all his faithfulness to you, according to all that good
word that he has promised.

And this Righteousness it shall be Rain, Rain, what?
that is: First, to note that all their good and help it must come from Heaven
as the Rain does, as if the Prophet should say, If you look to men, yea, to men
in public place you have little hopes that there should be such righteous
dealings, or to expect that the good Word of God in all his Promises to his
People should be fulfilled, yea, but look to Heaven, says God, I Will rain, it
shall come down from Heaven by ways that are above nature, that are above the
power of man, I Will rain Righteousness; seek him therefore till he rain
Righteousness, be not discouraged though you should see those in public glace
to carry things never so unrighteously, yet seek the Lord till he rain
Righteousness.

Secondly, By raining Righteousness is meant, the plenty of Righteousness, that
Righteousness shall come in abundance. It may be now, some men may meet with
some Righteous dealings and be encouraged when things are at the best among
men, but this Righteousness comes but by drops, yea, but seek the Lord till He
Rain Righteousness. What is it to have a few drops of water? You may go into
your Garden, and with a little pot of Water, water the Herbs; yea, but when it
rains down water, then the earth is refreshed. And so says the Lord here, Seek
me till I come with a shower of Righteousness, and rain it down upon you.

Thirdly, Till he rain Righteousness. That is, Till I work so graciously in the
works of my Righteousness to you, as shall make the Seeds that you have sown to
be fruitful, to grow up to the honor of my Name, and to your good. Now there
are many godly amongst you, and they sow Righteousness, they do many good
Actions, but alas, it is kept down still by the scorching heat of the
Oppressors; in places where Oppression prevails, many godly, truly godly men
and women they sow much seed of Righteousness, but there is little good comes
of it, and all is kept down: yea but says the Lord, Seek me till I rain
Righteousness, I Will rain from Heaven such showers that shall be the fulfilling
of my Promises to you, that shall make all your righteous actions grow up to
the praise of my Name, and the good of your Brethren, Oh! what a blessed time
is this, when there shall be nothing but righteous dealings, and all the
faithfulness of God shall be fulfilled, and there shall be plenty.

The Notes are:

First, Ob^. 1.
That God will come to sow Righteousness in time. Those that plow and sow in
Righteousness God will come in way of Grace and Goodness to them; Prove. 11. 18.
Prove. 11. 18. To him that sows Righteousness shall be a sure reward. Be not
discouraged you that sow Righteous seed; for it is not with the seed of
Righteousness as with the seed that is sown in the earth, for if that do not
come up in such a certain time, it will never come up; but you cannot say so of
the seed of Righteousness, it will come up.

Secondly, Obs. 2.
God sometimes comes not presently in raining Righteousness upon his people
that do sow Righteousness: Seek the Lord till he comes and rains Righteousness:
As if the Prophet should say, You have hearts to seek the Lord, to be humbled,
and reform, to sow in Righteousness; well, be not discouraged, continue
seeking, stay till he does rain Righteousness. After the seed is sown, you
would fain have a shower the next morning, but (may be) it will not be the next
morning, stay till Gods time; God does not always hear the prayers of his
people so as to answer them when they would. It is very observable concerning
Elijah, at one time when he cried for fire to come down upon the Sacrifice, it
came down presently: but when he cried for rain, he was fain to send his
servant seven times: Elijah did not get Rain from Heaven so soon as Fire from
Heaven.

The Third Note is this, Obs. 3.
That those that seek aright will continue seeking God till he comes and rains
Righteousness. There is an excellent Scripture in Psalm. 101. 2. Ps. 101. 2.
illustrated.
says David, I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; O when will thou
come unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart. As if the Prophet
should say, Why Lord, it is thy presence I desire more than a thousand worlds,
and I Will endeavor to behave my self in my house, in my family, not only in the
presence of others, but in my family, in the most perfect way I can: Lord, when
will thou come? It seems God did not come and manifest Himself presently:
though David did behave himself in a perfect way in his house, yet David
professes he would wait still. There Is many Scriptures may be given for this,
and many arguments why a gracious heart will not leave over seeking till the
Lord comes.

It Is the Lord I seek, and he is a great God, and is fit to be waited on,
though he does not come presently. We think it is a matter of State, simile.
because of the distance that there is between one and another to make them
stay, Why should we think much that we should wait upon the great and Infinite
God? And perhaps you pray, and find no benefit; it is fit for you to wait upon
God. There is an infinite distance between God and you, Motive to continue
seeking God*
Seek till he comes. If you do not get that, that you seek for, yet you are
doing your duty, and that is enough.

They are praying and seeking God, but they only have their eyes upon what they
shall get by seeking God, and if nothing comes of it, then they are
discontented; whereas merely the consideration of that, that thou art doing thy
duty should be enough to quiet thy heart.

Thou can not be better certainly than seeking God. Whither will thou go? If
thou leavest seeking God thou turnest from thy own mercy to vanity. And have
thou a temptation to leave off seeking God? shall thou get any thing by it?
Certainly thou can not do better, and therefore seek the Lord, seek the Lord
Till he comes, Isa. 30. 18* explained.
Isa. 30. 18. is a most excellent Scripture to uphold the heart in seeking God
though God do not seem to come. The Lord is a God of Judgment; blessed are they
that wait for him. You are not a man or woman of Judgment, you know not when it
is a fit time that things should be done; But God is a God of Judgment, he
knows how to do things in Judgment; and therefore blessed are they that wait
for him. Think of this, and deny your own Judgments, and your own thoughts, and
know that you are waiting upon God, that is a God of Judgment, that is
infinitely wise to come to his People in a fit season, and to come so that at
last you would not wish that he had come sooner.

And know, That all the while you are waiting, God is working good. We are
waiting upon men's doors, and they take no notice of it: but if we knew that all
the time we are a waiting our Petition were a reading and they in consultation
about it, and we only waited for the issue of the consultation, it would
satisfy us. And so a gracious heart may be assured of this, Have thou sought
the Lord in the truth of thy heart? The thing is not come yet, but ever since
thou have sought the Lord the heart of God has been thinking of that thing
which thou soughtest him for, and wilt not thou be seeking God still till He
does come?

And then, While thou art seeking God, thou art not altogether without some
dews; Indeed God does not come and rain in showers, that Righteousness that he
will hereafter, but surely thou have dews, thou have some encouragements, and
do not slight those dews of Gods Grace that thou have, for then thou may
stay the longer before the showers of Righteousness come; prize the dews of
Gods Grace and the showers of Righteousness they will come the sooner. Many
Christians though they have many dews of Gods Grace upon their hearts to
refresh them, yet because they have not showers they think it is nothing; what
have thou no dews of Grace? What is it that keeps thy heart so tender as it is?
Thou would not for a thousand worlds wilfully sin against God, certainly if
thy heart were hardened the Truths of God would not get into thy heart so as
they do: Indeed the rain comes in a visible way; yea, but there are dews of
Grace that come in a secret way: Thou do not indeed see the comings in of
those dews of Grace upon thy heart, yea, but others may see the effect of those
dews.

And then lastly, Seek the Lord till he comes; why? Because when he comes he
will come more fully a great deal. It was a notable Glover the Martyr, when he
had been seeking God for the raining of Righteousness, Mr* Glover the Martyr.
he was willing to give his life for God, and yet God had absented himself from
him, Oh! God was not come, he complained to his fellow Austin, that God was not
come; well, but says his friend, he will come; and give me a sign before you
die, if you feel the Spirit of God come to your heart: well, the poor man
continued all night, when he was to be burnt the next day, and yet he was not
come, yea, the Sheriff came to carry him to the Stake, and yet his heart was
dead. But he goes on till he came within the sight of the stake, and then the
holy Ghost came into his heart, and filled him with joy, so that he lifts up his
hands and voice, and cries, He is come, he is come. Now there came a shower of
Righteousness upon his heart, he was content to seek the Lord till he came.

And that may be a fourth Note, Obs. 4*
That those that are content to seek God till he comes, when he comes he will
come with plentiful showers in raining Righteousness. Oh! how many! how many
cursed Apostates are there that will curse themselves one day for not
continuing seeking of God till he comes? Perhaps there are some that have had
some convictions of conscience, and because they have not had encouragement
presently they were discouraged, and so thou have basely gone back, and now God
has left thee, and thou art become a base useless Hypocrite, and art a
dishonor, and disgrace to Religion, and all because thou would not stay till
God came: Oh! but others stayed till God came, and God came at length so fully
that now they bless his Name that they did stay. I remember I have read of
Colum^us that was the first that found out the West Indies, Christoph.
and the story says of him, Columbus.
that his men were even weary, he was so long in sailing, and so they were
resolved they would come back again, that they would, so that then all their
labor had been lost. But Columbus he came to them with all entreaties to go on
a little time, and at length prevailed with them to go on but three days
longer. So they were content to venture three days, and within that three
days they came to see Land, and so discovered those parts of the world that
were so little known to these parts. Now what a miserable thing had it been if
they had come back and lost all their Voyage? Thus it is with many a soul
sailing toward Heaven and eternal life, Thou have been a long time tossed up and
down in the waves of the Sea, the waves of Temptation, and of Trouble, and thou
think it is best to come back again: Oh! stay a while, do not limit three
days, but go on; yet it may be said of some that had they proceeded in their
voyage but three days more, they might have come and seen, whereas now they
have lost all. Oh! seek the Lord then till he comes and rains Righteousness.

And then the fifth is this, Obs. 5.
The help of those that seek God it is from Heaven. Till HE Rain. They do not
so much expect help from Creatures as from Heaven, they look up to Heaven for
their help; when all comforts in creatures fail they look upwards and there see
their help.

And then the sixth Note is this, Obs. 6.
That the fruit of Gods coming to his People after seeking, it is, To make them
fruitful, that is the end of Gods coming, the end of the Mercy of God in coming
to people, it is, to make their seeds to grow up and be fruitful. It may be you
would have God come, but wherefore, to bring comfort to you? No, the end of
Gods coming to his Saints, it is, To make them fruitful, and this would be an
Argument of the sincerity of your hearts in seeking God: When you are seeking
him, what do you seek him for, only for comfort, and peace, and to ease you
from troubles? Yea, but do you seek God that you may be fruitful? Hypocrites
seek Grace for Comfort chiefly, Saints seek Comfort for Grace.
The Hypocrites seek to have Grace that they may have Comfort, and the godly
seeks Comfort that they may have grace, so it is, That God may rain
Righteousness: I am as a dry ground, Oh! that God would come with the influence
of his Grace to make me fruitful in the works of holiness: Many of you would
have comfort, (as now in these days men's ears are altogether set upon comfort)
but is your comfort the showers of God? does it make the seeds of Righteousness
fructify in your hearts? Certainly you can have little comfort of that comfort
that is not as rain from Heaven to bring up the fruits of Righteousness in your
hearts, and in your lives.

And then seventhly, Obs. 7.
Gods coming with blessings upon those that seek him, it is, Righteousness:
that is, The good that they have as a fruit of seeking of him, it is, The
fulfilling of Gods Word, it is but Gods Faithfulness that was engaged for it.
Jesus Christ had purchased it by his blood, and they had a bond for it before,
what ever good they have from God.

It is an excellent Note to help us both in our seeking God, and in the
comforts that we have. When we are seeking God we are not seeking God merely as
a gratuity. Though in reference to us it is only free Grace, but to Christ it
is Righteousness, it is that which Christ has purchased, 1 John 1. 9.
therefore says Saint John, If you confess your sins: he does not say, it is
mercy for God to forgive them, but it is Just with God. And so when you receive
a mercy from God, you are not to look upon it as a mere Alms, though in
reference to your selves indeed it is so, but in reference to Christ your head
it is Righteousness, it is that which Christ has purchased, and that which God
gives you as a fruit of his faithfulness, as well as of his free Grace, when
thou art seeking of God let not only the eye of thy faith be upon the Grace and
Mercy of God, but upon the very Righteousness of God.

And then another Note may be, Obs. 8.
Though the good we do is our own good, yet God rewards it as if he got by it:
God makes Promises to us that if we do thus and thus we shall enjoy such and
such mercies.

Sow to your selves.
When we sow, God gives us leave to aim at our selves, but yet when God comes
to reward us, he does reward us as if it were only for him and not for our
selves, he rewards us in ways of Righteousness.

And thus much for this Verse of raining Righteousness. God has another rain
for the wicked and ungodly, in Psalm, 11. he rains snares, and fire and
brimstone upon them.

VER. 13.
Ye have Plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of
Lies.
NOtwithstanding all exhortations, Expos. in general.
and all offers of mercy, yet you have gone quite contrary (says the Prophet:)
Instead of breaking from your iniquities, you have plowed your iniquities. The
meaning is this: You have taken pains to propagate that which is evil, you have
taken pains to prepare for wicked things and to do all you can for the
propagation of that which is evil, both in your selves and others. That is the
plowing of wickedness. Prove. 21. 4.
The plowing of the wicked is sin, their endeavors, (that is the meaning) their
labor it is especially for the furtherance of sin, the very strength of their
spirits is let out for the furtherance of their sin; In Job, 4. 8. Job, 4. 8.
Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness reap the
same: to plow it is to endeavor, and labor for iniquity, for so the word that
is here translated Plow, (...)
it signifies, to Frame things, to Work things, to Endeavor any thing with all
our might; that is the signification of the word. You have set your hearts
altogether upon this work, for the furthering of wickedness, in thinking of it,
in plodding about it, in stirring of one another, and doing all you can in your
endeavors for the furtherance of wickedness.

Yea, You have been willing to go through all difficulties to accomplish your
wicked intentions: Micah, 7. 3.
As we read in Micah, 7. 3. Vt benefaciant, Munster.
it is a notable Scripture, it shows the strong endeavors of wicked men after
their sin. They do evil (says the text) with both hands earnestly. (...) Vel
nitunter ut (mala sua) bonafaciunt; i.e. justificent.
It is a very strange text, they are willing to take pains and plow for their
sin.

Oh! Some take more pains to perish than others to be saved,
how many are there that take more pains to go to Hell, than others do that go
to Heaven? they will so struggle, and suffer for their sin, willing to break
with their friends to accomplish their sinful lusts, willing to venture their
estates, to hazard their healths, willing to do any thing in the world, they
are willing to go through all difficulties that they may have their sin: Yet
they will not plow for God: Oh! they complain of any little difficulty in the
ways of God; yet complain of any difficulty in Gods ways.
but complain of no difficulty in the ways of sin, Oh! what a wicked and
wretched heart is this, to be offended with any hardness in Gods ways, and yet
be content to endure any hardness at al in the ways of sin! Oh! that we were
but as instrumental for God, and willing to plow, as hard as others do for that
which is sin. And Oh! when you shall come to die, to reap the fruit of your
labor, what terror do you think will this be to your consciences, when it must
tell you that you have taken more pains in the ways of wickedness than ever
you did in the ways of God? Cardinal Wolsey. See the Book of Martyrs.
As it was said of Cardinal Wolsey, when he was to die, Oh! says he, Had I but
served God as diligently as I have served the King, he would not have given me
over in my gray hairs. So when you shall come to die and your consciences shall
say, Oh! that I had but broken as much sleep to prayer and seeking God, Oh!
that I had but ventured my estate, and name, Who cannot die in peace (without
serious repentance)*
as much in the ways of God as in the ways of sin, it had been happy for me;
Is it possible that any of you can die in peace of conscience, and yet your
consciences shall tell you that you never took that pains for God as you have
done for sin? In a good motion that is for God, if others do it you will agree
and go on with them: I, but you will not plow hard for it; but in things that
are suitable to your lusts, you will not only move such a thing, and join with
others, but you will plow hard for it, Oh! what pity is it, that men's parts and
strength should be laid out so much upon that which is evil! Men that have
active spirits, Oh! how instrumental might they be for God if their necks were
but in Gods yoke? but they, all the days of their lives, have their necks in
the Devils yoke, and are plowing for the Devil all their days, and they will
reap accordingly.

Now this plowing wickedness was especially their way of false worship, Expos.
in parti^.
Oh! they endeavored there, they plowed hard to get up their false worship,
their worship at Dan and Bethel, and not to go to Jerusalem to worship. It
follows.

You have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity.
You do not hear of any sowing; for the truth is, there need no sowing for
wickednss, there need be but the preparation, do but plow, that is, do but
prepare the ground, and wickedness will come up alone. When you plow
Righteousness you must sow the seeds of Righteousness.

Ye reap iniquity.
The meaning is this, Expos.
You have your hearts desire to bring about your own ends, to have what you
plowed for. Sometimes men do plow and take a great deal of pains in that which
is evil, and God crosses them; but at other times God lets them reap: that is,
Do you labor for to promote such a thing though it be not according to Gods
mind, it may be God will let you have it; well, you plow for it, and you shall
have it; and do thou bless thy self in that? Oh! woe to thee, it is a woeful
harvest that thou have, it is a fearful curse for any man or woman for to have
their hearts desires satisfied in their sin, it were a thousand times better
that thy plowing were to no purpose at all, that all thy labors and endeavors
were quite lost; thou art loath to lose thy endeavors in the ways of sin, Oh!
but it were a thousand times better that thy endeavors were all lost than that
thou should attain that which thou plowest for.

But I find the word that signifies Iniquity, (...)
is used in Scripture to signify, The punishment of iniquity: for the Hebrews
have the same word to signify Sin, and the punishment of sin.

Or thus, which I think the holy Ghost has some aim at, What is here mea^t by
inniquity.
You plow (says he) wickedness, and reap iniquity; the plowing was for their
false worship, and their reaping was iniquity: I beseech you observe this Note
further.

That, The fruit of false worship it is the increase of sin in a Nation. Obs.


You plow wickedness, for so afterward it is called, The great wickedness; and
the fruit of that, it is the increase of much sin, it brings forth a harvest
for sin. When men have striven to set up any false worship, and have gotten it
up, what is the fruit of it? There grows presently a formality in Religion, Men
have a Religion, and yet they enjoy their lusts, for only the true Worship of
God is that which will not stand with men's lusts, therefore when men set up any
kind of false Worship, this will be the fruit, there will be a formality in
Religion, and this will please men exceeding well, for they can live in
worldliness, and licentiousness, and this will be the fruit of it. And verily
my Brethren, this is one main thing, that makes carnal, loose hearts contend so
much for a loose kind of worship, Why carnal men contend for superstition.
that they may have looseness in their ways so much the more: Endeavoring for
this kind of evil the fruit of it will be the reaping of iniquity.

You have eaten the fruit of lies.
First, Lies here what?
What are those lies that they eat the fruit of?

First, 1. Reasons for it.
Those arguments by which you justify your selves in your iniquity. Yea, but
they are but the fruit of lies. They would set up a way of false worship, but
they would have some Reasons for it, they would have some arguments to defend
it, and those, Oh how they hugged and closed with them, and let any one bring
and show them that such a thing may be proved thus and thus by such an
argument; now because they had a mind to the thing, their hearts closed upon
those arguments, and they fed upon it, it did them good at their hearts.

Secondly, 2. Comforts from it.
You feed upon lies; that is, Those comforts that you have from the way of
false worship, the way that you set up you have a great deal of comfort in it,
and you are very glad that it thrives, It is but a Lie (says God.)

Thirdly, 3. Hopes by it.
Their hopes that they had when that way was established of theirs, they had
such hopes that all should be so well, and that there should be no more trouble
between them and Jerusalem: I, but you feed upon Lies (says God) It is but a
Lie that you feed upon.

The Fourth Lie that they fed upon was, 4. Interpretation of Gods blessings in
it.
The Interpretation of Gods dealings, in blessing them for the way of their
false worship which they had set up; then all kind of outward blessings which
they had they made this Interpretation of them, the goodness of God to them for
that which they had done: As that is usual in places where there is any thing
in matters of Religion altered, though it be not right, yet you shall have men
that are for that way, what ever blessing comes upon a Nation, they will
interpret it as the fruit of that. I, but this will come to nothing.

And then fifthly, 5. Reports of the contrary party.
The fifth Lie, was, Those false reports that came to them against those that
did oppose their way of false worship: there were many that would not yield to
the way of false worship, and upon that reports were raised upon them, what
kind of men they were, and what they had done, and when these reports were
brought to them of the other way, Oh they did them good at their hearts, I but,
You have eaten the fruit of lies: many men's Break-fasts, and Dinners, and
Suppers are nothing else but lies. Surely now this will breed no good
nourishment. And what is the reason that we have such a deal of ill blood among
us? It is, because that men have such course food as they have.

Because thou did trust in thy way, and the multitude of mighty men.
Israel (the ten Tribes) had two great Confidences that are expressed in this
lattter part of the 13. Verse.

1. The Confidence of their Way.

2. And the Confidence of their Mighty Men.

Now the Way in which they did trust was, the Way of Religion that they chose
to themselves, that way that was distinct from the way of Judah, from the true
Worship of God.

And the Mighty Men was, the Power they had in their State.

These are two great Confidences of people.

First, Expos. 1. Party.
Thou did trust in thy Way; they were confident that was right, they were
not willing to hear any thing to the contrary: And if they did, yet their
hearts were so biased by their false worship, that any thing that was said to
the contrary was nothing to them, they were very confident that there was no
man able to say any thing to purpose against them, no, we have so many
understanding learned men for this way, no question it is right, there is none
but a company of silly, weak men that are in any other way.

Thus they trusted in their way, they please themselves, and one another, and
did seek to harden themselves, and one another in their way, they have got the
day, no question they have laid all upon their backs that have opposed them,
there is a great deal more reason for this way than for any other. There Is no
way of peace to the State, to the Kingdom, but this, that which others would
have, namely to go to Jerusalem to worship, it is a most unreasonable way. Yea,
they think that God is well pleased with their way, and they do good service in
opposing and persecuting those that are not of their way; Thus they trust in
their way.

From whence the Note and Point is, Obs.
That which is a man's own way he is very ready to trust in, to make much of;
Whatsoever is a man's own way: we have for this a notable Scripture in the Book
of Judges, 2. 19. Judge. 2. 19.
Oh the strength of spirit that there is in men when the way is their own,
says the text there, They cease not from their own doings, nor from their
stubborn way. I beseech you observe it, it is but a several expression, own
doings, and own way, the doings were their own, such things as they had
contrived to themselves, Their own way; and then they ceased not from, they
would stick to their own way, they were stubborn in their way because their way
was their own, Prove. 12. 15.
Prove* 12. 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes; but he that
hearkeneth to counsel, is wise. A fool, one that understands little, yet if the
way be his own, he will not hearken to counsel, he thinks he is sure, he needs
not counsel with any, he is so strong in it because it is his own way. It Is a
hard thing to get men out of that way that they have contrived to themselves in
matters of Religion: and therefore it is observable what God says of all the
Heathen in Jer. 2. 10, 11. Jer. 2. 10. 11.
Have any of the Nations changed their gods? but my people has (says he.) No
Nation would change their gods whom they had chose, only Gods People they were
peculiar in this to make change of their God: Why? because the gods of the
Nations were of their own making. opened.
What ways are of men's own that they stick exceeding much to, They trusted in
their own way; as when an object is too near the eye, simile.
the eye is not able to see it, to see any evil in it; If a foul thing be put
too near the eye, the eye cannot see it: so the evil that is near ones self,
very near, that is ones own, that is very hard to see; and yet what great
difference is it between ones being defiled by ones own dung, and by the dung
of another? If a man's heart be engaged in a way of his own, he will be ready to
father it upon God himself, and say, It is Gods way, and he will be ready to
think that all other ways different from his are men's own.

No men are more ready to charge others of pride than proud men; and no men
more ready to charge others of going to their own way, than those that do most
stick to their own ways; A note of one conceited of his own way.
it is one fruit of a man's heart sticking to his own ways and conceits, to
think that whosoever differs from him, does stick to his own conceits and his
own ways.

It Is a hard thing to make a man or woman that sticks much to their own ways,
to own it that it is their own; but how ever men will not own what is theirs,
but put it upon God many times, yet the Lord he will one day discover all the
ways of men, discover all the ways of men and women and show how much is
their own in it: Prove. 21. 2.
It Is a notable text for that in Prove. 21. 2. Every way of man is right in his
own eyes; but the Lord pondereth the heart, (or the Lord weighs the heart)
for pondering and weighing is all one. Mark, every way of man is right in his
own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the heart; that is, Though we choose ways to
our selves, and think they are right, and we are ready to think that our ways
are Gods, that we might justify our selves so much the more, but says the
text, God pondereth the heart; that is, God weighs exactly how much there is
of his own, and how much there is of our own in it, Oh! it were a happy thing
if we were able to do so, it is a great part of the skill of a Christian to be
able so to ponder his own ways as to know how much of God and how much of
himself is in a thing. There Is very few in the world knows this, there is scarce
any action that the best of us do but there is somewhat of self in it, there is
somewhat of God, and somewhat of self; but now here is the skill, to be able to
weigh how much of God, and how much of our selves is in an action. It Is a great
skill that your Goldsmiths have, they can presently tell you how much gold and
silver is in a vessel; an unskilful man looks upon it and thinks it is all gold,
but your Refiners will tell you even how much to a dram is mixed with it. Oh!
it were an excellent skill to be able in all our actions thus to ponder al our
ways, to know how much of God, and how much of our selves is in our ways, for
want of thi^ it is that we do miscarry so much in our ways as we do; every way
of man is right in his own eyes, but God ponders, God weighs men's actions to
see how much of himself; and how much of us there is in our actions.

But now then, Use.
Is it so, that it is in the hearts of men to trust so much in their own way,
because it is their own? Oh! what a shame is it then that we should not have
our hearts close with, and trust in Gods way! Let a way be never so base and
vile, yet if it be a man's own, his heart does close, and trust, and is strong
in it: Oh then! when the way is apparently Gods, why should we be so fickle and
unsteadie as we are almost always in the way of God? Make but the way of
Religion to be thy own, and then thou will be strong enough in it, but till
that time is, till we have given up our Wills to the Will of God, and we have
made Gods Will to be our own Will, we are never like to be strong in the Ways of
God. When there is but one Will between God and us, that Gods Will is our Will
then we are strong, when Gods Interest is our Interest, when Gods Glory is our
Glory then we come to be strong. Oh! happy are they that have so given up
themselves to God, as that they look upon their own good to be more in God than
themselves, this is the work of Grace to look upon ones own good, and Will, and
comforts of our hearts and happiness of our lives, to be more in God than in
our selves, that is the way to persevere in Godliness; as thus, As it is between
man and wife; when the wife comes to make the Will of her husband her own, then
she loves him strongly, and constantly: so when Gods will is made to be our
own, then we will fol Gods will strongly, and shall persevere in it. It follows;

And in the multitude of their Mighty Men.
This made them very confident in their way: Why, they had an Army to back
them, Expos.
they had an Army to fight for them, to maintain that way of theirs, they had
countenance from men of Power, they had strength enough to crush any that
should oppose them.

That Is the Note that lies plainly before us: Obs.
When the outward strength of a Kingdom goes along with a way of Religion then
men think it must needs be right, and that all men are but weak men that
appears against it. Mark the connection: They trusted in their way: that is, (as
I find generally Interpreters go) The way of Religion. And then, their Mighty
Men, these two are put together: so that you see the Note is very evident
before you, That way the mighty men go that shall be trodden
that is the way that generally men will trust in, and men will go that way;
were the scale turned and the strength of the mighty men went another way; As
now, Suppose that the strength of the Kingdom of the ten Tribes had been bent
to go up to Jerusalem to worship, and not to worship at Dan and Bethel, Do you
think there would have been almost any considerable party that would not have
gone up to Jerusalem, but worshipped at Dan and Bethel? but when the strength of
the Kingdom held the other way, when the mighty Men and the way of Religion
went both in one, the generality of the people went that way that the mighty
men went. This is the vanity and the exceeding evil of men's hearts, that which
way soever the mighty men go, that way they will trust in. There are very few
that will deliberatly say so, I will go that way that I see the mighty men go
in: But this is a secret bias and poise upon the spirits of men which inclins
them to harken to what may be said for that way, and not willingly to what may
be said for another. And secondly, It is such a poise upon their spirits, as
makes them to be willing and ready to let in any probability, if there be but
the least probability for the way that the mighty men go on in they take in
that, and when they have taken in one probability, that makes way for another,
and another, and so they drink in more and more, and so com to be strengthened
for that way, so as to put off the strength of any thing that can be said
against the way, except it be so apparent, as whether they will nor no, they
must be forced to sin against their consciences directly if they go another
way; I say, when the spirits of men are biased by seeing the strength of the
Kingdom go in a way, though (perhaps) they may have some good lie at their
hearts, yet there is that corruption in man's heart that except we can make the
other way so clear, that notwithstanding all shifts, and all kind af reasonings
that may be, they shall be self-condemned in their own consciences, that their
consciences shall tell them, they go directly against their light, I say,
except we can come thus, we cannot prevail with men's hearts, when the sway of a
Kingdom goes another way. And there are many Truths of God that concerns his
Worship, that cannot be made so clear but that a man may have such a diversion
to satisfy his conscience in this, That I in going another way, do not go
against my conscience; God would have us, that what is most likely to be his
mind that way to go, without any consideration of any outward respects. Now if
there be a temptation for outward respects that they will come into the
balance, do but turn the balance; and suppose in your own heart that all
outward respects were in the other balance, that all the mighty men were of
the other way, what would your hearts think? Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3.
In Revel. 13. 3. That when Power and Authority was given unto Antichrist, The
whole World wondered after her. So it is ordinary, that way that the mighty men
go, that way men's hearts will generally go. Oh! the little honor that Jesus
Christ has by us! Our hearts are swayed for the most part by carnal Arguments,
and carnal Motives.

Again, They trust in their way and in the multitude of their Mighty Men.

Great Armies are the things that are the Confidence of Carnal hearts: Obs. 3.
when they can get a great Army up of a multitude of Mighty Men, let there be
never such threats in the Word, yet if they think they have strength enough to
bear them out, they bless themselves in that. Oh! let us take heed of this
Carnal Confidence: Through Gods Mercy the Lord has given us now, that we have
the multitude of Mighty Men on our side, Applic. to Engl.
let us take heed that our Faith do not eb and flow as our Armies do; and I will
give you one Scripture that shows how far a gracious heart is from making flesh
his Arm, Cursed is that man (you know the Scripture) that makes flesh his Arm.
But an example of a godly man to show how far he was from trusting in an Army
of mighty men, 2 Chronicles. 14* 11. observed.
in 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. It is nothing (says Asa) with thee to help with many, or
with them that have no power. Why Lord, though we have no power, yet thou can
help us. Why did Asa speak thus? Had he no power? You shall find in the Chapter
a little before, that Asa had five hundred and fourscore thousand valiant
fighting men, Almost six hundred thousand valiant men that he had at that time
when he is pleading with God, Lord thou can save where there is no power. We
account it a great Army, if we have twenty, or thirty, or forty thousand
men; he has almost six hundred thousand men, and yet goes to God and prays,
Lord, thou can help where there is no power.

And yet further from the connection of these two.

Their way in which they trusted.] That is, The way of Religion, they thought
that was good; But had they had nothing else to trust in but that, their trust
would not have been very sure.

From thence the Note is this, Obs. 4.
That those who trust to any way of their own, had need of creature strengths
to uphold them. It Is a Note of very great use, they had need of bladders to be
under their arm-holes, if they trust in a way of their own. But now if the Way
be the Way of God that a man has confidence in, why then though all outward
helps should fail him, though all encouragements should fail in this world,
though we should see the creatures at never so great a distance, yet the heart
that has confidence in Gods way has enough to uphold it; here is the
difference between men trusting in their own way, and in Gods way. Indeed when
men trust in their own way so long as the Sun shines upon their way, that they
have external helps, they can go on confident, but let outward helps fail, and
their hearts sink within them.

But now when the heart is upright with God, and trusts in the Word, Hab. 3. 17*
and Promises, then it is able to say with Habakkuk, in Chap. 3. 17. That
though the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither the fruit be in the Vines; the
labor of the Olive should fail, and the Field should yield no meat, the Flock
should be cut off from the fold, and there should be no Herd in the stalls; yet
they will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of their salvation. Let
Heaven and Earth meet ^^^ether, whatsoever becomes of Armies, and of the
Policies of men, of Friends, and all outward respects; yet I will bless my self
in the Lord, and bless the time that ever I knew God, and his ways, The
confidence of a gracious heart.
my heart yet is confident it is the way of God, and I can venture my state
upon it, and my liberty, and my life and soul upon this way; let all things
seem to be under a cloud and never so dismal, yet my heart is steady, and is
fixed in this way of God that the Lord God graciously has drawn my heart into.

Oh! this is an excellent thing. Use. Examine.
Examine your hearts in that; when at any time you have seen things go very
cross, yet then whether you have not had your hearts to shake.

I remember it is an Observation that one has about John Baptist. John Baptist.
After he was cast into prison, he sends two of his Disciples to know whether
Christ were the Messiah, or no: They think that though before he was cast into
prison he did know that he was so; Behold the Lamb of God! but when once he
came to sufferings, some think that there was some shaking of his Spirit. So it
is many times with men, that when they begin to set upon a way and things do
somewhat shine upon them, and they have some encouragements outwardly, when men
suffer for a way, then they begin to question it.
then they go on, and are persuaded that it is a right way; but when things
fall cross, that they are like to suffer in that way, and the hearts of men are
against it, and they are like to meet with more evils than ever they made
account of, then they begin to call things into question, And is this the right
way? Oh! it is a sign that there was much failing in thy heart (at first) when
in the time of outward afflictions thou come to call into question whether it
be the way of God, yea or no. It follows.

VER. 14.
Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people; and all thy fortresses shall
be spoiled.
AS if the Prophet should say, Expos.
you have the Militia on your side, and you think you shall be able to drive on
your design, this your trust is, you have all the strength with you: but (says
he) what if there should be seditious tumults within you; What if the power of
the enemy without you should not come upon you, cannot God work your ruin that
way that you think not of; Oh! how suddenly may God suffer the discontentments
of people to break forth into rage and fury so that a tumult should arise among
them, to make tumults and bring all into a most miserable confusion. Obs.
Tumults a token of the great wrath of God.
It Is a great fruit of the wrath of God and a plague upon a City or Country
when God shall suffer tumults to arise among them. Therefore shall a tumult
arise among them: as a threatening of Gods severe wrath among these people that
were so confident in their way. A man may avoid external dangers for his body,
yea, but the distempers within his body may be his death. There Is fearful
miseries comes upon Cities and Countries when tumults rises, and there are
these two main things that have been the cause of tumults. The Causes.


First, Great Oppressions

Secondly, Engaging numerous parties in matters Controversal.

These going both together are very dangerous, for men they will carry on what
they have begun, if once they be engaged in it. The multitude not to be engaged
in matters controversal.
To engage a rude multitude in a business especially if it be controversal,
it is a very dangerous thing; for they being once engaged we do not know what
they may do to pursue and follow their engagements, the evil it is
inconceivable. When the multitude is in a rage, they are like to a tiled house
that is on fire; when houses are on fire in the City the great part of the
evil is, An apt simile*
if the flame have gotten to the tiles you cannot come near the house the tiles
flies so about your face: so it is in tumults, there is no coming near to talk
to them, None so cruel a^ the vilest of the people when they get power.
to convince them, but they are ready to fly presently upon you. And there are
none so cruel as the vilest of people when they are got together in a head; men
of no blood care not what blood they shed. In Prove. 28. 3. A poor man that
oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food. Pro. 28. 3*
When a poor man comes to oppress; it is true, Oppressions are great, the evil
of Tyranny it is very great; The evil of Tumults greater the^ the evil of
Tyranny.
but the evil of Tumults is greater than the evil of Tyranny: We see it many
times in men that are of mean rank, sometimes in those Committees that some of
you complain of. Now men could bear oppression a great deal more if it were
from those that are much above them, rather than from those that are their
equals, or it may be under them in estate, and those that are most under men,
if they come to get power any way they are like to be more oppressing than
others: we have cause to bless God for delivering of us from tumults in this
regard.

I might show you most dreadful examples of tumults in stories. Josephus he
speaks of many; for when God was about to destroy the Jews at last by the
Romans, their utter ruin was prepared by tumults and seditions that were among
themselves. Joseph. de bell Iudic. l. 2. c. 11.
In his second Book of the Jewish Wars the 11. Chap. he speaks of one Eleazar,
and Alexander that raised a Tumult, and murdered as they went, men, women, and
children, and so made havoc of the Country, that the Nobles of Jerusalem were
fain to come out clothed with sackcloath and ashes upon their heads to beseech
them that they would have pity upon their Country, and upon their wives and
children, and the Temple, The Nobles with sackcloath and ashes upon their heads
came to aswage the rage of this Tumult so grievous was it. Lib. 6. Cap. 11.
And I find in his sixth Book and 11. Chap. another story of Tumults and
seditious Spirits, that they being in some straights for food if there were but
any places in the City that had their doors shut up they did suspect there was
meat and would presently break in, and as soon as ever they came in, catch
whosoever they found by the throat so as to take the meat out of their very
mouths that was half chewed, they would not stand to ask them whether they had
any thing or no but would run and catch them by the throat and pull the meat
half chewed out of their mouths, and if any of them should let it go down
before they could get hold upon their throats they would use them most cruelly
for doing so. And in another place he tells that the Citizens suffered more by
them than when the Enemies took it; so that when the enemies took it they
thought that it was rather a relieving of their misery, than bringing evil
upon them, because the evil of the Tumults was so great among them. My
Brethren, Take heed of being occasion of tumults*
we should rather bear much than be any fomenters of the raising of Tumults,
take heed of that, you know not what the end of such things will be, A Tumult
shall arise among them. Amos, 2. 2*
In Amos, 2. 2. Moab shall die with Tumult.

When God intends the sorest scourge of all, Expos. 2.
utterly to destroy a people, he suffers Tumults to be among them. I find some
take this word Tumult [A Tumult shall arise] that is only meant the Confusion
of the hearts of people when the enemies should come upon them, that they
should be all in a Confusion, not knowing what to do through fear and terror
altogether. As suppose on a sudden an Army should come against a City, people
would be wringing of their hands and running up and down from place to place,
and paleness in their countenances, and not knowing what in the world to do,
all in perplexity and tumult: Thus God threatens it should be with them. As if
he should say, You are jolly and brave now, but when the Assyrians come out
upon you then your hearts shall fail, and you shall all run together and not
know what to do, the women and children shall cry, not knowing how to help your
selves, and so shall be brought into a confused Tumult. This is the sense that
some carries it in. But the sense may very well go either of these ways.

It is a mercy that God has not tried us this way; We live in our houses, and
follow our tradings, and lie down and sleep in quietness and rise again, but we
cannot imagine what woeful distractions there would be in the spirits of people
in the City, if there were a considerable Army encamped round about it:
Perhaps some of you here have been in places where the enemies have come
suddenly so that you know what this Tumult in the spirits of men and women
means. Bless God (I say) that the Lord has delivered us from such Tumults as
these: And the Power and Providence of God in Government of the World by a few,
in keeping people from Tumulting, and so bringing all to Confusion, it is to be
acknowledged, and his Name to be sanctified.

The word that is translated Tumult, Clamor (...) meticulosorum territorum.
it does indeed seem to import this, The crying of fearful creatures, those
that are terrified and scared, it signifies the crying out of them. Oh! it is a
great mercy for the heart of a man to be so stablished that when all dangers
shall be apprehended, yet they can find their hearts fixed in God, and not in a
tumultuousness presently. Ps. 112. 7.
A righteous man, it is said of him in Psalm, 112. 7. That when he hears ill
tidings, his heart is fixed: but it is a greater blessing, that when we see the
Armies before us, and hear the neighings of Horses, and clattering of the
Speers, then to be fixed. Oh! we should labor in the time of peace to make our
calling and election sure. Ps. 57. 7.
In Psalm, 57. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise. Awake my Glory, awake Psaltry and Harp, I my self will awake
early, I will praise thee, O God, etc. When was this that David cries to awake,
and to give Glory to God, and sing praise, and that his heart was fixed? It
was when Saul persecuted him, illustrated*
it was when he was in danger of his life, when Saul pursued him to take away
his life, yet, My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise (says David) even at that time. Ps. 46.
So in Psalm. 46. 2, 3. We will not fear though the earth be removed, though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof roar
and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.
This Psalm was wont to be called Luthers Psalm, for in times of trouble he
would say, Come and let us sing the 46. Psalm. Many Scriptures we might have to
this purpose. I remember the story of Archimedes, Archimedes.
that when the City of Siracuse was taken, and the enemies came in with their
drawn swords and hacked and slew whom they pleased, and abundant of bloodshed
there was; yet he was so settled upon the drawing of his Lines (being a
Mathematition) that when the Soldiers came in with their swords drawn, he was
drawing his Lines about his Art. A Fixed heart in prayer.
Which of you could, if you were at prayer, or any serious duty, if you should
hear of the breaking in of Adversaries, Could you have your hearts fixed in a
settled constant way, fixed upon God in such a time as this is?

As outward Tumults in Cities and Countries are very great evils, Spiritual
Tumults*
so are likewise Spiritual Tumults in the heart, when God seems to come against
the Souls as an enemy, I have a place for spiritual Tumults, that is, the
trouble and destraction of the heart in the time of the apprehension of Gods
absence: Ps. 40. 2.
in Psalm. 40. 2. He brought me up (says the Psalmist) out of an horrible pit.
(...) Fovea tumultus.
Now the word is in the Original the very same word we have here, From the pit
of Tumultuousness. Oh! it is true, as if he should say, my heart was fixed
indeed, yet at other times I found my heart in a tumultuous condition when I
apprehended God not coming in according as I expected, yea but the Lord did
bring me up out of the pit of tumultuousness. Oh! has not this been the
condition of some of you in time of trouble of your spirit, when you have
apprehended the absence of God from you? Your hearts have been all in a tumult,
has the Lord delivered you? Remember the Psalm, The Lord has delivered me out
of the pit of tumultuousness; I was in a tumultuous condition, my heart was
even overwhelmed, but the Lord has delivered me out of the pit of
tumultuousness. Ps. 61. 2.
And then in Psalm, 61. 2. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when
my heart is overwhelmed; Lead me to the rock that is higher than I. Remember
that Scripture likewise.

And all thy fortresses shall he spoiled.
What are strong holds for the safeguard of a people when the strong God is
against them? You have made Lines, and Fortifications, Oh! but the strong God
is against you. Nah. 3. 12.
In Nahum. 3. 12. All thy strong holds shall be like Fig trees, with the first
ripe figs, if they be shaken they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater.

And now my Brethren, blessed be God we know this Scripture to be true in a way
of mercy, God has made our enemies so to us, Applied.
and not in a way of Judgment: God might have made our strong holds so to them,
this Scripture might have been fulfilled thus, All thy Fortresses shall be
spoiled, that is, though we have made Fortresses we might have heard, first, of
this strong hold spoiled, and the other strong hold in such a place spoiled,
this Castle taken, and the other Castle taken, and we might have been amazed
with the news, and have said, How does God fight against ^s, that though we had
such strong holds, and men enough to man them, yet for all that they might have
been but as the first ripe figs that being shaken fall into the mouth of the
eater? How were our hearts dejected when we heard but of one strong hold being
taken from us, (Bristol) But I say through Gods mercy this Summer the Lord has
made this text good unto us, Bristol*
all thy strong holds, not all ours, but all the Enemies: How have they been
spoiled generally? Oh! the Lord has appeared glorious this way, and has made
this last Summer to be a continual miracle of mercy to us in this very thing,
All thy Fortresses shall be spoiled. It follows.

As Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel.
Hierom reads it, Expos. 1.
As Salmana was destroyed by the house of him that vindicated Baal in the day
of Battle. Sicut vastatus est Salmana a domo ejus qui vindicavit Baal in die
prelij etc.
And so all that follow the old Latin, they refer this to the story that we
have in Judges, 8. and think it has reference to that, the story where Gideon
slew Zalmunnah the Prince of Midian, and so they make Arbel to signify the
same with Jerubbaal though more short. And the holy Ghost does seem to make
that great Judgment of God upon Salmunna to be exemplary, vulg. Sic fere Graec.
he makes use of it afterward in Psalm, 83. 11. Make all their Princes like
Zeba and Zalmunna. Ps. 83. 11* (...)
But now the letters in the Hebrew do differ here, and we do not read of
Gidion though he did use very much severity upon Zeba and Zalmunna, yet we do
not read that he dashed the mother upon the children.

But Luther thinks that it is meant of some notable act of cruelty upon some
that was very near to them; Expos. 2.
but the particulars whereof we have not recorded in Scripture, Luther.
but only here mentioned, some notable execution of Justice it was upon a City
Beth-arbel not long before, that God sets forth as an example of his most
dreadful wrath that they might expect against themselves; this Beth-arbel we
find it not in the Canonical Scripture but in 1 Maccab. 9. 2. we find mention
of such a place, 1 Macca. 9. 6.
and afterward it was very famous for the great overthrow that Alexander the
Great gave to Darius, At Bethel Alexander overthrew Darius.
so that it is as if the holy Ghost should say, Did you not hear of that horrid
savage slaughter that Shalman caused in Beth-arbel when the mother was dashed
in pieces upon her children, they had no pity of any sex or condition, the
tender hearted mother embracing of her children she was dashed in pieces upon
them; such dreadful wrath of God your Bethel may expect, for so he alludes to
that.

Beth-arbel signifies the House of the insnaring god, As if it were (...) dei
incidiatoris.
the god of Policy, and Subtlety, it seems the people that called this City
by this Name, they had a god that they honored for the god of Subtilty, that
would ensnare all their enemies they thought, The god of subtilty*
and so they trusted in this god. And upon that called the City Beth-arbel, the
house of the Insnaring god. But now this would not do, the more they sought by
subtilty to undermine their Enemies, the more were their Enemies enraged, and
therefore when they came upon them they spoiled them, and dashed the Mother
upon her own Children.

We might from this very word take notice of such a meditation as that, Obs. 1.
That we should not think by our plots and policies to prevail, if God be
against us. Do not think to put off God by plots and policies and to avoid
dangers that way; this people did so because they had a Beth-arbel, a God of
Policy, they thought to prevail, but their misery was so much the greater.
Mothers and Children were dashed in pieces one against another. If you make
Arbel your God, Policy to be your God, you may expect so much the more rage of
God, and of the Instruments of His wrath against you.

And let men take heed how they seek to deceive and cozen other men, Use*
for there is no such way to encourage one man against another as this is, when
a man sees that he is sought to be undermined by policies, do not deal by that
way with your friends, acquaintance, and neighbors, you will encourage them so
much the more.

But oh! Obs. 2.
the fury and rage of War when God lets it out, to dash Mother against
Children. Psa. 137.
We read in Psalm. 137. concerning the children of Idolaters, that when the
Lord lets out his wrath upon the parents, he will let it out upon the children
too, Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones. It Is a very strange phrase. And in Isa. 13. 16. Isa. 13. 16.
Their children shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes. I remember Vrsine
in his Comment upon that place of Isa. he quotes this 137. Psalm. and he has
first this Note, Ursin. in Isa.
That though God does thus execute his Wrath, yet usually because it is so
dreadful and there is so much savageness in the thing in man's eye, therefore
God does use to do it by wicked men, and we never read that he made use of his
own Saints to execute that wrath. And then he answers that doubt, Ps. 137. ult
expounded*
I, but is it not said in the Psalm, Blessed are those that dash their little
ones against the stones, it may seem that it is approved of? Calvin*
Now that is his answer, and Calvin's, and others, that he does not mean
Blessed, that is, That they are blessed in their persons, or eternal blessings
of Mercy; but it is a Prophetical wish that they might have success in the
work, that they might have the blessing of success in the work, as an execution
of Gods Wrath, and Gods Justice, though the Instruments did sin in it, they did
it to execute their savage cruelty, yet the Prophet does look upon the Justice
of God in it, and wishes success unto them in such a work as that is, that the
Justice of God may go on and have its course, speaking in the way of a
Prophetical spirit.

The sins of parents (you may see) many times comes upon little ones. Obs. 3.
What has the poor Infant done? Oh! you tenderhearted mothers, consider of
this, how far your sin may reflect upon your children: If ever you should see
bloody Soldiers to come in in a terrible way, (as sometimes you have had fears
that way) and dash you upon your children, consider this is your sin that has
done it.

But you will say, Object.
Shall the children suffer for the Fathers sin?

Do not we read that God will visit the sins of Idolaters unto the third and
fourth Generation? Answ.
Indeed were your children innocent, had they no original sin, then it were
another matter; but now considering they have enough in them to make them
subjects of Gods wrath, God may take advantage the rather because of thy sin,
and therefore take heed, ane especially take heed to Gods Worship, for we do
not find in Scripture where any children are so threatened as the children of
Idolaters are.

And then a further Note is this, Obs. 4.
That the Judgments of God near to us should awaken us; we should think, Why
may it not be upon our selves? Applic. to Engl.
This was a heavy Judgment of God upon some City near, and God would awaken
them, Oh! what have we heard has been upon our Brethren in other parts, and we
have been sottish, and not sensible of it because i^ has not just come upon
our Gates; the Lord expects when we hear of any dreadful evil upon others, that
we should tremble and fear before him. And then one thing further note from
hence.

As Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel.
The word that is here Shalman, Pacificus (...) pace^ colere.
it signifies the name of one that is peaceable; one that is peaceable, and yet
he shall exercise his cruelty so, as to dash the Mother upon her Children, this
is not one that bears cruelty in his name, not a Tiger, but a Shalman, a
peaceable man as his name carries it, and yet thus cruel when he comes to have
power?

Oh! men who have peace in their names, and peace in their mouths, and peace in
(...), yet when they come to have power often times are very cruel; We were
like to have found it so, if our adversaries should have prevailed, especially
this City might have been made a Beth-arbel, and Mothers dashed upon their
Children. It Is true, when the adversaries did prevail in any place they did not
do so, but it was not through any ingenuity or pity, but out of fear, but had
they gotten the day then we might have expected even dashing of the Mother
against the children.

VER. 15.
So shall Bethel do unto you, because of your great wickedness.
SO shall Bethel.] What shall Bethel rise up against the rest of the ten
Tribes, and come and destroy Mother and Children together? That Is not the
meaning.

But Bethel shall do it; Expos.
that is, Bethel is the Cause of this, that dreadful slaughter that is like to
be among you it shall come from Bethel. Who would ever have thought that?

Oh my Brethren! Obs. 1.
Miserable Judgments do many times arise from causes we (...) think of: that is
the Note from thence. I say, miserable Judgments do many times arise from
causes we little think of, From Bethel there should come this slaughter and
dreadful bloodshed. And as that Note more generally, so more particularly this;

That from places of Idolatry comes the greatest evils to Kingdoms. Obs. 2.
As it is very observable on the contrary, from the places of Gods Worship comes
the greatest good, Psa. 76. 2, 3. opened.
so from places of Idolatry the greatest evil. In Psalm. 76. 2, 3. In Salem is
his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place i^ Zion: There brake he the Arrows of
the B^^, (...) Shield and the Sword, and the Battle. Did God break them there?
Was there a Fight in Zion, and in Salem? No, that is not the meaning, but in
Zion and Salem where Gods Tabernacle was, those Servants of God that were
worshipping of God in Jerusalem, and in Zion, and praying to God they got the
Victory: so we may say that such a place that was fasting and praying in the
time of our battles, Applied.
there God brake the Arrow and the Bow, in that place where they were praying
and seeking God, it was in Salem and Zion: Where the true worship of God is,
from thence comes the good of a Kingdom. Isa. 31. 9.
And so in Isa. 31. 9. Whose fire is in Zion, and whose furnace is in
Jerusalem: The Lord is there threatening the Enemies of his people, and he
says, That his fire is in Zion, and his furnace is in Jerusalem, there God
has his furnace and from thence it shall go to destroy the adversaries. And so
on the contrary, where Idolatry is set up, and false worship maintained, from
thence comes evils and miseries upon us.

Because of your great wickedness.
The word is, (...)
Because of the wickedness of your wickedness, so the Hebrews express the
suparlative degree, by a genetive case, the evil of the evil, the wickedness of
the wickedness. From whence observe,

Other sins are great sins, Obs. 1.
but this of false worship indeed is THE great sin that God is provoked against
a people for. Whence, let us not make light account of the Worship of God, for
how little soever Gods Worship is in our eyes, yet it is a great matter in Gods
eyes, and though you think that the sins against God in the matter of his
Worship be but small, yet God says, it is the great wickedness, it is the
wickedness of wickedness: And great wickedness it may be called not only in
respect of the nature of it, but from many aggravations, and long continuance
in it, notwithstanding all their means.

You may Note further from hence; Obs. 2.
God takes notice not only of men's sins, but of the aggravation of their sins.
Oh! let us do thus, do not only look upon your sins and acknowledge your selves
to be sinners, but look upon the Aggravations of your sins; Oh! this sin
committed against so many Mercies, so many Prayers, and Resolutions, and Vows,
and Covenants, and so many Deliverances that I have had; labor to lay the
Aggravations of your sins upon your hearts, and this is the way to humble your
hearts before the Lord. Indeed the Saints of God they need not seek to excuse
their sins, be not afraid to lay the aggravations of sin upon your own hearts,
according to what great aggravations there may be. Greaten your wickedness
before the Lord, do not so as ordinarily people do, to extenuate your sins, for
if there be any extenuation that possibly can be Jesus Christ will find out
that in his pleading, Christ is your advocate who sits at the right hand of the
Father, and it is his work to plead your cause, and therefore if there can be
any thing to extenuate a sin he will do it; you know that when he was here in
this world, when his Disciples did offend very much in that sleepiness of
theirs, that when Christ was to suffer they could not watch with him one hour,
Matthew. 26. 41. illustrated.
that sin might have been aggravated with abundance of circumstances, but says
Christ, The flesh is weak, but the spirit is willing; he falls to extenuate and
excuse. Now that which Christ did there, he will be ready to do in Heaven, for
thou that art a Saint.

And then further, Obs. 3.
According to greatness of sins so is the greatness of wrath; great wickedness
and great wrath they go together, and therefore according to the greatness of
sins should the greatness of our humiliation be. For so it is said of Manasses,
That he humbled himself greatly, and in Lament. 1. 20. Lam. 1. 20.
where the Church is humbling its self before God for the great wickedness and
the great wrath that was upon them. Behold, Oh Lord, for I am in distress; my
bowels are troubled, mine heart is turned within me; for I have grevously
rebelled. Mark, here you have these two points together, I have grievously
rebelled; Oh Lord, I am in distress; my bowels are troubled, my heart is turned
within me. Oh! remember this text you whose consciences do tell you of grievous
Rebellions.

The last words follow;

In a morning shall the King of Israel be utterly cut off.
Now for the understanding of this, we must consider to what this refers, 2
King. 17.
what King of Israel this was, and when this was fulfilled. For that if you
read 2 King. 17. it has reference to the story there; and this King of Israel
that is here spoken of, is Hoshea that was the last King of Israel, and
therefore it is said, Expos.
That he shall be utterly cut off: For he, and all his family was utterly cut
off, there was an end of the Kingdom of Israel that had continued so long
provoking God; says he, I have forborne the Kings of Israel a long time, but
now they shall be utterly cut off in H^shea.

This King of Israel his spirit was stout enough against God and his Prophets,
Hoshea the last King of Israel a wilful man*
and he would, and he would. My Brethren, It is not the stoutness of the
greatest men upon earth to say, They will, and they will, and they will venture
their Lives, and Kingdoms. Why, if they Will, God Will too, he has a Will as
well as they, at length Gods Will grows as strong as theirs, and proceeds
against them, and against their very families: The King of Israel shall be
utterly cut off.

Kings of the Earth they suffer little from men. What a brave business i^ it
for a man that he shall be able to go up and down in Countries, and rend, and
tear, and oppress, and bring thousands into woeful miseries and extremities, and
yet be afraid to suffer nothing at all Himself, therefore it is fit for God to
take in hand those men that are above the power of men; when men cannot deal
with them, it is the Lord himself he takes them into hand, and they are so much
the more under the imediate Justice of the Infinite God.

Shall be utterly cut off.
But when shall this be? Expos. 1.
In a morning: There is a sad morning coming.

But I find Cyril carries it thus: The Exposition of this part of this Verse,
as of many other particulars in these Exercises, appears to have been very
Prophesies.
God in his Patience is compared to a man asleep, and in the execution of
Judgment is said to awake; God brings his Righteous Judgments to light every
morning. But that is a little too forced.

But Secondly, In a morning: that is, Early, betimes; so in Jer. 21. 12. O
house of David, thus says the Lord, Execute Judgment in the Morning. So the
King of Israel shall be early cut off; And indeed this King of Israel he was
early cut off, he did not reign above eight or nine years at most. God does
take some in the morning of their time, in their youth, when their day is but
as it were dawning, he takes some sinners sooner than others: In the morning he
shall be cut off.

But Thirdly, Expos. 3.
In the morning, which comes yet nearer and more full to the sense and the
scope of the Spirit of God here; that is, even when the light comes, when they
have hopes of further good, then he shall be cut off. And so you shall find if
you read the story in the book of Kings, at this time when Hoshea was to be
cut off, that it was when he had entered into League with the King of EGYPT, and
now Hoshea thought a morning would arise, and he should have a brave day, and
live many merry days now; and when he thought the light began to come, in a
morning does God come to cut him off.

Oh! Obs.
so it is many times (my Brethren) That at that time when people have some
enlightening, and they think that now light is breaking out, Use for England.
when after a long night of darkness, then Gods displeasure breaks forth upon
them. We cannot but acknowledge that the Lord has granted us a morning light,
but let us fear and tremble; for the time of Gods displeasure, sometime it is in
the morning; when we think we have light breaking forth, God may have other
ways to bring darkness upon us than we are aware of; we know how dreadful a
day it was with Sodom after a Sunshine morning. It Is very observable, the
difference of Gods dealing with his own People, and with those that are carnal
and of the world: Zach. 4. 7. compared with the text, and explained.
compare this Scripture with Zach. 14. 7. Here, In a morning shall he be
utterly cut off. But in Zach. 14. 7. where God is speaking of mercy to his
People, he speaks of a day that should be known to God, and says he, At
evening time it shall be light; He comforts his People thus. But when he
threatens the wicked (says he) When the morning comes it shall be darkness.
The Lord does use to turn the darkness of the Saints into light, and to turn
the light of the wicked and ungodly into darkness. Oh! let us learn to fear
that God then that is able to turn light into darkness, Amos, 5. 8.
and darkness into light. Amos, 5. 8. Seek him (says the text) that turns
the shadow of death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night. He
can turn the shadow of death into morning. Suppose there be the greatest
darkness upon you, God can make that a morning of light: and suppose there be a
morning of light, God can turn that into darkness. Many men they set upon some
ways, and because they have a morning they bless themselves and think all must
needs go on according to their way; it is a very ordinary thing in the hearts
of men, especially that are compassing some notable design of their own, if it
does prosper in the beginning they think al will go on: Oh! thou may be
utterly deceived, thy designs may have a morning, and then God may cut thee off
and thy designs, and all thy thoughts may then perish. We read that Saul had
many Victories after that God had pronounced that he should be rejected. And
therefore we had need fear that God, that can turn the morning into darkness,
and darkness into light.

Fourthly, Obs. 4
God did not discomfit the Host of the Egyptians until the morning. God loves
to draw forth great sinners to the light; not to come upon them in the dark,
but to bring forth his judgments in the morning openly and clearly.

And lastly, Obs. 5.
In the morning he shall be cut off. That is, Suddenly, God will be quick at
his work: They thought by their power to hold it out: No, says God, I will not
make a days work of it, sicut mane transit, sic pertransit Rex Israel
it shall be in the morning, so the old Latin turns it, It shall pass as the
morning, as the light of the morning quickly passes over; as you heard before,
as the King of Israel is compared to the foam, so he is here compared to the
morning. Now my brethren to close this Chapter, Oh! what alteration of things
God is able to make in a morning! They (it may be) the day before, and over
night were jolly and merry, and blessed themselves in their way; they had
confidence in their way, and multitude of their mighty men; but in a morning
all is spoiled. God can make mighty alterations in a Kingdom in a morning, and
in Cities, and Families, and particular Persons, mighty alterations in a
morning: My Brethren, Who knows what a day may bring forth? who knows what a
morning may bring forth? Ezekiel. 7. 5, 6, 7.
Ezekiel. 7. 5, 6, 7. Thus says the Lord God, An evil, an only evil, behold, is
come. An end is come, the end is come, it watches for thee, behold, it is come.
The Morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwell in the Land; the time is
come, the day of trouble is near. As if God should say, All this while that thou
have bin in the act of the pride of thy heart, and vanity of thy spirit, I did
determine, that such a morning, such an evil should come, and it is come, it is
come, it is come, says God: Again, again, and again, the morning is come. Make
our peace at night,
O! think, when you lie down at night, think what thou have done this day, do
not dare to lie down, but first make thy peace with God, thou know not what
may be in the morning, and when thou risest up in the morning, And seek God
when we rise.
look up to God, and seek blessing and mercy from the Lord; for though thine
eyes be opened, and thou come to see the morning light, yet before the morning
be quite gone, thou know not what may befall thee, and therefore seek to make
thy peace with God, both in the night and in the morning; for great changes may
come to thee both in the night and in the morning, that thou never thoughtest
of in all thy life. And thus (through Gods blessing) we have finished the Tenth
Chapter.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE of the Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Chapters of the
Prophecy of HOSEA.
Page
A Acceptance
NO acceptance but by Jesus Christ 74
Admonition
Admonition to Saints 59 Admonition to England 66 Admonitions both to Popish
and Godly Wives 219 Admonition to those that sin wilfully 425
Affliction
In Affliction men see their need of God 9 Affliction teaches men, and what it
teaches them 189 In Affliction God is dreadful 335
Age
Every age ads to Idolatry 81
Aggravate
The sins of parents aggravate the sins of the children 209
Agreement
All Government comes by Agreement 17
Altars
Why there were no steps on Altars, nor tools lifted up upon them 70 The Altar
of Insence explained 71 Why there was but one Altar 74 The Altar typified out
Christ's sacrifice 74 Why it was sin to errect Altars? 76 Altars and Images to
be removed by Saints 327 See Christ and Service Book
Alphonsus
The diligence of Alphonsus King of Aragon in searching the Scripture 101
Allegory
A fit Allegory of a good Preacher 288
Alteration
God can make a speedy alteration in Cities 413
Ambition
We should have an holy ambition in Religion 82
Ancestors
There is more expected of us then of our Ancestors, and why 82
Antinomians
Antinomians confuted 100 Antinomians reproved 114
Antiquity
Antiquity is no rule for Religion 86
Apis
What manner of Idol the Egyptian Apis was 29
Apes
An Apes tooth worshipped in the Indies 388
Application
Application to the Court 365
Argument
There is no argument for the holiness of a Church 130 Arms, see Religion
Assyrian
Why the As^yrian Army was called an Eagle 4
Authority
Compulsion of Authority is no excuse for sin 283
B Backsliding
Backsliding is dangerous 13
Bare Necks
The evil of Bare Necks 433
Bassil
A custom at Bassil 34
Black Patches
The evil of Black Patches 433
Brethren
Brethren admonished 207
Believers
The happy state of Believers showed 159 Breeding, see Men Burden, see Kingdom.
C Calf
The Calf of Samaria why it was so called 25 Caution, see Kings
Canaan
Canaan was the Lords Land in an especial manner, and why? 157
Cause
The Cause of God prospers at last always 206
Children
Children should beseech their parents to repent 260 See Parents and Mothers
Christ
Christ is our Altar in the time of the Gospel 72 Christ is little beholding to
most Kings 337
Chemarims
What the word Chemarim signifies, and its diverse acceptations 388
Christian
Good Christians depend upon the Covenant they have made 7 It is a very
dangerous thing for Christians to be without Ordinances 54 Christians should
not endure wickedness in their families 273 Why Christians complain of
emptiness 317 A Christian Principle 320
Church
God does not cast off his Church though guilty of many sins 5 Church Officers
are to be chosen with great care 18 It is dangerous for the Church to mix with
the world 47 The Church is Gods palace. 128 The Church is compared to a Vine,
and why 300 See National and Vine
Christmas
Why Christmas was wont to be so zealously kept 118
Cleaness
God regards not outward cleaness where there is inward uncleaness 161
Commandment
The second Commandment expounded 78 The second Commandment illustrated 258
Comfort, see Grace Commanders, see Villainy Compulsion, see Authority
Communion
To neglect the communion of Saints is dangerous 298
Controversy
The Controversy between us and the Papists 78 Confidence, see Fear.
Consideration
A dreadful consideration 416 Consideration for men of quality 440
Custom
Custom is no rule for Gods worship 186
Continue
We must continue seeking God and why? 482 Covetous, see Idolaters
Covenant
Breach of Covenant is punished by the sword 365 In what cases men may be false
in a Covenant made 366
Counsels
Men's own counsels often deceive them 397 What ought to be avoided in our
counsels 398 What ought to be attended in our counsels 399
Creature
Better the Creature perish than be abused 412 Crown, see Princes
Crosness
The crosness of men's spirits in England 279
Crucifying
Why crucifying was so hateful to the Romans (...)
Curse
A dreadful curse lies upon the Jews to this day 298
Cyprian
Cyprian's Prayer at his Martyrdom 454
D Dead
Dead bodies, why they defiled. 166
Death
Some wicked men put a good face upon the matter even at death 177 Delight, see
God
Deering
Deerings speech in his Sermon before Queen ELIZABETH 278
Depart
When God begins to depart we should cry mightily 253
Despairing
The sad speech of a despairing woman 473
Destruction
Destruction is the fruit of not hearing the Word 293
Devil
A sinner is a creature the Devil empties his excrements into. 49
Diffidence
The vileness of diffidence in God 50 Distance, see Time Displeasure, see God
Distress, see Hypocrites
Divine
The speech of a German Divine at his death 189
Divinity
Man cannot put Divinity upon a creature 31
Dove
Why God accepts not the Eagle, but the Dove 4
Duty
Good Duties being cast off bring punishment 14 Fullness of Duty what it is 315
See Sin and Enlargement
E Eagle
Why the Eagle was unclean under the Law 4 See Assyrian, Dove Wicked men
Effigies
An Effigies of the last times: 339
Eli
Eli's example urged 384
Emptiness
Emptines is unatural to a Vine and why 304
Encouragement
Encouragements to fight 385 Encouragements for men in mean employments 450
Encouragements for poor souls in mean endeavors 465
Engagement
We must take heed of Engagements in evil 28
England
England another Canaan 159 England more unfit for mercy now than at the
first, and why? 263 England smitten as Sodom 281 See Admonition and Crosness
Enlargements
How we should use our enlargements in duties 312
Estrangement
The degrees of man's estrangement from God 111 Eternity, see Life.
Exhortation
Exhortation to young ones. 214 Exhortation to the Godly. 56 Excellency, see
Soul Excrements, see Devil.
Experience
An Experience worth the trial 316
See Heason.

F
Faces, see Painted Faithful Faithful men discouraged, and how 280
False worship
False worship must be cast off 13 It is just with God to let False worship
alone till it come to the full 82 See Ruin
Feast
Why a day is called a Feast to God 172
Faith
How to increase Faith for pardon in holy duties 120
Fly
When a man may fly 182 Forms, see Hypocrites
Foreign
Foreign Leagues are dangerous 46
Followed
Our own ways are not to be followed 64
Fear
Gods fear drives out carnal confidence 333
Forefathers
We are subject to imitate our Forefathers in evil 79 Fullness, see Duty
Funeral
Funeral mournings are hateful to God 166 See Gain Fruitfulness, see Vines
Furious
Furious men do the least service 329
G Gain
Gain at Funerals makes some rejoice, whilst others mourn 169
German
The speech of a German Divine at his death 454
God
Gods power showed 42 Gods justice over such as sow the wind 43 God takes it
ill we should go to Nations for help 58 God should be our delight 211 Gods
delight is in young ones. 213 God is the Saints glory 223 Gods departing is the
cause of woe, and why 250 We should labor to do what we can for God though he
seem to leave us 253 God manifests his displeasure in the places where men sin
272 God cannot endure wickedness in his house 300 See Church, House, Worship,
Mercy, Preservation, Depart. Generation, see Spirit.
Gentry
Gentry admonished 208
Good works
Good works are excellent, and why 30
Gospel
Gospel-Righteousness is a most excellent thing 451
Government
The danger of setting up new Government 23 Government is a thing of great
consequence 271 See Agreement, Pains.
Governors
Governors are subject to establish false worship 44
Grace
Hypocrites seek Grace for Comfort, but Saints seek Comfort for Grace 485
Gregory
Gregory's speech to Theodorus. 89
H
Happinss, see Believers
Heart
We ought to search our hearts 292
Help
Helps against Injustice 377 See God
Hemlock
Injustice compared to Hemlock 370 Hemlock stalks springing up in England 375
House
It is good dwelling in Gods house 272
Humiliation
The benefit of humiliation: 308 How humiliation should be preached 308
Hypocrites
When hypocrites are in distress they see their need of God 9 Hypocrites stand
much upon formal ways 10 Hypocrites think to fare the better for their parents
11
I Idolaters
Idolaters are profane, but covetous men are worse 24 Idolaters promise
themselves safety in their Idols 26 Idolaters are laborious in their Idol
worship 35 Idolaters sow in hope 36 Idolaters lay a ground for sucession 36
Idolaters observe their season. ibid. Idolaters love outward prosperity 153 We
ought to do as much for God, as Idolaters do for their Images 324
Idolatry
Idolatry drives men against principles of reason 31 Idolatry is an hereditary
sin. 30 Idolatry continues in succession 80 Idolatry depends much upon
Ancestors 258 See Succession
Jeroboam
What Jeroboam's sin was: 19
Jews
The Jews custom in time of danger 412
Ignorance
The miseries attending Ignorance 18 Images, see Altars
Invention
There ought to be no invention of Man in Gods Worship: 77
Injustice
Injustice is sometimes like to Justice 370 See Hemlock, Help Justice, see
Reformation
Joy
Means how to regulate our joy 142 See Prosperity.
Josephus
Josephus his lamentable story. 414
Israel
Israel's Prerogatives 48 See Nation
K Keep
Examine principles well first, and then keep to them 292
Keys
Four keys in Gods hand only, and what they be 263
Kings
Caution in imitating the Jews Kings 15 Kings were made by men 31 The burden
Kings are under. 65 See People Kingdom, see States.
L Labor
Every one bound to LABOR. 434
Lady
Work for Ladies 436 Land, see Ruin
Lapsed
The evil of lapsed Ministers. 48
Latimer
The speech of Bishop Latimer before Queen ELIZABETH. 278 Latimer's notable
story 178
Law
What the Law of God is 95 The Law of God is great, and why 96 The Law of God
moves to obedience 102 See Saints
Leagues
Leagues of peace may prove occasions of sorrow 138 Leagues must not be made
with wicked men 161 Learned, see Opinion
Life
Life is the se^d-time for eteruity 39
Liberty
Liberty is exceeding dangerous in young professors 309 London, see Popery
Love
Love is not to be bought 55
Lord
It is a great mercy to have time to seek the Lord 472 See Quick-sightedness
Luther
Luther called by the Papists, the Trumpet of Rebellion and Sedition 2
Lumpish
Sorrow for sin must not be lumpish 168
M Mass
The abominableness of the Mass 33
Malignants
Malignants may have great Victories 206
Meditation
Meditations for such as are weak in the fields 156 Meditations for parents
260, 288 Meditations for Rich men 322 Meditations at going to bed. 336
Men
Men of mean breeding should take heed how they behave themselves when they come
into Authority 66 Men's writings how they help to understand the Scripture 88
Mercy
All mercies must be improved for God 20 See Free Grace Misery, see Ignorance
Ministers
Ministers must not be weary of their work 3 Ministers that count such things
as are laid aside only inconvenient, will take them up again 203 Ministers must
gain the Peoples love 220 What Ministers should rejoice in 394 Ministers are
Plow men 471 See Lapsed, Wind, Rule
Motives
Motives to continue seeking God 482
Mothers
Tenderhearted Mothers admonished 259 Mothers fond love s^ayes their children
288
N Nation
No Nation but Israel forsook their Gods (...) 148 Our Nation to be helped, not
to be fled from 182 See God
National
No National Church now 75
Nobility
Nobility admonished 208
O
Officers, see Church
Opinion
The Opinions of the Learned are no rule for Religion 86
Opression
Our Opressions are not to be removed, but renewed 282 Ordinances, see
Christian.
Oil
What the Oil in sacrifices signified 162
P Pains
Pains must be taken about Government 271 Some take more pains to perish than
others do to be saved 488
Painted Faces
The evil of Painted Faces 433
Particular
Particular persons must suffer, not resist 18 Pardon, see Faith
Parents
Parents must not be a shame to their children 222 Parents must give their
children good education 266
Passions
Disordered passions cause sad conclusions 284 Peace, see Leagues
People
People give power to Kings: 16 Common people follow the great Ones 381
Peace
Many while they provide for peace provide for ruin 60
Perplexed
Why the wicked are perplexed in the day of the Lords wrath 177
Persevere
We ought to persevere in duties though we have no present comfort 428
Plow
We should plow in hope all our lives 428 We must continue plowing: 471
Plow-men, see Ministers Policy, see Reason Pomp, see Superstition.
Popery
Popery almost brought in at London 25
Pride
There is much pride in dejection 169 Pride is the root of not hearing 295 See
Stubborness
Prayer
Weak prayer may be strong: 315
Preservation
Gods preservation of us all our days showed 245
Princes
Princes when they come first to the Crown promise fair: 276 Princes are not
to be trusted in 338 None so perfidious as Princes. 338 Profane, see Idolaters
Prosper
We may prosper, and yet have no cause to joy in it 141
Prosperity
Take heed in prosperity 250
Professors
Young Professors should be kept down 308 Why Professors are empty? 314 See
Young, Question.
Q Question
A Question answered by a Professor 180
Quick-sightedness
The quick-sightedness of the enemy comes from the Lord. 20
R Racha
The word Racha explained: 303
Religion
When Arms may be taken for Religion 21 Good acts in Religion may be evil in
the doer 77 Religion is a Saints recreation 165
Reason
Reason, Policy, and Experience may go one way, and yet Gods Word another 85
Redemption, see Sabbath Recreation, see Religion
Reformation
Reformation cannot prosper except Justice be established 379
Revelations
Revelations besides the Word are dangerous 91
Riches
Riches in goods work is the best wealth 321
Righteousness
What Righteousness is 479
Rod
We must not choose our sin and rod too 427 Romans, see Crucifying
Ruin
Gods mercy prevents our ruin. 67 False worship is the ruin of a Land 159 See
Peace
Rule
A Rule to teach common people how to judge of their Ministers 197 Cautions to
the same RULE. 198 See Scripture
S Sabbath
The Sabbath was appointed for Commemoration of our Redemption 110
Saints
The Saints prize the Law of God 100 The Saints should sorrow most for sin 151
How the Saints rejoice in Gods vengeance 175 Saints admonished 219 The Saints
should prize the enjoyment of God 251
Satan
What Satan's great design is? 200
Scripture
The Scripture is the Rule, and the Expositor to understand the Rule 87 The
Scripture should be looked upon as particular to our selves 92
Self
People stick much at what comes from self 30
Self-denial
God requirs self-denial in temporal things 119
Servants
Great is the danger of servants at their own hand 54 Servants to great men
exhorted 277
Service
To be employed in public Service is the making of a man 123
Service Book
Service Book and Altars all some men's Religion 387
Sin
God knows how to make use of men's sins 22 A man may commit the sin against the
holy Ghost, and yet continue in Duties 115 God remembers the sin of wicked men
when they perform holy duties, and why 122 See Altars, Rod.
Signs
Signs of much wrath 126 Sound, see Threatening
Smiting
Smiting with the Pen is worse than smiting with the Sword 281
Sinner
God may damn a lesser sinner, and save a greater sinner: 152
Soul
The Excellency of the Soul^^ 33
Soldiers
Soldiers are Gods Priests 174 Sorrow, see Lumpish
Spirit
The Spirit of God forsaw this generation 114
States
States may judge of the right of a Kingdom. 2^
Stubborness
Stubborness is the fruit of pride 53
Strong
Strong places are not to be trusted in 132
Success
Sometimes God gives success in judgment. 421
Succession
Succession ads to Idolatry 80
Superstition
How it was superstition in the Israelites to build temples 130 Who mourns most
for superstition 391 Why carnal men contend for superstition 490
Superstitious
Superstitious men regard outward pomp 27 A note to the Superstitious 204
Superstitious children admonished 258 Sword see Smiting
T Taxes
Taxes upon men's estates are but mean burdens 66
Teachers
Teachers establish worship 84 Temple see Superstition
Threatening
The threatening of God is a terrible sound 3 Men should be sensible of the
threatenings of God 68 Distance of time in commandments and threatenings is not
to be heeded 80 Trumpet see Luther
Themistocles
The saying of Themistocles at his death
Thoughts
The shifting thoughts of carnal hearts in time of danger 181
Time
Evil tim^ are good times to die in 265 Time for England to seek God 477 See
Threatening
V Vanity
Scripture expressions of the vanity of great persons 403
Vessels
Gods grace to the vessels of mercy 49
Vile
Vile things are many times hid under glorious titles 191 Vileness, see
Diffidence.
Villainy
The villainy of malicious Commanders against the Godly. 257
Vine
The fruitfulness of Vines 300 The Church compared to a Vine ibid. See
Emptiness
Unclean
Why Mourners for the dead were so long unclean: 167
Use
Use for the afflicted 440
W
Ways, see Follow
Wealth
Wealth is wicked men's glory 223
Wicked men
Wicked men are as Eagles in their rage 5 Wicked men first serve their turns of
the godly, and then scorn them 47 Wicked men are wild upon their lusts 52
Wicked men are contemptible 53 See Perplexity
Wind
Who they are that sow the wind 37 Ministers must beware they sow not the wind
41 Rules how ib. See God
Wine
Wine in sacrifices, what it signified 162
Will Worship
Will Worship an empty thing. 303 Work, see Ministers Works, see Good
Word
It is a singular blessing to have the written Word 88 By whom the Word is
counted strange 105 World, see Christ
Worship
Gods Worship is an excellent thing 12 Gods Worship is cast off by carnal
hearts ibid. Gods Worship must not be imitated 110 The Worship of God is a
great matter 104 True Worship must be mourned after 388 See False, and
Invention
Wrath
The wrath of God is many times executed in answering our desires 150 The wrath
of God called Wine and why 174 See Signs Writers, see Men
Y Yoke
Christ's yoke easier than the yoke of the enemy 436
Young
Young Professors their danger 45 Young Professors should be kept down 308 See
Vine
Young ones,
Young ones exhorted 214 Young ones the hope of a Nation
Youth
Youths sins are Ages terrors. 121
FINIS.

