AN EPISTLE TO Friends of Truth In and about LONDON. Written by Edward
Borroughs, in the Year, 1661. And now is published for the further service of
those unto whom it is directed, and whom it does more particularly concern; And
also may be of service unto all (elsewhere) who love the Truth, as it is in
Christ Jesus.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

To the Friends of Truth in and about London.
DEarly and well-beloved in Christ our Life and Glory, The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, and at this time quickens my heart into the lively remembrance of
you all, herewith sending the hearty and fervent salutation of my dear and
perfect Love, unto all the Faithful amongst you; for the Fathers Love fills
my heart, and has raised up my spirit into an holy frame and temper of
gladness and rejoicing, of great joy and comfort in the remembrance and feeling
sense of what the Lord has wrought and made manifest among his people, and the
fullness of his Love and rejoicing flows out in praising and magnifying the
Lord our God for evermore. Oh what has the Lord wrought for us in our Day! How
has his outstretched Arm been made bare again and again for our salvation and
deliverance? How many have his mercies been, and how numberless have his loving
kindnesses been showed to us? How has his power and wisdom been discovered
amongst his People, by which we are quickened and revived into the Life of
Righteousness and Peace, to be Servants and Heirs of the Everlasting Father,
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, being called by him out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light? And how glorious is the Light that has appeared upon our
Tabernacle, and shined in our hearts, and that has led us in the way of Peace,
and taught us in the path of Righteousness; thus and much more has the hand of
the Lord wrought for us, having raised us up to be a People, that in times past
were not a People; but now he has formed us for himself, and created us for
his praise, having gathered us as a Shepherd does his Flock from our strayed
estate, in which we were strangers and afar off, inhabiting in death and
darkness, but now raised up to sit together in heavenly places, and to feed in
the fat pastures of his fullness that fills all in all.

This has been effected by the hand and power of the most High, who has also
preserved us unto this day through many trials and tribulations; and again and
again, when our enemies have risen up against us to destroy us, even then has
the Lord been our defense, and confounded our Persecutors, so that we yet live,
blessed is the Name of the Lord, the remembrance of which infinite tender
mercies from the Father, that we have received, have a heavenly influence upon
my heart at this time, which causes me to say, What manner of Love is this! Oh
the height, and depth, and infiniteness of the same! the beauty thereof has
ravished my heart, the strength thereof has overcome me, and the virtue
thereof has overcome me, and the virtue thereof has filled my soul; and this
is the present frame of my spirit; Full of love and good will to the Lord God,
and to all his Saints, and particularly unto you, unto whom my spirit desires
in the Lord the increase of peace, and mercies, and blessings, and all heavenly
virtue unto you all, for I am under particular engagements unto you more than
unto many.

1. Because my labor and service in the work of the Gospel has been more
amongst you than amongst others; even for diverse years have I been conversant
among you, in the administration of the gift of the Gospel, by dispensing the
Word of Life, to the Converting of some, and to the Strengthening and Cofirming
of others in the way of the Lord. And let the Just God bear witness of that
faithfulness, and integrity and sincerity of heart, in which he has carried me
amongst you, while many precious days I have passed away with you, and have
not sought yours but you, nor do I desire ought concerning you, but your
faithfulness to the Lord, and your growth and establishment in the wisdom of
Christ Jesus, and that blessings and peace may ever rest with you. And seeing
it is thus that some of my precious years in the service of God, have been
spent amongst you; Therefore is my heart and spirit engaged to you-wards, even
while I live, to advise you, and exhort you, and to pray for you, that you may
be sound in the Faith, and established in the Truth, and confirmed in the
Possession that never fades away.

2. In respect of that place of your outward Residence, (that great City I
mean) where Satan's Seat is, and where wickedness abounds, and many temptations
and provocations, which may attempt to draw you from the Lord. I do know the
dangers are many which may easily be met withal in that place. There is both
the love, glory and excellency of this world near unto you; and also the
terrors, threats, losses and persecutions of this evil world even dwelling
with you, all which may work upon some many fears and doubts, and beget
temptations to the denying of the Lord; and seeing the danger is such to
you-wards in that place, even more than to some others, therefore is my soul
engaged to admonish, and instruct, and pray for your preservation unto the end,
that ye may walk as the Lords, and to his glory.

3. And also my desires are for you, that blessings and peace may be multiplied
unto you, and that you may walk in the wisdom and power of the Lord in this
respect, that Truth may be honored, and crowned with dominion and authority,
and good report in that great City, by your faithfulness, and patience, and
diligence, and all the fruits of righteousness; for as many temptations do
attend you (as I have said before) so also many eyes are upon you, beholding
what you are, and what you do, and what will become of you, and if you walk in
faithfulness and righteousness, and be preserved unto the Lord in boldness and
valor for his Names sake, this will magnify the Truth, and crown it with
honor, and strengthen and comfort many that are weak, and be a joy to all the
upright, and it will confound your enemies, and put them to shame, and limit
the unreasonable spirit of the power of darkness, when our enemies see your
just, faithful, righteous and inoffensive manner of walking in all things. And
therefore for this cause, my heart is engaged to pray for you, seeing the eyes
of many are upon you to mark your ways and doings, and what will be the end.

And now, dearly beloved, as by the free grace and kindness of God ye are
called unto this calling, and are renewed and changed into the life of
Righteousness; so it is by the same grace and power of the Father, that ye must
stand and be preserved unto the end; for by grace and faith we all stand, even
through diligence, faithfulness, and watchfulness in the same grace, being
obedient to its teachings, and fruitful in its motions, and walking by its
rule, in meekness and lowliness of heart, in sincerity and godly fear, not
being or doing any thing of our selves, distinct or divided from this grace,
but being and doing all things, through the grace of God dwelling in us, and
this is the highest perfection of Saints; every ones highest state admits of
watchfulness, and faithfulness, and obedience, and to hearken to the Lord, and
do his will in all things; and whatsoever is of our selves, and related to the
outward world, may be kept in subjection by his power, that he alone may rule
and be exalted in Heaven and Earth, and in all things, what we are, and what we
do: And wait upon the Lord that ye may be established, and settled in the Truth,
and that ye may be confirmed therein for ever, as being natural heirs of the
possession of Grace and Truth, to do, and walk, and live according to his will,
being so inherited, never to go forth any more, and able to say, Nothing can
separate us from the Love of God; not Death, nor Life, nor any other thing: For
I would put you in mind, and ye also know it, how that many have been touched
in their hearts with the sense of the Lord, and his Love, yea, and many have
enjoyed of the good gift of God, and walked with us for a time, that have not
remained unto the end, but have started aside from the Lord, and been overcome
with the temptations of this world, even to the forsaking of the way of Truth
and Righteousness, and such have dishonored the Lord, and forfeited their
peace and inheritance in God, and become hardened in their hearts, and dead to
God, and the latter end of such has been worse than their beginning; though yet
for a time such walked with us, and tasted of the good gifts of God, yet are
become reprobate, because their hearts have not been firm, and constant, and
sound, and approved to God, but of an evil frame and temper of spirit;
ambitious, vainglorious, self-seeking, and such like, which Spirit could not
retain the gift of God, but abused it and perverted it from its proper end. And
therefore, dearly beloved, it is exceeding precious to have a heart and spirit,
tried and approved of the Lord; a good and honest heart, an upright and
contrite spirit, for that will abide in faithfulness unto God through all
tribulations and trials, if the the heart be right in the sight of God,
whatsoever the knowledge be, and whether the gifts be little or great, yet the
Lords presence is there, and such are blessed; so that its not enough, only to
have a touch and taste of the loving kindness of God, but every one must be
established therein, in an approved heart and tried Spirit, which can endure
all things and not be shaken nor moved, and its only that kind of spirit, which
is meek and lowly, sincere and upright, which is established in the Truth, and
which only can remain unmovable. And according to the ancient Doctrine of
Christ, which ye have believed, every one must look to your own particular
standing* and must feel your own particular joy, peace and comfort, and must
receive the assurance of Life in your own souls; for it is an everlasting word,
every one must stand by their own, by what they feel and enjoy of eternal Life
in their own hearts, that only is every ones security and assurance in the
Kingdom of Peace and Glory; and it is the height of perfection, to have the
seal of the Spirit of God in our Consciences; witnessing to us, That we are the
Lords: and blessed are they that have this Testimony, even that of the Spirit
of the Father, which is the everlasting Comforter against all sorrow, and the
perfect Seal against all doubts, and the sure Guide against all opposition.
This is the office of the Spirit of the Lord, and its work in the hearts of his
Children; therefore my advice is to you as from the beginning, Look to your
own, to your own measure of the gift of grace and truth, that only stands, when
all wanderings after men and things fall, and in that is your security, as I
have said.

And let your conversations and walkings be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, in all faithfulness and righteousness, that you may be an honor to the
Lord in your generation; for this only have we to do in this world, even to
show forth his praise and glory, who has created us in Christ Jesus. All
things in relation to Truth are well in these Countries; the Dominion of Truth
is set up over the heads of the wicked, and it is a terror to its enemies, and
the joy of all good men; and Friends are faithful in the Power of the Lord, and
look over this world, to the world that has no end, and their hope and
confidence is in that; and Meetings are generally quiet, and the presence of
the Lord is amongst his People. And thus to the Grace, Power and Wisdom of the
Lord God are ye committed, who is the only Preserver of all his Children. Grace
and peace be with you all.

E. B.
Underbarrow, the 18th. Day of the 8th. Month, 1661.
THE END.

