The Lord BALMERINO'S SPEECH In the High Court of Parliament in Scotland,
Spoken November. 4. 1641. Concerning the levying of an Army against the Papists
in Ireland. Describing their Conspiracies, which have a long time insulted and
continued against these two Kingdoms of England and SCOTLAND.

Printed at London for T. B. 1641.

THE LORD BALMERINO'S SPEECH, In the high Court of Parliament in SCOTLAND.
My Lords,
I Stand not up with a Petition in my hand, for I have already a Petition in my
mouth: Neither do I annunciate any thing to my own proper gain, but to the
real accommodation of this whole Kingdom. For although a particular
conspiracy by some confederates was intended against my self, and other Noble
members of this House; yet that very thing does not so much exasperate me to
speak, as the epidemicall dangers impendent on this Nation. Behold how
promiscuously men wander in the distracted paths of Religion! Behold how
preposterously our mortal enemies the Papists, do not only cast their
invective aspersions, but also their intended malice against us! And shall we
thus sleep in vindication? Shall we not exstimulate the height of justice to
those that promerit worse?

It strikes a repercussive stupidity into my mind to think of those
stratagems which they have forged, both for our beloved brethren in England,
and lately for the perdition of some in this illustrious assembly; and yet
shall we still permit the Popish recusants to perfect in their former
Hel-guided imaginations? It is an old saying among the Latinists, but not so
old as true, The impunity of a fault does add more courage to the offender;
and I fear if we do not curb in time their extended malice, all things will
grow to an higher Anarchie: The remission of some faults, are the cause of the
commission of others; and if we connive at their nefarious conspiraces, we
do in some manner encourage them in their wicked proceedings, and so by
subsequent conclusion, become our selves confederates unto them.

I confess, many of their accursed crew are aggregated in Ireland, and by an
irregular insurrection, do intend the utter demolition of Christian Religion.
But God foresees their erroneous imaginations, and will in due time (as we
trust in his omnipotent justice) precipitate all their Babilonish intents. Many
may build Castles in the air but to little effect, and many likewise may aim
at the ruin of Protestants, but although they be in strength like Goliath, yet
will the little stone of Religious David guided by Gods own hand, maugre all
their Gigantean puissance.

My Lords, if my tongue have committed any error in its prolixity, and
longinquity of words, that error shall wait upon your gracious pardon: But this
I am confident of, neither will I ever desist from my opinion, that unless we
do fully vindicate these malicious Papists, these two Kingdoms both Scotland
and England, cannot sleep long in security. If they do not intend our
subversion, why did they conspire against us? If they do not intend our
subversion, why have they so oftentimes plotted against England? If they do
not intend our subversion why are they now gathered together in Ireland, daily
studying the demolition of this State and Kingdom?

My Lords, assure your selves that these things cannot proceed from a good
intent: And if you annect and consummate all their conspiraces into one bundle,
you will find them so various, and intricately numerous, that I am persuaded
that they themselves can expect nothing but justice. Is it so then, that their
very own actions do cry out for justice, why are we then so backward in the
execution thereof? Is it so then, that revenge her self stands idle, why do
we not employ her? Is it so then, that the Kingdom expects a vindication, why
do we then frustrate them of their quotidian expectation?

My Lords, I conceive it very expedient, that we should leavy a sufficient army
to repel them, and if that will not suffice, then utterly to expel them, I am
sure and confident thereof, that England will conjoyne with us in munition,
therefore let us labor with all expedition to beat down their aspiring
malice: Let us not procrastinate this business, lest in the deferment hereof,
God himself be angry with us, whose cause we ought to maintain: What fear
can be conceived to oppose us, when the Almighty omnipotence will fight for us?
Therefore let us raise a sufficient Army against them, for no better cause can
ever offer it self unto us, then the maintenance of true Religion.

My Lords, I beseech you weigh my words with your sage gravity, and entertain
my hearty desire with all your consent herein; which hoping I shall obtain of
you, these are my hopes, these are my wishes, and lastly these are my prayers.

FINIS.

