AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED Upon the Eleventh, Twelfth
and Thirteenth Chapters of the PROPHESY OF HOSEA.

Being First delivered in several LECTURES at Michaels Cornhil, LONDON.

By Jeremiah Buroughs.

Being the Seventh Book published by Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, Sydrach
Simpson, William Bridge, John Yates, Will. Adderly.


LONDON: ^^inted by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1651.

To the READER.
GOD who alone is perfect in Himself, has retained this Prerogative to
Himself, That His Work should be perfect (as Moses speaks) And as another Holy
One has it, does al his pleasure. Paul, though in whatever he was to commit
to writing (in matters sacred) had infalibility of assistance, yet perfected
not all be intended: These things we will do, if God permit, said he to the
Hebrews: But we no where find extant any evidence, Heb.
that he accomplished what he there intended; Namely, A full Methodical
Discourse upon those first Principles, and Foundations of Religion, which that
speech had reference unto. It is no wonder then, that if such a kind of
Imperfection accompanied the Works of so great a Master Builder, if it attend
those who build on this Foundation, and are not privileged (as yet he was)
from building Hay and stubble.

This sort of Incompleatness has befallen the Works of this worthy Author, in
respect to the finishing of this Prophecy, which he intended, and had
performed; wherein yet to the Church of God, there shall be no loss, there being
no thoughts nor Notions suggested to any man, which though for the present they
die with him. But the same Spirit that is the inspirer of all, does bring to
light in some one or other servant of God, in his own time.

What a Treasury of Thoughts seemed to be lost, and to die with the Savior of
the World, which he had not, could not then utter; which yet the Spirit that
filled him without measure, distributed amongst the Apostles that came after
him, according to the measure of the gift of Christ in each. There is no beam
of Divine Light has shone into any man's heart that shall finaly, and for ever
be put under a Bushel; but in the end shall be set up, to give light to the
whole House.

The purpose of this Preface is, To consign the Pasport thorough the World, of
these last Notes of the Author upon this Prophecy; Namely, The Eleventh,
Twelfth, and Thirteenth Chapters; and to assure the Reader, That they are the
best and most genuine that can be expected, being collected out of those under
his hand, al along; and the best Copies of those that took them from his mouth:
And to subjoyn this hearty prayr, for a blessing from Heaven on these, and the
rest of these our Brothers Labors that are published, that his Works may follow
him, and he receive (at latter day) a full reward, even according to the fruit
of his doings.

Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simpson, William Bridge, John Yates,
Will. Adderly.


THE CONTENTS
CHAP. XI.
VERSE. I.
COhaerence Page 2 Observation 1 God stands much upon the clearing of himself
to be a God of Love and Mercy Ibid. Obs. 2 It is the Privilege of the Saints to
be beloved of God 4 Obs. 3. It is a great aggravation of sin, to sin against
Love 5 Obs. 4 It Is very useful to call to mind Gods old Love 6 Obs. 5 All Gods
old mercies remain engagements to duty, and aggrations of sin 7 Obs. 6 Let not
our hearts sink though we are able to do but little for God 8 Obs. 7 If God
love us so soon, our love to God ought not to be deferred 9 Obs. 8 The Church
is in the same relation to God as a Son is to a Father 11 Obs. 9. Let wicked
men take heed how they use the Saints, for they are Gods Sons 12 Obs. 10 The
Saints are not only Sons in relation but in community. ib. Obs. 11. Gods Sons
are not free from sore and grievous evils in this world. 13 Obs. 12 It Is a
great mercy to be called out of Egypt 14 Obs. 13. God has an eye to Christ in
all he does 19
VER. II.
Exposition 22 Obs. 1 It Is a mercy of God to have Gods Ministers calling us to
obedience 23 Obs. 2 When God has called us out of affliction, it is a great
addition of mercy to call us out of son unto duty ib. Obs. 3 It Is a great
aggravation of men's sins if they be called to duty, after God has called them
out of misery, and they do not obey it ib. Obs. 4 For men not only to disobey
Gods call, but to turn away themselves from it, and from those that speak to
them in his name, is very micked and a high degree of sinfulness 24 Obs. 5 It
is yet a higher wickedness to have our corruptions irritated by the Word, and
provoked. ib. Obs. 6 That Gods free grace is very great and very strong 25 Use
Comfort against a stubborn heart 26
VER. III.
Exposition 27 Obs. 1 When God calls his people out of afflictions, yet they
know no more how to guide themselves in their way, than a little child does 28
Use for England 29 Obs. 2 The way that God leads people in many times may be a
way of much difficulty ib. Use We have cause to bless God that we are in his
way 30 Obs. 3 Though we meet with difficultys in our way, yet God loves to
teach his people how to go in their way, and the more difficult their way is,
the more care has God of them, to teach them how to go ib. Use Be not
discouraged at your difficulties, but look up to God for guidance ib. Obs. 4
Seeing God makes it a fruit of his love to teach them how to go; when you see
others slip and stumble in the way of profession of Religion: Bless God then
for his mercy toward you that he helps and teaches you in your way 33 Obs. 5
Take heed, you that have need of teaching that you be not wayward, foolish,
wanton, and unruly, and that you do not wilfully run into rugged and slippery
ways 34 Obs. 6 Gods Ministers and all others should labor to follow God in
this way of his, that is, To have a tender care of others ib. Obs. 7 Gods
Ministers must not be discouraged though they meet with those that are very
froward 35 Obs. 8 It is a great aggravation of sin when children requite not
their parents for their education 36 Obs. 9 God will not cast off his children
though they get hurt 37 Use Be not discouraged when you have gone out of Gods
way, because the Lord will heal his people 38 Obs. 10. God does us much good we
knew not of 39 Use Not to abuse our strength in the ways of sin, and so
manifest that you know not that God has healed you 41
VER. IV.
Exposition 42 Obs. 1 That the ways of God are very rational so that they may
draw any man of understanding to love thew. 49 Obs. 2 The way to prevail with
men is to deal with them in a rational way 50 Obs. 3 It Is a great aggravation
of sin, not to be drawn die these cords of men 52 Use, 1 Saints should be
eminent in courtesy 54 Use, 2 We should draw our relations with gentleness ib.
Use, 3 Gentle means rejected, aggravate sin 55 Obs. 4 We must preserve the
honor of our inferiors though their faults be great ib. Obs. 5 It will
aggravate the shame and confusion of men which disregarded Gods using them in
an honorable way 56 Obs. 6 Not to be drawn to our duty but by violence and
strength, it is beastial 57 Obs. 7 As God deals with us according to our nature
so we ought to deal with God (as far as we are able) suitable to his nature ib.
Obs. 8 That the Lord does not always stand upon number, though the greatest 59
Obs. 9 That Love, it has strong bonds 63 Obs. 10 We should labor to cast the
bonds of love upon those we have to deal with 66 Obs. 11 Seeing Love has such
bonds in it, we should make use of the Love of God to bind our hearts to him 78
Obs. 12 There Is nothing more aggravats sin, than that it is against Love 88
Obs. 13 That deliverance from oppression is a great mercy 92 Obs. 14 To abuse
our ease when God is pleased to deliver us from yokes, is very sinful 93 Obs.
15 To oppress one another, after we are delivered from oppression is likewise a
great evil 97 Obs. 16 Mercies prepared and provided for, laid before us are to
be prized 101 Obs. 17 In receiving of our food, we must look up to Heaven 102
Obs. 18 The Service of Gods people is easy, and their provision is bountiful
ib. Use How great is the mercy of God to us who has eased our yokes, and laid
meat before us (...) 103
VER. V.
Obs. 1 That which bardens men hearts against threats in their sin, is some
shifts that they have in their thoughts 104 Obs. 2 A stout heart cares not
whether it goes rather than it will return to God 105 Obs. 3 Stubborn hearts if
any thing crosses them will foolishly and desperately wish their return to
their former condition of misery ib. Obs. 4 God knows how to cross wicked men
of their wills, to spoil them of their plots 106 Obs. 5 If we will not do Gods
Will, God will cross us of our own 107 Obs. 6 God is not so much displeased at
our sins, as at our not returning 108 Obs. 7 To refuse to return
notwithstanding means used and mercies tendered, is a fearful thing ibid. Obs.
8 Scornful spirits when they are called upon to return from their evil ways,
do not only deny returning, but also scorn and slight what is said to them 110
VER. VI.
Obs. 1 It Is time for a people to return, when God does whet, or draw out his
Sword 111 Obs. 2 That the abiding of the Sword is a sore judgment ib. Use,
Against protractors of the War Obs. 3 The sword shall abide as long as God will
have it ibid Obs. 4 That though it be sad for the sword to be in the Field, yet
for the sword to be in the City is sadder 113
VER. VII.
Exposition 118 Application 1 Public to England ibid 2 Private to particular
persons 119
Why men start back Reasons 1 Gods ways are unsuitable to them ibid 2 They have
a greater mind to other things ibid 3 They are weary of the ways of God ibid.
4 They have watched advantages to get off from what they have formerly made
profession of ibid 5 They are sorry they engaged themselves so much as they
did ibid 6 They greedily embrace any Objections against such ways ibid 7 They
are very greedy to take any offense ib. 8 They watch for offenses 120 9 They
are willing to embrace any opinion, that will give them liberty 121
Obs. 1 That it is a great evil for men to strive against their conscienoes 122
Obs. 2. Men's hearts sink down to low and mean things naturally. 126 Obs. 3. It
is the end of the Ministry of the Word, to call men to the Most High God, who
have their hearts grovelling after low and base things ib. Obs. 4 It is a great
and sore evil to stop our ears against the calls of the Word 127 Obs. 5 That
the calling to the most high God is a special means to cause those that are in
a suspense to come in to a full resolution. ibid Obs. 6 The true Worship of God
is an elevating thing 129 An Exhortation 131 1 To great men ibid 2 To Saints
ibid
How God has exalted the Saints. 1 He has raised them from the depth of
misery 131 2 He has made them one with his Son ib. 3 Has loved them with the
same love wherewith he loved his Son ib. 4 Has made them Coheirs with his Son
ib. 5 Has given his Angels to be ministering spirits to them ibid 6 God intends
to honor himself in their eternal good ib. 7 He has prepared for them a Crown
of Glory ib.
Obs. 7 God has little honor in the world 132
VER. VIII.
Exposition general 134 Exposition particular 135 Obs. 1 The greatness of man's
sin hinders not the work of Gods mercy 141 Use, 1 If the bowels of Gods mercy
work toward us, let ours work toward our brethren. 142 Use, 2 Why should
great afflictions for God hinder our hearts working to him, when our great sins
against God hinder not Gods heart from working toward us ibid. Obs. 2 Sinners
are at the very mouth of misery when they do not think of it ibid. Obs. 3 Gods
free mercy is that which keeps us from being destroyed ibid. Obs. 4 Sinputs
God to a stand ib. Obs. 5 The salvation of a sinner breaks through many
reasonings and workings in Gods heart 143 Obs. 6 According to the relation a
sinful people have to God so difficult a thing is it for God to execute his
wrath upon them 144 Why God is not ready at any time to execute Judgment upon
a sinner. 1 The prayers of the Saints stand against Justice 145 2 The Lord look
upon the place with an eye of pity ib. 3 God considers that he has but little
worship in the world 146 4 He looks upon the Service has been formerly given
him in that place ib. 5 There may be a remnant of Saints there ib. 6 He eyes
the miseries they will endure ib. 7 The Lord sees how the adversaries will
insult 147 8 He looks upon the Elect ones not yet born ib. 9 If my wrath must
be satisfied let it run out upon others ib. 10. The affliction of the Saints is
Gods own affliction 148 11 God will fetch good out of their evil ib. 12 Gods
Justice is glorified by his patience ib. 13 Gods mercy may convert ib.
Obs. 7 A chollerick disposition is none of Gods Image 150 Use 1 Take heed of
being passionate ib. Use, 2 Let not Ministers be tart in the Pulpit ib. Obs. 8
Saints may be bold in seeking God in prayer 151 Obs. 9 The Saints that walk
close with God must needs be very secure 154 Obs. 10 When judgments come upon
Gods own people there is some great matter in it 155 Obs. 11 There is a
difference between the day of patience and the day of wrath ib. Obs. 12 If God
do not hasten Judgment against us, we should not hasten it against our selves
ib. Obs. 13 The people of God are subject to as sore evils as the worst of men
156 Obs. 14 When sinners are nearest to judgment, then the bowels of Gods
mercy works toward them 157 Obs. 15 Those that are in relation to God have a
privilege that others have not ib. Use Take heed of abusing Gods mercies 158
Obs. 16 If God be unwilling to make his People like the Wicked in punishment,
let them not make themselves like them in sin ib. Obs. 17 Though God be never
so much inclined to mercy he does not hide his eyes from the sins of his own
People ib. Use Let not the encouragement of mercy hide our sins from us 159
Obs. 18. Strong motions to repentance, give strong encouragements to come to
God 160 Obs. 19 Let arguments of obedience to God cause stirrings in our
hearts. 161 Obs. 20 Let us not think it too much to have our hearts turned from
strong resolutions to do evil. ib. Obs. 21 God's repentings are mighty
encouragements to Prayer 162 Obs. 22 We must gather as many arguments as we
can to kindle Repentance in us ib. Obs. 23 Our mercies to others should not be
cold, but burning 165
VER. IX.
Exposition 165 Obs. 1 The stirrings of mercy in our hearts should rather
prevail with us than stirrings to wrath 166 Obs. 2 Stirrings for God should
rather prevail with us than temptations to sin 167 Obs. 3 Gods mercies do not
free his People from all fruits of displeasure ib. Obs. 4 We should acknowledge
mercy, though we suffer hard things. 167 Obs. 5 Sinners should not be secure
when evil is upon them, and think Now we know the worst on it. 168 Obs. 6 God is
very gracious to his People when evil is upon them ib. Difference between God
and Man in point of Anger. 169 1 Man is not able to rule his Anger ib. 2 Man is
of a revengeful and cruel disposition 170 3 Man is in a rage oftentimes with
others, because of the disquit of his own heart ib. 4 There is but very little,
if any mercy at all in man ib. 5. Man is of a fickle and unconstant
disposition ib. 6 If man pass by an offense, it is from some motive from
without ibid 7 Man thinks it his dishonor to be reconciled to those that offend
him ibid 8 Man cannot foresee the consequences that may follow upon his
pardoning of offenses 171 9 Man cannot work good out of what ill carriages are
against him ibid 10 Though man promise much mercy yet upon any offense, he
will recall his promise again ibid 11. Man thinks it is best to take his
advantage of offenders at the present time 172 12 Man is bound to positive
Rules of Justice that are set to him. But God is free. He will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy ibid
Obs. 7 God glories in the goodness and mercy that is in himself. ib. Use
Passion and anger debases man 173 Obs. 8 If God were like Man, sinners could
not be forborne 174 Obs. 9 It is a good way to exercise faith in Gods mercy
ibid Use Let us labor to be holy in our anger 178 Obs. 10 God delights to show
the glory of his holiness in mercy toward sinners 179 Obs. 11 Gods
faithfulness is a special part of the glory of his holiness ibid Use 1 We may
see hence how holiness will help our faith ibid Use 2 Let us manifest our
holiness in our faithfulness ibid Obs. 12 God continues among a people for his
Saints and Elects sake ibid Obs. 13. The Saints are of great use where they
live 179 Obs. 14 Humiliation and reformation do often save a City from
destruction 180 Use Let not our sin provoke God to destroy us ibid
VER. X
Exposition ib. Obs. 1 It is the Lords infinite goodness to be the Captain of
his people 181 Obs. 2 It is the honor, safety, and happiness of the Saints to
have God go before them ibid Obs. 3 That the Majesty and terribleness of God
causes the wicked guilty conscience to fly from him 182 Use Oh the blessing of
a clean conscience ibid Obs. 4 That when Gods time is come for a through
reformation in the world, he will make the earth tremble 184 Use 1 Despair not
at the strength of the wicked 185 Use 2 Learn to prepare for those times ibid
Obs. ult. There are like to be great stirrings in the West 186
VER. XI.
Exposition 186 Obs. 1 God has his time to place his people in their own
houses, in peace, and safety 187 Obs. 2 It Is a good work to be instrumental in
this ibid Obs. 3 They that walk after the Lord shall be placed in their houses
ibid Use Trust God with your houses. ib.
VER. XII.
Exposition General 188 Particular 189
Obs. 1 Many profess to God the acknowledgment of his Greatness, Glory, Power,
etc. but it is but as a lie to God ib. Obs. 2 Many men beset the business and
affairs that they manage, with lies also 190 Obs. 3 That when men are once
engaged in shifts and lies, they grow pertinacious in them 191 Obs. 4 The sin
is the greater, where there is no example of evil in others 192 Obs. 5 To
continue in a false way of worship when a right way is held forth, is an
aggravation of sin ib. Obs. 6 It Is a great comendation to continue in the
Truth, when others fall off ib. Obs. 7 We should be more severe to those that
are nearest to us, when they dishonor God, than to others 193 Obs. 8 To enjoy
but little with God, is better than to have much without enjoying God 194 Obs.
9 To serve God, is to reign 195 Obs. 10. God has never bin without some
Witnesses to his Truth ib. Obs. 11 It is unfaithfulness to forsake the true
Worship which God has appointed 196 Obs. 12 God has a special eye to a States
faithfulness in point of Worship ib. Obs. 13. Faithfulness consists in a
constant persisting in good ib. Obs. 14 We should look more at the example of a
few Saints, than of thousands of wicked men. 198
CHAP. XII.
VER. I
Exposition 199 Obs. 1 Creature Comforts will prove but wind 202 Obs. 2. It Is a
grievous thing when troubles come to have nothing within us to help us but wind
203 Several ways of increasing Lies 1 By carrying about Reports. 207 2 By
mis-reporting of Reports. ib. 3 By adding to Reports ib. 4 By inventing new
Reports ib. 5 By maintaining Lies by Lies ibid.
Use 1. Take heed of spreading Reports to the dishonor of Religion 210 Use 2.
Search out the truth first, before you report at all ib. Obs. 3 When people are
guilty of a sin, the Prophets should beat upon it again and again 212
VER. II.
Exposition 213 Obs. 1 God commends and contends with his Church at once ib.
VER. III.
Exposition, 1. 219 Obs. 1. We are to acknowledge God's Election of our
Forefathers to be an Act of free grace 222 Obs 2 Those which receive great
blessings from Gods mercy to their Ancestors, are to acknowledge the free grace
of God ib. Exposiston 2 223 Exposition 3 ib. Exposition 4 226 Exposition 5 228
Exposition 6 231 Exposition 7 232 Obs. 3 That when God strives against his
Servants, he gives them sirength 234 Obs. 4 It Is a great honor to manifest
much strength in prayer ib Obs. 5 The way to prevail with men is, to prevail
with God 236 Obs. 6 That the time for the Church to prevail in, is then when
she is most weak 239
VER. IV.
Obs. 1 Prayer is the great prevailing Ordinance with God 246 Ingredients to
Prayer 1 Faith in the Covenant of God 248 2 To be in Gods way 259 3 To plead a
particular promise ib. 4 Sense of our own unworthiness ib. 5 Acknowledgment of
mercies and truth in promises 260 6 Remembrance of former means ibid. 7 Deep
sense of the thing desired ibid. 8 Strong arguments 261
Obs. 2 God finds his people many times when they little think of him 262 Obs.
3 The foundation of the Saints comfort is in the Covenant of God 264 Obs. 4
Mercies promised should believed when there is much unlikelihood 265 Obs. 5 The
multiplying of the Church is a great blessing ibid. Obs. 6 The Saints have need
of renewing promises ibid. Obs. 7 The blessing that comes to the world comes by
promised seed ibid. Obs. 8 It was in Gods heart to do good unto us Gentiles
thousands of years since ibid. Obs. 9 God is still working toward the
fulfilling of promises 166 Obs. 10 The mercy and faithfulness of God is
constant for continuance ibid. Obs. 11 The Saints have need of the confirmation
of mercies ibid. Obs. 12 It Is a great help to fiath to have God present himself
to the soul as God Almighty 267 Obs. 13 God delights to revive his people in
their fears, with suitable mercy ibid. Use, To learn tender-heartedness toward
them that are in fears and troubles ibid.
VER. V.
Exposition 269 Obs. 1 That though God be never so strong and terrible in
himself; yet faith has strength to wrestle with him 284 Use, Christians should
raise up their spirits when they have to deal with God ibid. Obs. 2 God is the
same to us (if we forsake him not) as he was to our forefathers 289 Obs. 3.
There Is no need of Images to keep Gods remembrance 288 Obs. 4 God manifests his
glory, that he may be remembered from age to age ib. Obs. 5 The meditation of
the Name, JEHOVAH, is a useful Memorial of God 289
VER. VI.
Obs. 1. The consideration of our godly forefathers is a great argument to turn
us to God ib. Obs. 2 That God is the Lord of Hosts, is another argument to turn
us to him 290 Obs. 3. Because God is Jehovah, we must turn to him 291 Obs. 4
The Excellency of the Saints is an Argument to turn us to God 293 Obs. 5. We
depart from God in the midst of our services, when we perform them not in Gods
way. ib. Obs. 6. In our turning to God, we must reform our special sins 295
Obs. 7 We must reform as well in Duties of the Second Table, as in matter of
Worship 296 Obs. 8 There must be righteousness among men, where there is a
turning to God 298 Obs. 9 Those that are in Authority must manifest their
turning to God, by Execution of Judgment. ib. Obs. 10 The mixture of Mercy and
Judgment is very comely 299 Obs. 11. A turning heart to God, is a waiting heart
303
VER. VII.
Exposition 310 Obs. 1. Men by their sin may lose the honor of their
progenitors. ib.
VER. VIII.
Exposition 324 Obs. 1 Wicked men will have something to say for themselves ib.
Obs. 2 Wicked men may prosper a while in their evil courses ib. Obs. 3 Wicked
men attribute all that they get unto themselves ib. Obs. 4 Carnal hearts
account riches the only substantial things 325 Obs. 5 Wicked men glory in the
estates they have gotten ib. Obs. 6 Carnal hearts seek to relieve their
consciences with outward comforts 326 Obs. 7 Wicked men believe not that God is
so angry with them, as they are told he is 327 Obs. 8 Evil things many times
have good names 330 Obs. 9 It Is hard to convince covetous men of their
iniquity ib. Obs. 10 It Is hard to convince them that they do not love to be
charged with their sin 331 Obs. 11 Men may in words profess the thing that they
are guilty of to be abominable ib. Obs. 12 Wicked men care not, so other men
cannot accuse them 332 Obs. 13 A carnal heart extenuates his sins 333 Obs. 14
If wicked men can but escape the danger of Law, it is all they care for 334
VER. IX.
Obs. 1 The prosperity of men in a sinful way makes them forget what God has
done for them in former times 336 Obs. 2 God takes notice of men's unthanfulness
ib. Obs. 3 Old mercies are great engagements to duty and the neglect of duty a
great aggravation of sin 337 Obs. 4 God gives hopes of mercy to sinners upon
their Repentance 339 Use To persons offended by others 341 Doct. 2 The
consideration of what God (...)h done should help our (...) in believing what
he will do ib. Applied to England.
VER. X.
Obs. 1 It Is God that speaks by his Prophets 344 Obs. 2 It is a great mercy to
a people for God to speak to them by his Prophets 345 Obs. 3 God will take
account what becomes of the labor and pains of his Prophets 347 Obs. 4 It Is a
great mercy for God to declare his mind again and again ibid. Use, How may God
upbraid us with this 348 Obs. 5 The Lord takes account of the manner of men's
preaching, as well as of the things they preach 349 Obs. 6 The revealing the
Word by similitudes is very useful and profitable ibid. Obs. 7 Slight not the
Word when it comes by a simile 350 Obs. 8 Rest not in the pleasantness of the
simile ib.
VER. XI.
Obs. 1 Whatsoever is presented in the Worship of God (if not of Gods
appointment) is mere vanity 352 Obs. 2 When Gods Judgments have been against
any for sin, all sinners guilty of the same sins have cause to fear. 353 Obs.
3 Such whose principles are nearer to God than others, if they be superstitious
God will surely be revenged of them 354
VER. XII.
Scope 357 Obs. 1 Such as take pride in their Ancestors should look back to the
mean condition of their Ancestors 392 Obs. 2 Dependence upon God in afflictions
shows grace of God in any 393 Use, 1 To servants which are in hard service ib.
Use, 2 To servants which are out of it. ib. Obs. 3 Love will carry through long
service 394 Obs. 4 A good Wife is a great blessing of God, though she have no
portion ib. Obs. 5 Children should not marry without their Parents consent 395
VER. XIII.
Obs. 1 None shall lose any thing by what they do for God 397 Obs. 2. The
shiftless estate of our Ancestors, should humble us much 398 Obs. 3 God works
great things for his Church by small means ib. Obs. 4 It Is a great aggravation
of sin, to transgress against God's more than ordinary appearing for peoples
good 399 Obs. 5 Abuse of suth as have reference to the service of God, is a
great evil ib.
VER. XIV.
Obs. 1. God is not angry unless he be provoked 403 Obs. 2. It is only sin that
provokes God 403 Obs. 3 Some sins provoke God more than others 405 Obs. 4 They
that be wilful in sin, their blood will be upon their own heads 407 Obs. 5 God
will be Lord, let wicked men do what they can 410
CHAP. XIII.
VER. 1.
Obs. 1 It Is an Honor to have respect from others when we speak 415 Use for
Inferiors ib. Obs. 2 Those who are in Place of Power account it their honor,
that others should tremble at what they say 436 Obs. 3 The subjection of the
hearts of men to those in authority, is a work of God 417 Obs. 4 The meaner the
beginnings of men are, the more imperious they prove 418 Obs. 5 Men of great
repute, and reverend respect, by sin fall from their dignity 419 Verified in
Magistracy and Ministry ibid. Use, For Magistrates and Ministers 421 Obs. 6
Alteration in marter of Government is a hard and difficult thing 422 Obs. 7 Men
of resolved spirits will break through difficulties, when God raises them up
to it 423 Obs. 8 If after they have gone through difficulties they rest in
their own strength, they shall vanish and come to nothing. 423 Obs. 9
Alteration in Religion is a difficult business 424 Obs. 10 Men of resolute
spirits will go on in matters of Religion, though it be from better to worse
425 Obs. 11 When God withdraws his protection from a Family, he leaves it as a
dead carcass 426 Obs. 12 Corruption of Worship causes God to withdraw from a
people ib. Obs. 13 When wicked men are most active in their evil way, then they
may be under the sentence of death 427
VER. II.
Obs. 1 Use makes a mighty alteration in men's spirits 428 Obs. 2 When
destructions nearest, evil men are wickedest 430 Obs. 3 There Is no stop in
Apostasy. 431 Obs. 4 Every sin against conscience, weakens the work of
conscience 433 Obs. 5 In what degree a man falls off from God, in that degree he
loses his comfort in God 434 Obs. 6 When one has sinned against God, his
spirit and holy duties are unsuitable ib. Obs. 7 The presence of God is terrible
to an Apostate ib. Obs. 8 What may turn an Apostates heart to God, is grievous
to him ib. Obs. 9 One sin cannot be maintained without another 435 Obs. 10 The
pride of an evil man's heart is such that he will be justifying his sin ib. Obs.
11 When men are grown far in an evil way they grow desperate ib. Obs. 12 When
men trust to their own understandings in matters of Worship God gives them up
to sottishness 441 Obs. 13 It Is false Worship to give Religious respect to any
creature by kissing as well as bowing to it 443 Use Against such as kiss the
Book when they take an Oath ib.
VER. III.
Obs. 1 The messenger of wrath drives unsettled men to misery 444
VER. IV.
Obs. 1 It Is a great evil to sin against the work of mercy 445 Obs. 2
Deliverance from Egypt is a Note of Gods being our God 446 Obs. 3 The end of
Gods great work is, That he may be known to be God ib. Obs. 4 God delights to
manifest himself in a way of salvation. 448 Obs. 5 Saving mercies are great
mercies ib. Obs. 6 No creature can do us good further than God gives it leave.
ib. Obs. 7 Our faith should be exercised on God as a Savior ib. Obs. 8 We are
never safe but when our peace is made with God. 449 Obs. 9 God is never
worshipped as God, but when he is worshipped as a Savior ib.
VER. V.
Obs. 1. It Is a great mercy for God to know a man in time of trouble 451 Obs.
2 Gods knowing us in distress, is a mighty engagement to us. 452
VER. VI.
Obs. 1 It Is better to want the comfort of the creature, and to have Gods
protection, than to have the creature and live of our selves ib.
VER. VII.
Obs. 1 The Lord pities sinful men in adversity 499
VER. VIII.
Obs. 1. The wrath of God is more dreadful than the dreadfulness of all the
creatures in the world. 505
VER. IX.
Obs. 1 It Is an aggravation of sin another day, to be the cause of the evils we
suffer 508 Obs. 2 Men would put offtheir evils from themselves to God 510 Obs.
3 God knows how to turn all the evils upon our selves 511 Obs. 4 A man can
bring himself to no misery but there is help in God for it 519 Use, Look up to
God when you have done evil 520 Obs. 5 Those that seek help in God and yet
misery grows upon them, let them examine themselves. 521 Obs. 6 The more God
has helped men, the greater will their destruction be if they be destroyed at
last 522
VER. X.
Obs. 1 It Is a sad condition when God rules over a people in spite of their
hearts 523 Obs. 2 The things that carnal hearts rest upon will vanish 526 Obs.
3 God loves to insult over men in their carnal confidences. 526 Obs. 4 It Is
great confusion to carnal hearts when they shall be asked, Where Is their
confidences? 527 Use Let us learn to seek after those things we may be able to
give an account for 528 Use, 2 Let not the Saints be afraid of evil men ib.
Obs. 5 Though God be much with a man, yet if he be of a low rank, carnal hearts
regard him not 529. Obs. 6 Men will not hear so long as they do not suffer 533
VER. XI.
Obs. 1 God may have a hand in things wherein men sin exceedingly. 535 Obs. 2
Things that are very evil, may have present success 536 Obs. 3 Gods gifts are
not always in love ib. Notes whether it be out of Love, or Hatred. 1 When we
desire the gift rather than God in it 540 2 When our desires are immoderate and
violent 541 3 When God grants men their desires before due time 542 4 When
there comes no blessing at all with what we enjoy 543 5 When what we desire, is
merely to satisfy our lusts 544 6 When men are so eager that they care not
whether they have it from a reconciled God, or a provoked God. 545 7 When the
mercy is given, whether we be fitted for it or no 546 8 When we rest upon the
means we use and not upon God. 547 9 When God gives our desires, but not a
sanctified use of them 548 10 When there goes a curse together with what we
have ib. 11 When we regard not what becomes of others, so we may have our
desires satisfied 549 12 When God satisfying our desires makes way for some
judgment 550 13 When men are greedy of things, and never consider the
inconvenience ib. 14 When men seek to have their desires satisfied merely
because they love change 551 15 When it comes through impatiency to submit to
God in a former condition 552 16 When desire of further mercies make us forget
former ib. 17 When men desire new things out of distrust of God 553 18 If God
change our conditition, we bring the sins of our old condition into our new.
554 19 If we seeek to attain our desires by unlawful means ib.
Corralaries drawn from the former Notes. 1 Be sure you quiet your desires 555
2 Let us prepare our hearts to seek proportionable grace for what we have ib. 3
Be not too much exalted when your desires are satisfied ib. 4 Never draw
arguments of Gods love by satisfying our desires 556 5 Envy not at men when
their lusts are satisfied ib. 6 Learn to deny your selves in your desires ib. 7
Never rest in what you enjoy, before you know from what principle it comes ib.
8 Look after what God never gives but in love 557 9 Bless God when you find
what you have in love ib.
Notes of another Sermon prepared by the Author, but not preached 562
The Names of several Books printed by PETER COLE, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the R Exchange, in LONDON.
Seven Books of Mr JER. BUROUGHS, lately published; as also the Texts of
Scripture on which they are grounded. VIZ.
1. The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed:
1 What Contentment is. 2 It is an holy Art and Mystery. 3 The Excellencies of
it. 4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravation of it. 2.
Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general: and particularly, in Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3. Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 27. Wherein is
showed: 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the light of Nature. 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men
that have their Portion in this life, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4. A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness, on Phil. 3. 19. Wherein is showed: 1 What
Earthly-mindedness is. 2 The great Evil thereof. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindness, and Walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24.
and on Phil. 3. 20. The Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Books are, An Exposition with
Practical Observations, on the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. Chapters of the
Prophecy of HOSEA.
AN EXPOSITION Of the PROPHESY of HOSEA.
CHAP. XI.
VERSE. 1.
When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt.

THIS Chapter is made by some, the sixth Sermon of Hosea's Prophecy. The scope
The scope of the Chapter.
of it is this: To clear God from severity, and to upbraid Israel for
ungrateful and stuborn carriage, against Mercies and Means: and yet to promise
mercy to the remnant, to his Elect ones, which is to the end of the 11. verse.
As for the 12. verse, though it Where the Chapter ends.
be made a part of this Chapter, yet it were more aptly a great deal joined to
the 12. Chapter; and so it is by some.

There were in the end of the former Chapter dreadful threatenings against
Israel, that the Mothers should be dashed The coh^e^ence.
in pieces upon their Children, and the cutting off of the King utterly, this
was in the close of the last Chapter. But now, does not this argue God to be a
God of ridgedness and severity? Where is the Mercy, Goodnese, and Clemency of
God toward his people? What! to have the Mother dashed in pieces against her
Children! To cut off the King of Israel u(...)terly! Yes, says God, for all
this I am a God of Mercy and Goodness, for I have manifested abundance of Mercy
already, and am ready still to manifest more; but you have been a stubborn and
a stout hearted people against me. And from that General scope, Note:

That, God stands much upon the clearing of Himself to be a God of love and
mercy: Whatsoever becomes of wicked Obs. 1.
men, yet God will be cleared before all the world, that he is a God of much
mercy; God takes it very ill that we should have any hard thoughts of him, let
us not be ready to entertain such thoughts of God, as if he were a hard Master.
I remember Luther has such an expression, That, all the Scripture, the general
scope of the Scripture it is, to declare the Lord to be a God of mercy and
goodness; Tota Scriptura hoc praecip(...)e agit, ne dubitemus, sed certo
speremus (...)dan^u and credamus Deum esse misericorde^ benegnum patientem.
Luth.
says he, The whole Scriptures aim at this, That we should believe and be
confident that God is a gracious and merciful God. And this is the scope of
this Chapter. Let us rather charge our selves of wickedness, and ungrateful
dealings with God, and let us for ever justify God and acknowledge him to be
not only a Righteous God, but a Gracious God; though thou and thousands such as
thou art shall perish to all eternity, yet the Lord shall be acknowledged a God
of Mercy before his Angels and Saints for evermore. But thus much for the
scope. When Israel was a Child.

At his first beginning to be a people, that is (...) (...)
In his young time my heart was toward him. Indeed, the heart of God was to
Israel, that is, Jacob, the Father Rom 9. 11. 12.
of the Tribe, before he was born, before he did either good or evil: But here
it is spoken not of the Father, but of the Tribes, Israel, when they were first
a people, In their young beginnings, then I loved them. When he was a Child. The
phrase opened.


That is, First, When he knew little of me.

Secondly, When he could do little for me.

Thirdly, When there was much vanity and folly in him, as there is in children.

Fourthly, When he was helpless and succo(...)ss, and shi(...)ess, and knew not
how to provide for himself.

And further, Tarnovius, a learned Commentator upon this Prophecy, thinks that
the Hebrew word that is here Excuss^^ (...) significat eum, qui creb^o sugum
parentis vel Heri excutit and quamvis (...) Ternov. in(...)c.
translated a Child, is a word that notes the stubbornness of Israel against
God, one that has often shaken off the yoke of parents, or of a master, and so
[Ky] that is translated [when] is sometimes [although] Although Israel was a
Child, a Froward and Perverse Child, that shook off the Yoke, yet then I loved
him. And what a child Israel was when God loved him you may find, in Ezekiel. 16.
4, 5. etc. What a child Israel was. Ezekiel. 16. 1. etc. applied.
And as for thy Nativity in the day that thou wast born, thy navel was not cut,
neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all,
nor swadled at all. (and then in the 5. verse) None eye pi^ed thee to do any of
these unto thee, to bave compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the
open field to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast born: then
in the 6. verse, And when I passed by tree and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Liv^: yet, I said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. Again and again, (and then in the 8.
verse) Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was
the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness:
yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord
God, and thou becamest mine.

Well, but wherein did God manifest that he did love Israel when he was a Child?

Mark the 8. verse, When I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy
time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee and entered into a Covenant with thee, says
the Lord, and thou becamest mine.

The Love of God to Israel i expressed in these three particulars. Wherein the
love of God to Israel stood


First, That God made a Covenant with him. Oh it is a great mercy of God, and a
fruit of great love, that such an infinite God would be pleased to make a
Covenant with his people, to bring them into Covenant with him; all mankind
was in Covenant with God at first, but falling from that first Covenant, there
was but only a peculier people that God took into Covenant with himself, and
made it as a fruit of his great love, to take a certain people into Covenant
with himself more than others.

And secondly, Thou becamest mine; that is, I had separated thee for my self,
and took thee for a peculier one to me, and intended special mercy and goodness
to thee, Thou becamest mine, so as that I should have a special propriety in
thee, and thou should have a special propriety in me.

And then thirdly, I confirmed all this by an Oath, I swear this unto thee; Was
not here love, for God to Covenant, to take in to such propriety, and to swear
that we should be his? Thus when Israel was a child I loved him, that is the
meaning of this Scripture.

Now the Note of Observation is this.

First, That, it is the privilege of the Church and of the Saints, Obs. 1
for God to love them: God loves his people, this is their privilege, he loves
them with a special love. In the 12. of Jer. 7. they are called, the dearly
beloved of Gods soul; see Jer. 12. 7.
how God loves his people. God he delights in his Saints, and there is nothing
in the world that should sanctify a gracious heart more than this, That God
loves him; And as Gods love is extraordinary to them more than to other People,
so their love again should be reflected upon God in a more than ordinary way;
There Is nothing can be a recompense to Love, but Love: that is certain, Love is
never satisfied but with Love; And therefore, seeing God professes love to his
people, he does expect love from them, therefore he will not be satisfied with
any duties you perform, whatsoever you do, but it must be out of Love, Love
must have Love, and know, that you cannot prize Gods love more than God prizes
yours, there is nothing in Heaven and Earth that God prizes more than the love
of his Saints, and therefore, if ever Gods love, or Gods prizing of your love,
may gain love, Oh you Saints, love the Lord. That Is the first.

But Secondly, It Is a great aggravation unto sin, to sin against love. For to
that end God here shows that he loved Obs. 2.
them, that he might aggravate their sin so much the more, and clear himself.
Many times you make in the days of your humiliation, and at other times, many
aggravations of your sin, that your sin it is against knowledge; this is great;
That your sin it is of an heinous nature, that it does a great deal of hurt,
that it brings you under dreadful threatenings, that it provokes the wrath of an
infinite God against you; these are great things for the humbling of your
hearts for sin. But above all aggrevations for sin, this is the great
aggravation, That your sin is against Love, that though God has shown much
love to you, yet you sin against a loving God, and a gracious God. God begins
with this aggravation, being his scope here to clear himself, and to charge his
people of ungratefulness, yet God loved them. Oh! sins against love are great
sins indeed.

But Thirdly, I loved him when he was a child. (...) very (...). 3.
(...) to mind Gods old love. That Is the Third Note; The love of God unto us
when we were children; yea, the love of God unto our forefathers, the love of
God unto a people when they were at the first beginning, the ancient love of
God to a people, it is of very g(...) use, it is of great use for all to consider
of the love of God in former times to them; nay brethren, it would be of very
great Gods ancient love to England. An instance of it.
use for us to consider of ancient love of God to England. And I will give you
one remarkable Note of Gods ancient love to this Nation, that is this; That it
was the first Nation that ever God set his heart upon for the choosing of the
Gospel, the first Nation in the world that by public Authority England the
first Nation in the world that God chose for the embracing Religion by public
Authority.
did submit to the Gospel, and certainly God remembers that love of England.
For we find it recorded; it is true, we cannot expect Scripture for this,
because it was Lucius of England is said to be the first Christian King.
(Centur. Cent. 2. Cap. 2. Tit. de Propagation. Ecclesiiae (...) J. Balai
Catal.) Who also by public Authority established Christianity, about the year
169. Lucius in lucem prodit. de patre coello. J. B. Author primus apud Britones
Religiones erat. Rossaei Britania.
^^nce the time of any Scripture; but so far as we may give any credit to
Stories, we find it, of all Nations upon the face of the Earth, the first that
received the Gospel with the Countenance of Public Authority. And this is not
a little matter: Certainly the Lord remembers the kindness God remembers the
kindness of Englands youth and first love
of our youth, and the old love of England, and the first love of England in
receiving the Gospel. Indeed God caused the Gospel to be preached to other
places before it was to England; I, but there was no plac^ that by the
countenance of Public Authority (...) it so soon as England did, and therefore
England may be said to be the very first fruits of the Gospel in that respect.
Oh! it is good for us to consider of that, and many good uses we may make of
Gods old and ancient love; when we see any further expressions of Gods love it
may encourage us upon the thoughts of his former love, there was an old love
and this God continues, his old love unto his people, and surely God intends
yet further love unto us.

And then for our selves in particular, It Is very good for Particul. persons
should recall Gods ancient love unto them when they were children
us to look back unto his ancient love: That is, Now God has loved some of you
from your childhood, how the providence of God did work toward you then; Some
of you (I suppose) in this place may say, that God loved you when you were
children, when I was a child I had such and such expressions of Gods love
toward me, It was love that I was born of Christian Parents, and that I was
brought up in Christian education, That I was delivered from such and such
dangers, yea (it may be) God began to reveal himself to me betimes. And if you
would call to mind all the loving passages of Gods providence since you were
children, you might have matter of meditation sufficient. There Is many of you
that complain you cannot find matter for meditation: I Will give you a rule to
help you in meditation at any time, it is this, When you A Rule how we may never
want matter of meditation
cannot meditate of other things but you are presently be wildered and know not
whither to go, then turn your selves to this meditation, To think of all the
gracious passages of Gods providence toward you ever since you were children,
and this the weakest may be able to go along in. And that is the third Note of
Observation.

Fourthly, All Gods old mercies remain engagements unto duty, Obser. 4.
and aggravations to our sin. I loved him when he was a child; it is brought to
that end, to aggravate their sin, and further to engage them unto duty.
Remember that the love and mercies of God unto you when you were children are
engagements to duty when you are old. And they are aggravations of your sin,
The sins of those men and women that are against old mercies they are the
greatest sins: Oh! that you should sin against that love of God unto you when
you were children! God began with you then, and has continued his love and
mercy to you ever since; then, Oh! make this an aggravation of your sin, in the
day of your humiliation, charge it upon your own souls, these and these sins
have I committed, though God loved me, though Gods mercy and goodness was
toward me when I was a child and has gone along to me, yet I have walked
unworthy of all that love and mercy, know that if you do forget the old love of
God, yet the Lord remembers it, he remembers his old mercies, and he remembers
your old sins.

But then fifthly, Let not our hearts sink in despairing thoughts, though we see
that we are able to do but little for God, and though Obs. 5.
we are unworthy of love; Though there be much vanity and folly in our hearts,
and in our lives, yea, though there has been much stubbornness, yet still let
not our hearts sink in despairing thoughts, I loved them when they were a
child, They could do little for me, and they knew little of me, and they were
vain, and foolish, and stubborn, and yet I loved them. Certainly the ways of
God toward Gods ways of mercy and affliction toward Israel, a type of his
ways toward his people in all ages.
Israel are as a type of his ways toward his Saints, as the afflictions of
Israel are Typical to the Church; and we gather an argument to be patient in
afflictions when we read how God dealt with the people of Israel in the
wilderness; so we may gather an argument to help our faith when as we read how
God dealt with them, though they were unworthy and were poor and weak, yet God
loved them. Therefore you poor people that find your selves weak in
understanding, alas! you know little, and can remember little of that which is
good, and alas! you can do little for God, ^ea I find (perhaps says one) much
frowardness and stubborness in my heart against God; but do you bewail it? if
so, let not your hearts be discouraged, do not think that these are things that
will hinder the love of Gods love does not find, but make the person lovely.
God; Gods heart may be toward you notwithstanding this, when God comes to
love he does not find the object to be lovely before he loves, but his love
makes the object to be lovely, therefore God can love though thou know
little, and can do but little.

But you will say, He can love, I but, Will He love? If Object.
I did but know that, this would satisfy my heart.

To that I answer,

First, how ever, when you hear that God did love Israel Answ.
when he was such a child that none eye pitied him, this is enough to help you
against any concluding thoughts against Gods love, for God did love his people
when they were as unworthy as you are.

And then secondly, But would you know whether God would love you? the readiest
way for you to know whether God will love you, yea or no,

It is first, To raise up your faith, if you are able, upon such grounds as
these are, Upon the consideration of his love to his people when they were
unworthy.

And then secondly, In quietness and meekness of spirit to lay thy self before
the Lord as an object of his pity. If thou do not think thy self worthy to
be an object of How to know whether God will love us or no?
love, yet lay thy heart before God as an object of pity, and there resolve to
wait til the time of love shall come, till God shall make known that his heart
is toward thee for good, it is not the way for thee to be froward and vexing
because of thy unworthiness, meanness, poverty, and baseness, and so to
determine that he will not love thee therefore; but, I say, the way for thee to
have the sense of Gods love, is this, When thou see there is no worthiness in
thee why he should love thee, yet there is enough in thee to make thy self an
object of his pity.

And sixthly, Does the love of God to his people begin Obs. 6.
so soon? I loved Israel when he was a child, Oh! let not thy love then to him
be deferred too long; Gods love begins betimes to his people, let not his
people; love be deferred too long. God is before hand with you in love, and
when ever we begin to love him it is upon this ground, Because he loved us
first. You who are young youths, do you love Youth.
God betimes, for if you be such as ever shall be saved, God did not only love
you when you were a child, but he loved you before you were born, before the
foundations of the world was laid; Oh! it is pity that the first springing of
your love should not be bestowed upon God: Certainly old love is the best love,
as old love in God is sweet, so old love in the Saints; it is a sweet thing to
think that God loved me from a child; but then, if I can say this too, I What
will complete the comfort of our lives.
loved God from a child, this will make it sweeter: put but these two together,
Oh! when these two can be added, what is wa(...)g to the comfort of ones life?
God loves that love that is from a child, Jer. 2. 2. I remember Jer. 2. 2.
the kindness of thy youth, says God. For young people to love God, Oh! God
loves that, God loves the love of young ones, the love of children; how sweet
will old age be to thee if thou can say thus, Lord, through thy mercy I have
loved thee from a child, and that is an evidence that How we may know whether
God loved us when children.
thou did love me when I was a child? How many are there now that are old
whom God loved when they were young, that would give ten thousand worlds if they
had them that they had known and loved God sooner than they have done? Though
it is true, I lived in wickedness almost all my days, and yet at length God
manifested himself to me, and by that I know God has loved me from eternity,
but, Oh! that I had loved God from a child; I say, those whose eyes God
enlightens, and hearts God converts to himself, would give ten thousand
thousand worlds that they could but say this, Oh that I had but loved God from
a child! You who are children and young ones, do you begin betimes to love God,
that if you live to be old you may say, that God loved you from a child. It was
an excellent speech of Austin when God pleased to work upon his heart, Lord, I
loved thee too late: And so it will be with any that do begin to love God,
Nimis sero te amami. Aug.
they will say that they loved God too late; and it will be the great burden to
their souls that they loved God so late as they did. And called my Son out of
Egypt.

I called him; that is, by Moses and Aaron, I sent them to call them out of
Egypt and bring them from thence; and this seems to have reference to that
Scripture in Exodus 4. Exodus 4, 22.
22. where the Lord says, Israel is my Son, even my first born. Moses comes to
Pharaoh in the Name of God to have Israel out of Egypt, and he coms to Pharaoh
after this manner, and, Tell him, that God says, Israel is my son, even my
first born, so in Jer. 31. 9. I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim Jer. 31. 9.
is my first born.

My son, The Seventy have it in the plural, My sons, his (...) 70.
sons out of Egypt; but in the Hebrew it is in the singular, I called my son
out of Egypt, and although the Holy Ghost (...)
speaks of all the people in general, yet he puts them in the singular number,
and in their very community they are called the son of God.

The Church (that is the Note from hence) is related to God Obs. 1.
as a son to the father; yea, the very firstborn; what God speaks of the
people of Israel is especially intended toward Privileges of Israel refer to
the Saints.
his Saints which are the true Israel of God, they have the privilege to be
sons unto God, to be children, Is it a light matter (says David) to be the son
in Law to to a King? but then what do you think it is to be the son to the King
of Heaven and Earth? and the Heir of Heaven and Earth? Is Ephraim my dear son?
Jer. 31. 20. Ephraim my dear son, This is the privilege therefore of the Saints,
that God deals with them as sons, I Will spare them as a Father spares his own
son that serves him, in the Malach. 3. 17.
third Chapter of Malachy, the 17. verse. And the special privilege that they
have from this is, that they are not Saints therefore not under the Law.
under that Law that slaves are under, in reference to God; those that are in
the state of slaverie they are under this Law, Do, or Die, if thou do offend
but in the least thou shall perish for ever, the curse of the Law is upon thee;
But the Sons of God are brought into another condition not to be under that
Law, they indeed if they Psalm. 89. 30, 31. etc.
do offend may be corrected and chastized, but they are never under the Law of
the sentence of eternal death for their offense; there is a great deal of
difference between the administration of God toward Slaves, and toward Sons,
This is the great privilege of Sonship, That thou art not under the Law, thou
art brought under another Law, under the Law of Jesus Christ, that though thy
sin indeed of its own nature, if God should deal with thee in Justice, would be
enough to put thee under an eternal Curse, yet being a Son, God puts thee under
another Law, and does not deal with thee by that Law that pronounces a Curse
against every sin. They are Sons.

Secondly, Let wicked men who have to deal with Gods people, Obs. 2.
when any of the Saints of God are under their power, let them take heed how
they use them; For they are Sons; they are not Slaves, they are the Sons of the
eternal God, in Jer. 2. 14. Is Israel a Servant? is he a home-born Slave? why
is Jer. 2. 14.
he spoiled? How comes it to pass that Israel is dealt withal so as he is?
What, is not Israel a Son?

When as any of the people of God are under the power of any men, God looks
upon them as Sons, and if they Use.
deal hardly with them God will enquire and will say thus, Is such a one a
slave? had he been a slave I would not so much have cared for your dealings
thus with him, but he is a Son. You find in the Acts that they were afraid when
they heard that Paul was a Roman. When thou know thou have to deal with a
Son of God, know that thou have not so much liberty to misuse him as thou have
to misuse another man, though no liberty to misuse any.

Thirdly, The Saints are not only Sons in their particular Obs. 3.
relation, but in their Community they are sons too: Take them joined together,
as the members of the Church, and so the whole Community of the Church now, is
but as one Son: I called my Son out of Egypt. He speaks of the whole Body of
Israel: Now the Lord looks upon the Community The Church one [in Faith, Spirit,
Babtism, etc. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. not in outward incorporation and visible Government]
of his Church as one Son in the singular number. There are many privileges
that do belong to the Church of God in their Community, as well as in their
particular relation.

And they should labor to unite themselves much together, seeing God puts them
altogether in the singular number. Oh! the Lord loves unity in his Church.

Though a Son, yet in Egypt.

That Is the Note further from thence, That Gods Sons Obs. 4.
are not free from sore and grievous evils in this world, though they be Sons,
yet they may go into Egypt. In Jer. 12. 7. I have Jer. 12. 17.
for saken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have given the dearly
beloved of my Soul into the hands of her enemies. Though the dearly beloved of
Gods Soul, yet given into the hands of enemies: Though Gods Son, yet goes into
Egypt: So the Church under Antichrist for above twelve hundred years, God gave
up his Sons into that spiritual Egypt.

We must not think therefore as soon as we come under grievous afflictions,
that God has cast us off from being Sons; though they were in Egypt, yet still
they were my Sons. Now we are ready to think that if God bring us into sore
afflictions then we are no more sons; No, thou may be delivered up to the
power of the enemy, and yet a son of God still, and no slave for all that, and
no enemy. There Is a notable Scripture in Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. observed.
where it is said of the people of Israel, That they were in the waste howling
wilderness, and yet they were as the apple of Gods eye.: so thou maest be
delivered up to the wast howling wilderness, to suffer sore things, to be
banished from thy house and home, and to wander up and down in the wilderness,
and yet remain as the apple of Gods eye. It is a strange sight indeed to see a
child of God, an Heir of Heaven, a Co heir with Jesus Christ, one dearer unto
God, than Heaven and Earth, to be under the power, the humors, the lusts of
wicked men, of base ungodly Gods Sons slaves to Satan oft-times, and for a
season. And to wicked men;
ones; yet it is so, yea, for a time they may be slaves to Satan; I say, those
that God has an eternal love to even are for a season often times slaves to
Satan: But then they have not the comfort of this Sonship, nor do not know it.
But now they may know themselves to be Sons, and yet slaves to the humors of
wicked and ungodly men, there is not a stranger sight in the world, I which is
the admiration of Angels.
believe the Angels in Heaven do not see a stranger sight that they more admire
at, when they see a godly man to be under the lusts of wicked men; but this is
Gods work for the present: God intends to manifest himself in another way
hereafter, but for the present he fetches about the glory of his own ends this
way, to let even his own dear sons to be in Egypt. But God calls them out of
Egypt, God has his time to deliver his people and call them out of Egypt: and
it is but a Call, and it is done, it is God has his time to call them out of
that slavery.
as easily done as a man that gives a call for such a one out of such a place;
let our bondage be never so great, it is but a word from God to deliver us.

Again, It is a great mercy to be called out of Egypt. This the Lord here brings
as a great testimony of his love to Obs. 5.
them, that he calls them out of Egypt. In Exodus 12. 42. It is a night to be
much observed of all the Children of Israel in Exodus 12. 42.
their Generations; To be called from that Egypt was a fruit of Love; and so to
be called from spiritual Egypt, (for man's natural estate, is a spiritual Egypt)
to be called from Antichristian Egypt is a great fruit of Love; and as it is a
fruit of love, so it is an aggravation of sin, for so it is brought, I called
my Son out of Egypt, and yet they did thus and thus.

If God remembered this mercy, of calling them out of Egypt so many years before
as an aggravation of their sin, how much more may the Lord make that an
aggravation of our sin that called us of late out of that Egypt that we
Applicat. to England.
were in? Many ways I might show you that we were under a great, if not a
greater bondage than the Israelites were under in Egypt. And there has been as
out stretched an arm (though not so obvious to sense) in calling of us out, as
in calling of them out of Egypt; now let not this be an aggravation of our sin,
the sound of our cries under the yoke of our bondage is not yet out of our
ears, and the very sores of our shoulders through their yokes are not yet
thoroughly healed, and therefore if we now before the sound be out of our ears
and our sores be healed, yet grow to be wanton, foolish, vain proud, cruel,
oppressing one another, and abusing of our liberty, Oh! our sin must needs be
accounted exceeding great before God.

Well, but yet we see not all the mind of God in this expression, The Text as
cited Mat. 2. 15, further expounded.
nor the chief part of his mind, for we find in in Matthew. 2. 15. that there the
holy Ghost cites this Scripture that now I am opening to you, and interprets it
of Jesus Christ. When Jesus Christ was fain to fly into Egypt to save his life,
the holy Ghost says, That it was to fulfill that Scripture, I called my Son out
of Egypt.

It is a very strange Interpretation, (as we have diverse other such in the new
Testament) and Hierom upon the place says, That Julian takes advantage upon
this, and Hierom in loc. Matthew's interpretation seems strange to some.
some of the Jews, with others that hated Christian Religion, did take much
advantage upon this quotation of Matthew, against the Authority of the Gospel,
and said, surely it argued Matthew very unskilful in Scripture, that he should
make such a quotation as this, when it is apparent that it is spoken of the
calling of the people of Israel out of Egypt. And truly we should never have
thought that there had been such a meaning in this place of Hosea, had we not
found it so interpreted by the holy Ghost. And by the way, before we come to
open that, and show how that was a right quotation of this Scripture, I Will but
observe this one Note from it, that we may see that by the interpretation both
of Matthew, and diverse other places we find in the new Testament, that there is
much more of the mind of God in the old Testament, than was ordinarily known to
them that lived in those times. Which of the Jews could have made such an
Interpretation, I have called my Son out of Egypt? That is, Jesus Christ after
he is born, he shall be persecuted and forced to fly for his life, and that
into Egypt, and he shall come again out of Egypt; who could have thought the
holy Ghost could have intended such a thing as this is? Things were not
understood til they came to be fulfilled, and then they were understood. And
the truth is, as in the old Testament, so in the new, there are a great many
Scriptures that we understand yet but little of. And the time of our knowing
the meaning of them is reserved to the time when they are to be fulfilled, many
Prophesies we have in the Revelations, and other places, that are (I am
confident) as dark to us as this place of Hosea was dark to the Jews; and there
is as excellent a spiritual meaning in many places of the new Testament hidden
from us, that will hereafter to the Church of God be revealed clearly, as there
were in the old Testament, many places (I know not whether I may say as many as
those) but are as much hidden from us. Jesus Christ that was the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world, in Rev. 5. (...) he that shall open the Book
that is sealed, and it is a fruit of the death of Christ, it is the Lamb, as he
is a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world that shall open the Book that
is sealed: there are many things in the book of God that are sealed to us this
day, and it is the purchase of the blood See Bucer on Matthew. 28. P. 197.
showing, that the Apostles allegations of Scripture were not proper, unless to
such as the holy Ghost enlightened to see the mystical sense of them; and except
we shall say that those Expositions were received things in those days, as are
among the Jews, now the Chaldae paraphrase; expounding many places of Christ,
which according to the Letter have another sense, and this perhaps may be the
sa^er to affirm, because else it may seem the Apostles could not so well have
charged the Jews with Obstinacy, as Act. 13. and Chap. 28. and else where.
of Jesus Christ to open it, and (...)hen his time comes it shall be opened to
us. I have called my Son out of Egypt

Interpreters I do find do much weary and tire themselves and the readers about
this point, and those that will search into Interpreters about the aptness of
this quotation may quickly spend days in it, I find the opinions reduced to
these three heads.

Some think that Matthew quotes this but only by way Opinions about the place
in Matthew.
of allusion, and similitude, that there is a similitude between Christ's going
to Egypt and returning, as the people of Isreal's going to Egypt and returning,
but that is a fridged and a poor, weak Interpretation, and against what is said
in Matthew, which says it was that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

But the second has more in it, which is of Junius Junius in loc. Parallel.
lib. 1. Paral. 6. Isa. 2. 9.
that learned man, he thinks that the very litteral sense of the place is
rather a Prophecy of Christ's going into Egypt and returning again, than of the
people of Isreal's going into Egypt and returning again. So he says in his
Paralels, in his 6th of the first book, it is (says he) as if God should say,
I have threatened that I will utterly destroy the King of Israel, what shall I
wholly destroy Israel therefore? No no, I will not do that for my Sons sake,
for though Israel is unworthy and receive not my Son, and by my Sons going into
Egypt it is declared that they are unworthy of him, and that they should never
have my Son come among them again, yet he shall come amongst them again, and
that shall be an evidence to them that I will not cast off my people of Israel,
and it is a very spiritual and good Interpretation, and we find often that, the
Lord when he did promise mercy to his people, and would give an evidence that
he would not destroy them, he would give a promise of Jesus Christ; as in Isa.
9. 6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: Isa. 9. 6.
he seals the Promise that he will not cast off his people by promising the
Messiah; so Junius thinks that the Lord here does seal this promise of mercy to
the people of Israel, that he will not utterly cut off his own people, Why?
because he will call his Son out of Egypt.

But, yet I cannot think that it will fully satisfy, but 3. preferred.
I will give you that which may more clearly appear to be the mind of God, and
that is this, That this Scripture in Hosea, it was intended to be typical, not
only to show (so Hierom on Hos. 11. 1. expounds it.)
what was past, that God did indeed call his people out of Egypt, but to be a
type of what God did intend for the time to come; as to give you other
instances, there are many things that are spoken in the old Testament, that are
spoken literally of some other things, and yet apparently are meant typically
of Jesus Christ, first in Exodus, 12. 46. compared with John, 19. 26. in
Exodus, Exodus 12. 46. and Joh. 19. 36. compared
it is in the institution of the Passover where God says, Not a bone of it
should be broken: Now in John 19. 36. it is said, when as the Soldiers came to
break the bones of the two Thieves that were upon the Cross, through a
providence they find that Christ was dead and so they broke not Christ's bones.
One would think now that this were a mere accidental thing, but yet the holy
Ghost says there, it was for the folfilling of that Prophecy, that not a bone
should be broken. Thus you see things that Things accidental are under
providene.
are very accidental yet God has a special work in them, God intends great
things by things that seem to be of little moment in our eyes, What more light
thing than that, that they should not break the bones of Christ? Great things
intended of God by small.
though meant clearly at first, and literally concerning the paschal Lamb, yet
typically concerning Jesus Christ. Compare two other Scriptures together in 2 Samuel 7. 14. with Heb. 1. 5. in Sam. it is apparently spoken concerning 2 Samuel 7.
14. Heb. 1. 5. compared also.
Solomon, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. But now the Apostle in
Heb. 1. 5. he speaks of Christ there clearly, and says, To which of the Angels
bath he said, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? and again says
he, he shall be my Son, and I will be a Father to him. It Is meant firstly of
Solomon, and typically meant of Jesus Christ. So the people of Israel going
into Egypt and turning back again, are meant literally of Israel, but God
meant to Prophecy what would be done with Christ, that he should go to Egypt
and return back again.

And indeed, God has an eye to Christ in all things he Obs. God some way or
other aims at Christin all his works;
does, in all his works some way or other they have reference to Jesus Christ;
that indeed was one of the greatest works of God for his people carrying them
to Egypt and bringing them back again, but God did not intend that so much, but
he had an eye to Jesus Christ in it.

And we shall see hereafter (take this Note) that it will be one great part of
the Glory of the Saints to see how which to see will be one part of the Saints
glory.
God had an eye to Jesus Christ in all his great works in the world; now we
look upon such a work, and such a work to have such an influence upon such a
business, but we do not see the reference that it has to Jesus Christ;
hereafter it will be a special part of the glory of the Saints that they shall
see how in all the works of God, he had an eye to Jesus Christ; even the work
of Creation; God would not have created the world but for his Son, and the
fall, and in every thing he had an eye to his Son, for the magnifying the great
work of his Son, and such who had a special work of the Spirit of God in those
times did understand Gods meaning, though ordinarily they did not: I remember
one learned Interpreter has this expression, to show how they might understand
Gods mind by his types, he expresses it thus, As it was with Jonathan when he
carried his Bow and Arrows into the field A similitude.
to give David a note whether he should fly away for fear of Saul, or return
back again. Now when Jonathan shot his Arrows, he said unto his youth, It is
beyond, and on this side. Now the youth knew no more but thus, that he was to
look at the Arrow; yea, but says he, David knew more, that when he said it was
beyond him, then he should do thus, and when it was on this side then he should
do thus. It is a very good expression in the difference of the types and the
letter of things, those who knew but merely the letter they were but like
Jonathans youth that did but only according to what Jonathan said, but David he
knew the reach of Jonathan, and so was able to make use of it. Oh! it is an
excellent thing to be able to understand the reach of God in his Word (as I may
so say) and it is a fruit of love. It Is a fruit of A fruit of Gods Love, and of
Christ's Spirit, to understand the reach of God in Scripture
the love of Jesus Christ to his Saints that we should know his mind more than
other men do. And certainly if the people of Israel had but known this when
they first went into Egypt and returned back again, that the Lord did aim at
Jesus Christ in it. Would it not have been a comfort to them, if they had known
that God intended to make them conformable to his Son? Would it have been a
comfort to them to have known it? Then certainly it must needs be a comfort to
the Saints to A comfort to the Saints in their sufferings, that they have a
conformity with Jesus Christ by them.
know now, that in all their sufferings they have a conformity to Jesus Christ;
we know it now, and that is the reason why we do suffer, it is to make us
conformable to Jesus Christ; the Jews did not know this, that which was the
reason why God would have them suffer, but we know it, and therefore in all our
sufferings we should exercise our faith in the sufferings of Jesus Christ, Do
we suffer thus and thus? he did so, to take away the sting of our sufferings:
and in a special manner you that have been driven from house and home, if there
be any here that have been driven to fly for their lives, and perhaps you have
been driven to go among strangers; Oh! but your suffering is not so great as
the suffering of Jesus Christ was, he fled for his life when he was but an
infant, and did not only fly to strangers, but to his enemies, to the
Egyptians: you are driven but from one part of England to Those that fly with
their children.
another, Oh! exercise your faith in this; it was a very strange work of Gods
providence that presently after he was born he must fly for his life; you that
are fain to carry your children with you, Oh! remember how Joseph and Mary was
fain to do it, was fain to fly for the life of Jesus Christ, and carry him, and
this flight was a great deal more than your flight, for they were fain to fly
to Egypt. Now supposing it was by land as that many reasons may be given, they
were fain to fly a matter of an The danger and length of Christ's flight into
Egypt.
hundred miles through the desert wilderness where there was no habitations:
you fly from one town to another and find relief; they were fain to fly above
an hundred miles, it is fifty leagues, which your Mariners account three miles
to a league, and was in the very desert between the Land of Canaan and Egypt:
Now though it is true, the people of Israel was forty years in the Wilderness;
but it was not through the length of the place, three days journey might have
carried them into the Land of Canaan, but it was forty years that they were
about it, God prolonged it, and they did entangle themselves and were stubborn
and Rebellions, and so it was prolonged, though the way was but in its self
short: but yet certainly this flight of Joseph with Christ to Egypt must needs
be sad and miserable; it cannot be conceived that any of your flights should be
so said and miserable as that was, for they could not carry any provision with
them, but were fain to fly in a private way to save the life of Jesus Christ;
Oh! how often do you think did Joseph and Mary look upon this Babe when they
were flying through the desert Wilderness, and think, What, is this the Son of
God? The inward tentations of the parents (...) Christ in they(...) flight.
Is this the Savior of the World? Is this he that should be the redeemer of
Israel? Is this he that is God and Man? Is this he that is the second person in
Trinity, that presently after he is born we must fly for his life through a
desert wilderness? Oh! the strange work of God in the very work of Man's
Redemption! Things were so low and poor, and seemed to go on in such a contrary
way, as it would have put any ones faith to it, to have thought that Jesus
Christ should have done such great things as he did. Oh my brethren! this is
the way of God to put the faith of men to it, especially at first. So it was
with Christ's flight into Egypt. It follows;

VERSE. 2.
As they called them, so they went from them, etc.

AS they] That is, Moses and Aaron, and other Prophets, and Ministers of God
sent unto them, they Expos.
called them to serve the Lord, and to worship him according to his own way.
And especially they called them from Idolaters and false worship.

As they called them, so some turn it; that is, Though they were so called, so
called, yet they went from them. (...). 70.
When the means of God is so powerful, to resist then is a very great evil. If
our Gospel; that is, our Gospel preached 2 Cor. 5. 4. illustrated.
with so much plainess and power is hid, it is hid to those that are lost. But
take it here:

As they called them] that is, Look what earn(...)ess there was in Moses and
Aaron and other Ministers of God to call them from their evil ways, so much
stubornness and stoutness was it for them to go against it. Calvin thinks it
is, Because they called them, THEREFORE Calvin in loc.
they went from them.

Because they called them; that is, They went from them for the very nonce (as
we use to say.) Because Moses would have us do thus and thus, we will do the
quite contrary for the very nonce.

They went from them: that is, Turned their backs upon them; like stuborn
Children and Servants when they are called they will not hear, but turn their
backs upon you; so did they to Moses From whence observe;

First, It is a mercy of God, to have Gods Ministers calling Obs. 1
us to obedience. Who are we that God should send his Messengers after us? What
need has God of us? Suppose we go on in the ways of death and perish, what
shall God lose by it? But this is Gods mercy, that he will call after us; God may
say, If you will go, go on and perish everlastingly: Oh! but he does not so.

Secondly, When God has called us out of affliction, it is Obs. 2.
a great addition of mercy to call us out of sin unto duty; and we should
account one as great as another. We think it a great mercy if the Lord will
call us out of an affliction; but when God calls us out of a misery, and calls
us to a duty, Do you think that that is as great a mercy? That Is a sign of a
sanctified heart indeed. You are in sickness and under great extremity; if God
should say, I will give out my Word to deliver you, that would be a sweet word
you would say. I but when God gives out his Word to call thee out of thy sin to
a duty, thou should as joyfully take an hint of that Word of God too; Oh! do
you prize Gods call unto you from sin to duty, as much as from misery to
prosperity.

Thirdly, It Is a great aggravation of men's sins if they be Obs. 3.
called to duty, after God has called them out of misery and they do not obey
it. After thou come out of an affliction, whether bodily or spiritual, God
expects thou should as diligently hearken to his call that calls thee to
duty, as thou do take hold of his mercy when he held it to thee to deliver
thee out of thine affliction; charge thy soul How we should charge our souls if
we answer not Gods call to duty after deliverance.
thus, Oh wrenched heart that I have, I called to God, and God has heard my
call, and now God has delivered me, and calls me to a duty, and shall I stop
mine ears against Gods call? Oh how just were it for God to leave me in misery,
when I turn my back to him when he calls me to a duty!

Fourthly, For men not only to disobey Gods call, but to Obs. 4.
turn away themselves from it, and from those that speak to them in his Name,
this is very wicked, a high degree of sinfulness before God: In Jer. 2. 27.
They have turned their back unto Jer. 2. 27.
me, but not their face; and so in Jer. 32. 33. They turn their Chap. 32. 33.
backs, that is more than not to obey. Our backs, that is, to refuse to obey, to
resolve not to obey, in Jer. 18. 17. Chap. 18. 17.
God threatens them that in the day of their calamity he would show them his
back too; as when a Traitor is illustrated.
petitioning to his Prince, so long as the Prince is but willing to parley with
him, and read his Petition, there is hope, but if the Prince turns his back
and will not look upon his Petition, there is no hope then: So there is hope of
people that we may bring them to obedience so Use to Ministers.
long as they will hearken to the Word, but if once they turn their backs, then
there is little hope; so when God turns his back upon sinners there is little
hope then. Remember you that turn your back upon calls to obedience, Jer. 18.
17. to be remembered by those that turn their backs on the Word.
Oh! remember that Scripture in Jer. 18. 17. that God threatens in the day of
your calamity he will turn his back to you. Now this wickedness men do not grow
to on a sudden; at first they are loath to be convinced that such a thing is a
truth, but at length when the evidence of truth comes clear they in a desperate
way turn How men come to that height.
their backs upon it and resolve not to hearken to it: a famous instance you
have of this in Jer. At first they said that Jeremiah did not speak the Word of
the Lord, but Ier. 43. 2. with Chap. 44. 86.
afterward, As for the Word of the Lord that thou have spoken, we will not hear.

Fifhly, It is yet a higher wickedness to have our corruptions irritated by the
Word and provoked. As they called, so they Obs. 5.
went away. When men's hearts grow as Lime, that the showers of the Word shall
inflame them, this is a sad condition indeed; when the more clear evidence they
Simile.
have of the Word, the more desperate wicked they grow. We find it so in some
places, when the word comes with the greatest power, this is all the effect it
has upon the hearts of men, to make them the more desperate wicked. You wonder
sometimes that where the Word is preached Why men most wicked where there is
great means
with power men should grow more wicked; wonder not at it, for where the Word
does not convert sinners, it does harden them.

Sixthly, From the extreme perverseness and stubornness Obs. 6.
of the Jews we may learn this Lesson, That Gods free Grace is very great and
very strong; the Lord was merciful to his people that were thus stuborn and
stout, but the more they were called to obedience the more wicked they grew,
and yet Gods mercy continued toward them for a long time together, and indeed
in that God should set his heart and love upon such a people as this, it is one
of the greatest helps against despair almost as any we know, Do but look into
the Book of God, and read of The Jews a very wicked people: yet
notwithstanding God makes them his peculier people.
the people of the Jews what wretched, froward, perverse, stuborn,
stout-hearted people they were, and yet that God of all the people of the earth
should choose them to be his peculier people; Oh! the free Grace of God! there is
nothing that God has in his design more than to honor free Grace. I confess I
had thought to have spent some time in showing to you the extreme stubornness
of Gods greatest delign is, to magnify his free grace.
the people of the Jews, and all to this end to magnify the free grace of God
toward such an unworthy people; you find that God does so himself when he
speaks of his Mercy to that people, he does give them this notice, That he
would have them to know, that what he did for them was not for their own
righteousness, in Deuteronomy. 9. 6. Understand therefore that the Lord thy God gives
thee not this Deuteronomy. 9. 6.
good I and to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiff-necked
people; As if God should say, I might magnify free Grace, whereas I might have
chosen some other people that might have been more yeeldable to my hand, I
illustrated.
chose you, that it might appear that all that I did was out of free Grace. In
Psalm. 78. 8. Be not stuborn as your Psalm. 78. 8.
forefathers were; they are called stout-hearted, stiff necked, strong, they
seem to be of strong spirits, but it is strong against the truth; and though
stubornness has a kind of Glory in it, yet the truth is, there is nothing but
weakness in it: in Ezekiel. 16. 30. How weak is thy heart, Ezekiel. 16. 30.
says the Lord, seeing thou do all these things, the work of an imperious
whorish woman? They are said to be stronghearted, stiff hearted, but says the
holy Ghost, how weak is thy heart? and you shall find in Scripture that they
are called stiff necked, and Iron-^inewed, and that they walked contrary to
God, and that they are perverse and crooked, and that they had hardened their
hearts and made them like an Adamant; and says Stephen, You have always
resisted the holy Ghost; and impudent children, Act. 7. 52.
and rebellious children: It is very observable if you read those Scriptures,
presently after they came out of the Land of Egypt, within three days after
God had shown them such a miraculous work they fell to murmuring, nay, they did
not stay so long, for it is said in Psalm. Psalm. 106. 7. Exodus 14. 11, 12. Exodus
16. 2. 28. Chap. 17. 2. with the continual story of the Israelites confirm the
doctrine.
106. They provoked the Lord at the Sea, even at the red Sea. And in Exodus 16.
2. 28. and in chap. 17. ver. 2. the people did chide with Moses again, so read
the story of Exodus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Judges, and the Kings, and you shall
find them continually rebelling, a people with an Iron sinew against God, and
yet for all that the Lord makes choice of this people, and loves them; Oh! free
Grace, the free Grace of God. When your children are stuborn and stout against
you consider of this, you think A meditation for parents vexed with stuborn
children. Use. Comfort against a stubborn heart.
it a grievous affliction to you, Oh! but there is none in the world that are
so crossed with stuborn children as God himself is.

And though you should find your hearts to be very stuborn, yet for all that do
not have your hearts sink with despair, for Gods Grace is free to overcome even
stubornness, as it did here. You have a most remarkable place for that, for the
overcoming of stubornness, in Exodus 34. 9. Let my Lord I pray thee go amongst
us (for it is a stiff-necked Exodus 34. 9.
people) This was no argument of despair, that God should not go among them
(for it is a stiff-necked people:) But Moses makes such an argument with God,
Lord, they are a stiff-necked people, yet I pray thee let my Lord go amongst
us, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine heritage. [Where
by the way we may note how the Chaldae paraphrase renders this, viz. Let the
Majesty of the Lord go with us; the Majesty or Divine Presence: the Hebrews
call it Shecinah (...) they usually distinguish this from God the father, and
say there is no coming before the blessed high King without Shecinah. So our
Savior more plainly, John, 14. 16. But to return.]

God holds forth by this example that he would have none sink with despair, but
be brought in by his free Grace, notwithstanding their stuborn hearts that they
have had against him.

Now as for the latter part of this second verse, of their sacrificing to
Baalim, and burning incense to graven Images, I shall not need to speak to
that, as having spoken of that heretofore.

VER. 3.
I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their Arms: But they knew not that
I healed them.

HEre we have the third degree of Gods goodness toward Ephraim, the fruit of
his love, he called them out of Egypt, and he called upon them by his Prophets,
and he taught them to go.

God here compares himself to a Nurse, or to a tender Expos.
Mother, or loving Father, that carries along the child, and guides the hand of
it, and the feet of it; and as they are leading the children if there be any
rugged foul way, the Nurse or the Parent takes them up in their Arms, such was
my dealings toward Ephraim said God. In Psalm 77. 20. God there is said to lead
them by the hand of Moses and Aaron, like a flock of Sheep. But here he is said
to Psalm. 77. 20.
lead them like a Nurse, or a Parent, and this expression seems to have
reference unto that we have in Deuteronomy. 1. 31. In the Wilderness the Lord thy God
did bear thee as a man does The T^xt referred to Deuteronomy. 1. 31.
bear his son in all the way that ye went; Look as a man leads his son by his
hand, and when he comes to hard way does bear him up and take him in his arms,
so did the Lord thy God deal toward thee as a man to his son: for so he called
Ephraim in the former verse, his Son, he loved him when he was a child; so he
is compared to to a child, and God to the parent that teaches him how to go,
God taught them how to go in their way out of Egypt all along in the Wilderness
until they came to Canaan

When they came first out of Egypt they knew not which way to go no more than a
child, and if God had left them when they were brought out of Egypt, certainly
they had perished in their way, the way was very full of difficulty in which
they were to go and God did seem to lead them about, but the Scripture says,
He led them Psalm. 107. 7. observed.
in the right way, in Psalm. 107. 7. though they were forty years in the
Wilderness, whereas they might have gone through within a few days, yet still
they were led in the right way, God taught them to go.

From whence there are these Notes of Observation.

First, When God calls his people out of afflictions, yet they Obs. 1.
know no more how to go, to guide themselves in their way than a little child
does. We think if we be delivered from such and such an evil we are well, but
when God does grant deliverance if he should leave us there, we should quickly
spoil our selves, we should quickly turn the mercies that we have into misery
if we be left but a while; It is the pride of men's hearts that makes them
venturous of them selves, hence they get many a knock and bruise; Oh! many
stumble in their way and split themselves and perish because they will be going
themselves and not depend upon Gods hand.

We find by experience now God has brought us out Use for England.
of Egypt here, in great measure we are called out of Egypt, and we hope that
God intends a Canaan to us, yet what children are we? we do not know how to
step a step in our way, Oh! how often have we been at a stand in our way since
God has been pleased to call us out of Egypt? we have been at a maze; not
knowing which way to take, this way or that way, Oh! how often have we fallen
in our way, and gone astray? If ever people had need to have God to teach them
how to go, then Our path untroden.
have we at this day; our path is an untroden path, and there are many
stumbling blocks in our way, we often stumble and fall in them; Poor children
have not more need to have the hand of the Parent or Nurse, when they go upon
the Ice, in slippery ways, then we have need of the hand of God upon us to
lead us in our way and to guide us. That Is the first Note.

Secondly, The way that God leads people in many times Obs. 2.
may be a way of much difficulty; he said, he taught Ephraim to go, and led him
in the way. If we enquire what that way is? it was the way through the
wilderness, yea, before they came into the wilderness, before they came at the
Sea, in Exodus 14. 9. The Egyptians pursued after them, Exodus 14. 9.
(all the Horses and Chariots of Pharaoh, and his Horsemen, and his Army) and
overtook them, encamping by the Sea, befides Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon.
Pharaoh and all his host pursued them, they were in a very straight way, The
Sea was before them, Pharaoh and all his Army was behind them, and they were
encamping by the Sea, before Pi-hahiroth, at the mouth of those Mountains, that
the Mountains did compass them round about, and they were before Baal-zephon,
that is, the god of watching, the Baal-zephon what?
Egyptians God that they made account was the God that did watch those that
went out of their Country without any leave, they came before that God that was
the God for their watching those that went out of their their Country, and to
keep them from going out, and between the Mountains, and the Sea before them,
and a great Army behind them, and yet God taught them to go; what a way does
God teach them to go in? And then when they go further they must go through the
Sea, or no other way, God taught them to go through the Sea, and when they have
gone through the Sea, Is all the evil over? No, they must come into the wast
howling wilderness, and there be led along for forty years together, and yet
God does reckon up his guidance of them here in this way as a fruit of his love.

So long as we are in Gods way, though the way be difficult, yet we have cause
to bless God that we are in Use.
his way, and let not us be troubled at the difficulty of our way when we see
God before us, and leading us in our way.

Thirdly, Though we meet with difficulties in our way, yet God loves to teach
his people how to go in their way; and the Obs. 3.
more difficult their way is, the more care has God of them to teach them how
to go. We do not find such an expression of Gods care of them to teach them in
any other way but this of theirs, when they went first out of Egypt; because
that way was the most difficult, therefore God takes upon him in a special
manner to teach them in that way.

Be not discouraged at your difficulties, but when you Use.
are in your way, and your conscience tells you that it is not a way that you
have chosen to your selves, look up to God for guidance, cry to him; as you
find in Psalm. 107. 6. They cried to the Lord in their trouble; (and then verse.
7.) Psa. 107. 6. 7.
he led them forth in a right way. Mark how these two are joined together: They
cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he led them forth in a right way. When
you are in straights, cry to God in your trouble, the Lord will lead you forth
in a right way. When we have been in the greatest straits England.
and have had the hardest way to go, how has God taken us up in his arms!
Through Gods mercy, though we be very weak; yet we are gone on a great way even
from Egypt, from our spiritual Egypt and bondage. It is unthankfulness in
people, to say, We are in as bad a condition as ever we were. What God may
bring us to through the unthankfulness of men we know not, but certainly
through Gods mercy we have been led along a great way in our journey, God has
taught us to go; it has not been the wisdom nor providence of men that has
carried us on in our way so far as we have been, no, we have found apparently
we are not much beholden to the wisdom of men for that way that we have been
carried on in, but it is God that has come in in our straits, we see by what
has fallen out, how we should have perished in our way, we should have
returned into Egypt; how often have we been ready to think, Would things were
with us as heretofore they have been: Oh! this has been the peevishness of our
spirits, to be thinking of turning into Egypt: as it was with this people,
though God was with them in their way, yet often they thought of returning back
again. We have been ready to be thinking of by-waies for our selves, and every
one to be shifting his own way, and what cross paths have we walked in, first
one way, and then another way, undoing what we have done? First engaging men,
and then discouraging The changableness of those that have been our guides.
the same men that we have encoraged; though they have continued the same, yet
our spirits have not continued the same toward them. We may apply that that
you have in Jer. 31. 22. which is spoken in reference to their way, coming out
of their captivity; How long Jer. 31. 22. enligntned and applied.
will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? It may be well applied to
England at this day; Oh! how long will we go about? that is, shifting this way
and that, and not daring to trust God in his way; we are afraid that if we
should go on in the right path that God guids us in, that we should miscarry,
and therefore we go about, and that is the reason it is so long before we have
our deliverance, because we go about, and do not follow Gods guidance in our
way. There Is an excellent promise that God makes to his people in Jer. 31. 9.
in reference to the Jer. 31. 9. illustrated.
guiding of them in their way from their Captivity; They shall come with
weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by
the rivers of waters, in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble: for I
am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first born. This is a Scripture very
suitable to that Scripture we are now opening. It Is a fruit of fatherly love to
guide us in a straight way, and keep us from stumbling. But mark how this shall
be done: They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them.
There must be weeping and supplication to It Is a fruit of fatherly love to
guide us in our way.
cry to God for guidance in our way: As a poor child if it be left a little by
the Mother or Nurse, it stands crying to be guided in its way; and this should
be our care in all our straights, not to fly upon this Instrument, or the
other, but to cry to God to guide us in our way. We may apply this to Gods
guidance of the soul from spiritual Egypt; when God brings the soul out of the
spiritual Applied to the guidence of the soul.
bondage he guides it in the way to heavenly Canaan: you whom the Lord are
bringing out of your Spiritual Bondage, look up to God to teach you how to go:
why? For your way is a hard way, it is a straight way, it is a narrow way that
you are going now, it has many stumbling blocks in it, it has many bypath
near it, that are very like to it; Your way is a very slippery way, Why the
soul needs guiding
and you had need be taught how to go; you may slip and fall and break your
selves quickly if you be not taught how to go; you that are young beginners in
the way of Religion be not too confident in your own understanding, and your
own strength: many poor children Young beginners not to be too confident.
for want of the care of their Nurses have gotten such falls when they were
children that have lamed them and made them go crooked all their days; and so
it has An apt simile.
been with young Professors of Religion, many young ones in the profession of
Religion, because they have been too bold and confident in their own
understanding, the Lord has left them to such falls that they prove but crooked
all the days of their profession, but though they do go on in a way of
profession of Religion, they are but maimed Professors, crooked Professors,
because of the falls that they have gotten when they were young ones: And truly
we have very great cause to fear that A prophecy touching the proof of much of
the profession of these times.
who lives but a few years, to see those that are young Professors of Religion
now live to be something old, I say, we have cause to fear that those that live
to see it, will see a great many maimed and crooked Professors of Religion, for
there are a many young ones in these slippery times gets falls that venture so
much upon the Ice, upon doubtful things that they understand not, which get
such falls and bruises that are like to stick upon them as long as they live.
Some of you it may be may remember when you were children you would use to
venture upon the Ice, and be sliding, and you got such bruises then that now
you feel them; Oh! let young ones take heed of venturing upon doubtful things,
let them look up to God to make their way plain before them, and not lean to
their own understandings lest they have falls (I say) by which they get bruises
that they may feel another day.

And further: Seeing God makes it to be a fruit of his love Obs. 4.
to teach them how to go, when you see others slip and stumble in in the way of
profession of Religion and spoil themselves, Oh bless God then for his mercy
toward you, that he helps and teaches you in your way: As when a man is riding
upon the road in winter time, it may be he sees some before him whose Simile.
horses get into holes and stumble, and it may be the man breaks his leg or
shoulder before him, if it proves not to be deadly to him; now if you should
see a man falling and breaking his leg or arms, falling down with his horse in
such dangerous ways as there is in many places, would you not have cause to
bless God that you are delivered from that, that God has preserved your limbs?
Thus when you see Professors falling in the way of profession of Religion, Oh!
bless God that he teaches you in your way, that he guides you. To women that
are weak in ways that are slipery you will take hold of their hands to guide
them; and so God does to you, know the whole course of your way from spiritual
Egypt to spiritual Canaan, it is Ice and rugged all the way, that God is fain to
take you by the hand, and Oh! the goodness of God to condescend thus to his
poor Creatures, to compare himself to a Nurse, Oh! how often would we run into
harms way (as we use to say) if God did not lead us?

And further, Take heed you who are weak and have need of teaching, that you be
not wayward and wanton; that you be Obs. 5.
not foolish and unruly; and that you do not wilfully run into rugged and
slippery ways: God indeed is as a Nurse to teach you how to go, yea, but be
not you as wayward and froward children that sometimes tire their Nurses; it is
more difficult to teach some children than others how to go, they are so
froward and wilful that they will go their own way, if the eye of their Nurse
be but from them never so little they will go their own way; Oh! take heed you
be not among those froward wilful children that will be going their own way.

Again further, I taught Ephraim to go.

Gods Ministers and all of us should labor to follow God in Obs. 6.
this way of his, that is, To have a tender care of others; we should be like
our Father: God takes a delight in teaching weak opes how to go, and in guiding
of them in their way. Truly we that profess our selves to be Gods children, we
should imitate our Father, and especially Gods Ministers, they should take a
delight to help weak ones on in their way, and to carry weak ones in their very
arms; that which God is said here to do, Moses in another Scripture is said to
do, as in Numb. 11. 12. Have Number. 11. 12.
I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou should say
unto me, carry them in thy bosom, (as a Nursing Father bears a sucking child)
unto the Land which thou swearest unto their Fathers? It seems Moses, though he
thought it to be very hard to bear so many people in his arms (as it were) yet
God gave that Commission to him, and he did it according as he was able, he did
carry the people as a Nurse, or a Father or Mother carries the sucking child
in their bosom.

Yea, And though Gods Ministers meet with those that are Obs. 7.
very froward, yet they must not be discouraged; we are as froward in reference
unto God, as any can be in reference unto us, and therefore you must consider
you that are Ministers, when you meet with young Professors, and others that are
beginning in the ways of godliness, and you find them untoward and peevish
many times, do not cast them off because of that; if God should have cast off
you because of that, what would have become of you? No, instruct them with
meekness, even instruct them with meekness that oppose themselves; though they
kick and spurn, yet instruct them with meekness though they oppose themselves,
and in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. we have a notable 1 These. 2. 7. Ministers pattern.
pattern of a Minister there how he should carry himself in this respect; But
we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children. Thus
Ministers should be of gentle spirits, and know that God does put them in place
to teach children how to go in their way; and therefore we find it in Tit. 1.
7. that they must not be soon Tit. 1 7.
angry, Ministers must not be of angry dispositions; you would be loath to put
your children to froward Nurses, An apt sim^le.
their very milk would some way favor of them, and your children may get a
great deal of hurt by Nurses that are pettish and froward; it is a special
qualification and A Nurses qualification.
necessarily required in a Nurse, that she be of a gentle and patient
disposition: Now Gods Ministers are compared to Nurses, and do not think the
comparison too mean, for God himself is compared to a Nurse, when he says he
taught Ephraim how to go.

And then lastly, Seeing the tender care of God, like a Parent or a Nurse
toward the Child, is made an engagement to their duty, and an aggravation of
their sin, because they were not what they ought to be. As if the Prophet
should have said, Oh! therefore you should have served and loved the Lord that
was so gracious to you as to teach you, but you have not done so, and therefore
your sin is greater. From whence the Note is,

That the love and tender care of Parents and Nurses in bringing Obs. 8.
up children, and enduring much trouble with them, is a great judgment to
children when they grow up to requite with duty and due respect their Parents
and Nurses; and if they do not it is a great aggravation of their evil. You that
are grown up from children, remember the care, remember the sorrow, remember
the trouble of your bringing up, and be ashamed of your undutifulness; How is
it that Be ashamed undutiful children.
you have all your limbs, but from the care of your Parents and Nurses? you are
to bless God for your Parents care, and the care of those to whom you were
committed when you were children, and know that you owe due respect unto them
for it. He is an Apostate to the great Law of Nature who Violates Charities due
unto Parents and Nurses. I remember I have read of the Pisidians, a certain
Heathen people, that when they were a Feasting at any time, the first fruit of
all their Feast they The Pisidians.
would offer to their Parents, as thinking it unseemly for them to rejoice in
the use of the Creature without showing due honor to their Parents from whom
they had their being and education; Heathens have ever condemned undutifulness
in children to be unnatural and liable to punishment, and they have punished
undutifulness; and the Law of God (we know) does punish a stuborn child with
death. But they knew not that I healed them.

Many times children, though there be a great care to Expos.
teach them how to go, yet they will venture themselves, and by their
venturousness and wantoness they get many a knock and bruise. So it was with
this people, indeed my care was toward them, but they would go their own way,
and they often bruised themselves. Well, did God therefore reject them and say,
It is through your own fault that you have gotten these bruises and maims. No,
I healed them says God. Though he were never so froward, and he got by that
many bruises, yet my pity was so great that I healed those very bruises and
maims that he got by his wilfulness.

Though in the reading of this we may pass it easily The text one of the most
remarkable in Scripture.
by, yet it is as notable a Scripture as most we have in the Book of God.
What Is the reason our consciences do so misgive us, and that we are so afraid
that the Lord will leave us to our selves? when our consciences accuse us of
this, Oh! we may thank our selves for it, the Lord showed us another way, but
we through our sinfulness, and frowardness would go in our own way, Can we
think that the Lord should have care of us in our sores that we got our selves
by our wilfulness? yes, (says God) such was my compassion toward Ephraim,
that I taught him how to go, and yet they got bruises, But I healed them
afterward.

That Is the Note from it, God will not cast off his children Obs. 9.
though they get hurt; yea, though they get hurt by their own sin, yet the Lord
is so gracious as to heal thm. You have a notable Scripture for this, in Isa.
57. 17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wrath, and smote him:
Isa. 57. 17. 18
I hid me and was wrath, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. He
went on frowardly when I smote him; what then? in the 18. verse, I have seen
his ways. One would have thought that should have followed, I have seen his
ways, and I Will smite him, and plague him, and make him to know what it is to
deal so frowardly and perversely with me, but, behold the goodness of the Lord!
Gods ways are not the ways of men, his thoughts are not our thoughts, for he
says, I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and restore comforts to him; I
will not say, I will never lead him more, because he would not regard my
teaching but goes his own ways and gets many bruises; No, I have seen his
ways and will heal him, and lead him notwithstanding.

Oh! be not discouraged when you have gone out of Use
Gods way, but be troubled and ashamed, make use of this promise, the Lord sees
the frowardness of his people, and yet will heal them, and lead them, and
restore comfort to them.

And my brethren, thus has the Lord dealt graciously with us in our
inconsiderate, foolish, sinful courses, Applicat. to England.
how often we in this Land have been brought low by our inconsiderate, foolish
ways, we have been sore wounded, we have been in danger to bleed to death by
the falls that we have got, we have often given all for gone as it were, men's
ways have been so perverse and cross as there has been little hope of any
good, that sometimes when we have met together we have even said, al is gone,
we are but betrayed, and therefore there is little hope of any good; Have not
we oftentimes said thus? but the Lord has come in and healed us, and that
Scripture in Isa. 57. has been made good unto us, the Lord has beheld the
frowardness of our ways, and yet has healed us, and yet has led us. You have
gone one in such and such ways says God, and you have even undone your selves
in them, and you were made but fools, and others squandered away your estates
and nothing came of it; well, you knew not what to do, I Will lead you in ways
that you do not think of, in such ways as you have the least hopes of good by,
I will lead you on in those ways and restore comfort to you. My Brethren, the
ways that the Lord has this last Summer restored comfort to England by, were
they ways that any of you did think of this time twelve month? Certainly it
was never in the imaginations and thoughts of men to be brought in such ways
as the Lord has lead us in, and restored comforts The New-Model of the Army,
1645.
to us by, the Lord did see that the way of the old Soldery was not the way to
restore comforts to England, but the Lord has led us in other ways: well, let
Gods healing of our bruises that we get in walking in our own ways make us
thankful and careful that we run not wilfully into any such ways any more,
that we be not still more ventrous, and more careless; if we be, God may suffer
us to break our bones; for though God be patient and loving, and merciful, yet
he has times to leave men in the perverseness of their ways, it may cost us
dear before we are healed if God does leave us, though God may not take away
his love, to cast us wholly off, I but we may be forced to cry again and again
with David, in Psalm, 51. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, that the bones
which thou have broken may rejoice; David would go out of Psalm. 5(...)
his way, and he got such a fall as he broke his bones; Oh! that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice. When God heals us, he expects that we should take
notice of his work, that we should acknowledge him. But mark what follows.

But they knew not that I healed them. I healed them says God, but they knew
not that I healed them.

My Brethren, that is the Note from it, God does us Obs. 10^.
much good that we know not of: I say, God does us much good that we know not
of; not only in preventing mercies in a day that we know not of, but in healing
mercies, we attribute our healing to this and the other cause; but it is God
that comes in in the use of means, sometimes comes in beyond means; though means
oftentimes has been used and no good has been done by them, at last God by a
secret and invisible blessing he comes and heals us; we must not envy at the
honor that is due to Instruments; But certainly by the healing that we have had
this last Summer, we have cause to look beyond all men and means; though God
has used means, yet it is God that has healed us, and they desire that we
should attribute all the Glory to God, our healing has been such that except
we even maliciously shut our eyes we cannot but know and acknowledge that God
has healed us in great measure; Oh! let not us by our pride and stoutness, our
oppression, our foolishness make it appear that we do not acknowledge that God
has healed us, God God stands much upon it to be acknowledged the healer of
his people.
stands much upon that, because it is his Glory to heal his people therefore he
stands much upon it to be acknowledged to be the healer of his people. For
bodily healings we are ready to acknowledge those that do heal us; What
thankfulness is given to Physicians when they have been Instruments to heal our
bodies; Before healing any body would say they would give, Oh! what would they
give! al their estates that they might be healed of such a disease; but when
they are healed it may be they will neglect the Physicians, but it is those that
are of base spirits: but others are very ready to acknowledge thankfulness that
way to the Physicians that heals their bodies: how gainful therefore is the
practice of Physicians that God makes use of to heal men's bodies? I remember I
have read of Jews the Eleventh of France, Lewis the 11. of France.
that for his Chaplins he allowed them twenty shillings a month, but for his
Physi^ian, one John Cottiere, his allowance was ten thousand Crowns a month;
four Crowns would serve his Chaplin and ten thousand for his Physician, that is
a gainful practice, because men are more sensible of the healing of their
bodies than the healing of their souls.

Well, any of you who have been in great sickness and Use.
distresses of body, yea, and in distresses of soul too, and are healed, do not
you now by the frolickness of your spirits and the abuse of your strength in
the ways of sin, manifest that you do not know that God has healed you, both
in respect of National healing, and in respect of Personal healing; let every
one make use of that of David in Psalm. 103. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
Psalm. 10. 3.
that is within me bless his holy Name; and again, Bless the Lord O my soul,
and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquity, who healteh
all thy diseases. Oh! that we were able to join these two together now, Who
forgiveth all thine iniquity, and heals all thy diseases. Healing is a
Healing with forgiveness a sweet mercy.
mercy indeed, but then it is a mercy to purpose when it is a fruit of
forgiveness, when we can make good the former; who forgiveth thine iniquity,
and heals thy diseases, when we can say our healing is a fruit of our
forgiveness; God has in great measure healed the Land and Nation, Oh that we
could say that he had forgiven us! our healing without our forgiveness will be
to little purpose, and therefore in the times of our greatest wounds we should
cry for forgiveness in the first place, and not be satisfied with any healing
without forgiveness of our sins. And so particularly, God has healed some of
your diseases in body, it may be your families have had Applied to visited
families and persons
the Plague, or some other disease, Pox, or Measels, why the Lord has been
pleased to heal you, you were in a sad condition then, and the Lord has healed
your families, yea, but can you put both together, bless the Lord who has
forgiven the iniquity of my family, and healed the diseases of my family?
And so for your own particulars, do not satisfy your selves with this, that
you have your healths restored you, except you can bless the Lord who has
forgiven mine iniquity, and healed my diseases; when thou find the one, that
thou art healed, be not satisfied except by faith thou can see the other,
that thou art likewise forgiven all thine iniquities. And thus much for the
third Verse.

VERSE. 4.
I drew them with cords of a man, with bonds of love.

THis Verse is a great Verse, and it will be very hard to pass over this in an
Expository way only.

I drew them with cords of a man, with bonds of love.

Here Is a fourth or fifth expression of Gods love,; for there was two in the
former Verse, Taught them to go, and healed them. Now here is the fifth, I drew
them with cords of a man, with bonds of love. God still aggravates his mercy
that they might see their sin. As there is no such way to be kindly humbled for
sin, as to see it against much mercy. I drew them with cords of a man.

Some would carry this as if it were a proper name, Expos. 1.
with the cords of Adam, for so the word is, for the word Adam, signifies a man
of red earth.

But it is rather to be taken appellatively, with the cords of a man, that is, I
did not deal with them like beasts, 2.
which must be drawn or put on with violence, my way was not thus with them, to
draw them and to have Iron Chains about them, or strong cords to force them on
in their way, no says he, I dealt with them like men, I drew them on with the
Cords of a man. It does note Cords of a man what
these three things:

First, I dealt with them in a rational way, as men, not as beasts, and sought
to draw them in that way, as men.

Secondly, I dealt with them in a gentle way, not with rigor and violence, but
as a man, for they were humane, so my ways were ways suitable to their
humanity: as the Scripture sometimes speaks of the Rods of men, I Will chastise
them with the Rods of men, by which some think is meant, (that is) more gentle,
I dealt with them gently.

And then thirdly, With the Cords of a man, that is, I dealt with them in such
ways as were honorable to them, as were suitable to that respect that is due to
a man. I considered that they were men made at first according to my Image, and
they were the most excellent Creatures that I had upon the earth here, and
therefore I dealt with them in a way suitable to their Nature, to preserve the
honor of their humane Nature, Rationally, Gently, Honorably.

First, Consider how Rationally God dealt with this 1. How God dealt rationally
with the people of Israel. 1. A Law in its self rational. Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
people.

First, The Law that I gave to them it was according to the Principles of right
Reason, there was nothing in my Law but was suitable to the very principles of
right reason, in Deuteronomy. 4. says he, The Nations shall hear al these Statutes,
and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people, (why?) in
the 8 verse, What Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so
righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day? Mark, all the
Nations that are about you shall say, What Nation is there so wise, that has
Statutes and Judgments like this Nation? Surely explained.
then my Law it had abundance of Reason in it, it had the reason that might
convince not only you, but all the Nations about you; I drew you with the Cords
of a man, in a rational way.

Secondly, God strengthened it with many Arguments, 2. Backed with Reasons.
which is some way beyond the manner of men; If the Lord had but only given out
his Law, and left men to find out the meaning, it had been enough; yea, but the
Lord drew them with the Cords of a man, that is, added to his Law many
Arguments and Reasons to show the equity of the Law that he had given to them:
now men think it enough if they give out a Law, you do not use to have the
proof of the Law and the reason of it; yea, but says God, I drew them with the
Cords of a man, I gave them a Law that had reason in it, and explained that; as
if we should go no further than the very moral Law, see how God begins, I am
Jehovah thy God, that brought thee out of Preface to the Decalogue.
the Land of Egypt, every word a Reason to back the Law.

I am Jehovah, therefore obey. I am thy God, therefore obey. I am thy God that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, therefore obey. So you shall see how the
Lord does argue his Law by the strength of Reason.

Yea, not only Reason, but many Persuasions and Motives, 3. Urged with Motives.
Deur. Chap. 4, 5, 6.
and Exhortations, as man deals with man, if you read the 4, 5, and 6.
Chapters of Deuteronomy, you shall find all those, with Motives, and
Persuasions, besides Reasons, to draw them on to obedience, Now Motives and
Persuasions are the Cords of a man, to draw man as a rational Creature.

Fourthly, If there were any objections that they had, I answered al their
objections. Do not you find when you 4. Cleared from Objections.
come to hear the Word, that the Word meets with every secret objection, you
can have no secret objection against any thing that God requires but at some
time or other the Word meets with it.

Fifthly, Yea, I called them to reason with me, therefore 5. God desires
con^erence with us Isa. 1. 18.
I dealt with them like rational Creatures, as in Isa. 1. 18. Come, let us
reason together, says God; see how God deals with people after the manner of
men: As now, If you should fall out with a neighbor, and it may be your
neighbor is froward and humorous, but now, you are able to overcome your own
passion, and you go to him Simile.
and say, I pray thee let us reason the case together, and if it be yours, take
it; now you deal with him like a man. So God, why says he, let us reason the
case together, be not carried on with humor and passion, but let us come and
fairly reason the Case one with another.

Further, Sixthly, God earnestly desires that they 6. Would have us consider.
Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
would but consider of things, in Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they were wise, that
they understood this, That they would consider their latter end. Now when you
have to deal with them that are humorous, if you by the strength of reason have
power over your own passion you would be ready to express your selves thus, Oh
that I could but find Simile.
such a man in a way of reason, that he were but wise, that he would but weigh
things! thus God says concerning his people, Oh that they were wise and
considered, and understood things!

Seventhly, God pleads with them after the manner 7. Pleads with them.
of men, in Jer. 2. 35. I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not
sinned; thou art Righteous in thine own thoughts. Come, I will plead with thee,
and convince thee says God. As now, If one wrongs you, and they will not
acknowledge that they have wronged you, perhaps Simile.
some are of turbulent spirits and they will make them know that they have
wronged them by casting them into prison, and by Law; but God he does not do
so, but he pleads the Case with them.

And then in the last place, The Lord will appeal to 8. Appeals to their own
consciences.
their own consciences whether they have dealt well with him, yea, or no; he
will make them to be the Judges; in Isa. 46. 8. Remember this, and show your
selves men: Isa. 48. 8. illustrated.
bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors: do not be led on like beasts in
your passion and humor, show your selves but men, and do but remember, and
think of it, I will leave it to you to Judge, and so, Judge between me and my
Vinyard; and then again, Are not my ways equal, and Isa. 5. Ezekiel. 18.
your ways unequal? Now all these expressions are to show how God did draw
them with the Cords of a man in a rational way.

Secondly, In a gentle way: As if God should say, I have not driven them on
with rigor, but I have dealt gently with them like men: indeed if so be that
one should be always striking a youth, or servant, or man, you would be ready
to say, you are not meddling with a beast, 2. How God deals gently with his
people.
or a dog, but with a man; says God, I remembered I have to deal with a man,
and therefore I dealt in a gentle way. There are these six or seven
particulars, how God expresses his dealing with them in a gentle way.

As first, I have suited my self to their very dispositions, 1. Suits himself
to their dispositions.
this is now to deal in a gentle way; as a Schoolmaster he looks upon his
Scholars not as a company of beasts, but as the children of men, and therefore
he considers their dispositions and tempers, and he suits himself with their
temper, (if he be a wise Schoolmaster) and will draw them on with such ways
and Cords as are suitable Simile
to humane Nature. So I do says God.

Secondly, I have observed when they were in the best 2. Observed when they
were in a good temper.
temper, and have sought to work upon them then, I have observed what their
dispositions are; but now though men and women are of such and such
dispositions, yet always their good humor does not work. If you that are wives
will deal with your husbands like men, observe when they are in a good temper,
and then deal with them and seek to draw them; God does so; I Wives
observed when they were in the best temper of all, and then I came upon them
with the most strength, to draw them at such a time rather than another.

Thirdly, I gave them time to consider; though they were never so untoward, yet
I did not come instantly upon 3. Gave them time to consider.
them with blows, but I gave them time to consider, to bethink themselves: many
Scriptures we might show for either of these: you do not give beasts time to
consider.

Now when you fly upon others presently without giving Use.
them time to consider, you deal not with them like men but beasts.

Fourthly, I have hired them to obedience by my gifts; 4. Hired them to
obedience.
I do not only in an imperious way command them to obey, or else look to it at
your peril, but I have come and hired them to the ways of obedience, and gave
them gifts to draw them, and so I dealt with them like men.

Fifthly, I have had consideration when they did not 5. Distinguished of
weakness and wilfulness.
obey, whether it were through weakness or wilfulness, when they were
disobedient, I did not make it all one whether they disobeyd through weakness,
or wilfulness, and so I dealt with them accordingly.

And then Sixthly, In all afflictions that was brought 6. Afflicted in measure
as their natures might bear.
upon them, I considered that they were but men of weak natures, and could not
bear much; I did not lay on as if I were laying on upon an Ox, or such a
creature that had so much strength to bear, but I considered they were men, and
I laid on my strokes gently considering that they had tender natures: as you
know the Prophet speaks in Isa. 57. 16. I will not contend for ever, lest the
spirit that I Isa. 57. 16.
have made should fail before me. The Lord looks upon the weaknesses of his
people, and therefore will not contend, lest their spirits should fail before
him.

Seventhly, In their afflictions, I was sensible of their 7. was aflicted in all
their afflictions. Isa. 63. 9. Simile.
afflictions as well as themselves; so you know what the Lord says, In all
their afflictions I was afflicted, I was sensible: so as a tender Father, or
wise Master, if he does strike the child or servant, the very blows in a manner
will be as sensible to him as to them: but it is not so with you when you
strike a beast. So says God, I did not afflict them, but it went to my very
heart, and I was afflicted as well as they. 3. How God drew his people in an
honorable way.


Thirdly, I drew them with the Cords of a man; that is, in an honorable way, so
as that honor and respect that was any way due to such a creature, or that was
suitable to such a creature it was preserved.

First, My Instructions was ever more than my blows, I never struck more blows
than I gave them Instructions, 1. Instruction more than correction.
if I struck them one blow, I gave them twenty, forty instructions to one
blow. When you have children or servants, and perhaps you will give them forty
blows to one instruction, you deal with them not like men, but like beasts.
That Is the first. It Is a dishonor to mankind, for any Superior to give more
blows than instructions, but I dealt with them like men, suitable to that
respect that is in a kind due to humane Nature.

Secondly, Whatsoever spark of ingenuity remained in them, 2. Preserved their
ingenuity.
I took care to preserve it; that is the second thing; If there were but a spark
of ingenuitie in any of them I took great care to preserve that ingenuitie, and
not to quench that spark in all my dealings toward them.

Thirdly, I aimed at their good as well as mine own, as well 3. Aimed at their
good in all.
as my glory; there is many Scriptures that way; you do not do so when you
strike beasts, you do not consider of the good of the beast, but at the benefit
that you should have, that he may further your work. But now when you come to
strike men you must look at their good as well as at your own good; there is no
parent must strike the child, but must look at the benefit of the child rather
than to satisfy his humor. When you strike merely for your own advantage
without aiming at the good of those you strike, you deal not with them like
men, but like beasts.

Fourthly, I did never any thing toward them but so as they 4. Still held forth
hope of reconciliation.
might have hope still preserved in them of being reconciled to me upon their
coming in, though they deserved never so much, and I seemed to come against
them the most harshly, yet I never so came against them but there was hope
preserved, that at any time of their coming in and repenting I would be
reconciled to them; this is to deal with them like men, when you deal with any
that offend you Admonition to parents and governors.
(parents or Governors) never be so harsh, but though they be very evil, there
must be preserved some hope that upon their coming in they be reconciled to you.

Fifthly, I was careful to maintain their honor as my people, 5. Kept up their
honor.
(that is) in all my dealings with them, though they were hard sometimes to
flesh and blood, yet I put a difference between them and other people; other
people were to me in comparison but as dogs (as it were) but these as men, and
as free men, in Jer. 2. 14. Is Israel a Servant? Jer. 2. 14.
is he a home born Slave? why is he spoiled? What, Israel a servant, a
home-born Slave! no, he must be looked upon as a free man. So in Isa. 27. 7.
has he Isa. 27. 7.
smitten him, as he smot those that smit him? No, I look upon them with some
different respect, and as men, and as Freemen, and deal with them so.

Sixthly, Whenever they began to return, I met them half 6. Met them half way.
way; I did not stand it out to the uttermost to discourage their hearts, but I
met them half way in all their returnings. And did not God deal honorably with
them? Indeed if you would deal in a contemptuous way with another that has
offended, you will say, Let them wait; yea, but if we will deal with another in
an honorable Simile.
way, if we see him but in coming a far off, we will run and meet him, as the
father of the prodigal did; so says God, I did not deal with them in a
contemptuous way, but I drew them with the cords of a man, and in an honorable
way I dealt with them. Thus you have this expression opened, I drew them with
the cords of a man.

Now there are diverse Observations from hence:

The first is, That the ways of God are very rational, so Obs. 1.
that they may draw any man of understanding to love them: If man's nature were
not degenerated, were it that we did but stand right in regard of our principle
of Reason, it were impossible but the ways of God should draw us, at least to
an outward obedience to them; there is no reason in your ways, but there is
reason in Gods ways, and therefore if you had but the hearts of men, though you
had not the hearts of Saints, yet to approve of Gods ways, at least: and for
an outward conformity to them you might be drawn; if men were not besotted with
their lusts, certainly they would never be so confident in their sinful ways
as they are, if men did but bethink themselves of the way of God. Says
Solomon, When thy people are carried away captive, and shall bethink
themselves: there is so much reason in Gods ways, that if one did but bethink
1 King. 8. 47. observed.
himself: Says David, I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies. Oh! it is a great mercy Psalm. 119.
to have a considering heart; and it is a great judgment of God to leave men and
women to a slight and vain spirit, not to weigh and ponder things; most people
are led on in a continued hurry of passion, like to the Horse in the Battle,
and no man says, What have I done? Oh! could thou but have so much power
over thy passion, and the violence of thy lusts, as to get alone and weigh Gods
ways, surely thou could not but be convinced that the ways of God are
better than thy ways, they are so rational.

The Second Observation is this:

The way to prevail with men, it is to deal with them in a rational Obs. 2.
way; the way that I took with this people to prevail with them, it was, to
draw them with the cords of men: Certainly the way that God takes to prevail
with people is the best way.

Therefore those men that would prevail with any people Use
to bring them to any thing that they desire, it is to deal with them in a
rational way, and so seek to prevail with them; the Spirit of God does so, in
Joh. 16. 8. And when Joh. 16. 8. (...).
he is come, he will reprove the world of sin: it is, shall come with
DEMONSTRATION, for so the word Logically signifies; it is a word that signifies
to convince in a way of demonstration that one cannot deny possibly, and so the
Apostle says, We came in the demonstration of the spirit 1 Cor. 2. 4.
and of power. Mark; Demonstration of the Spirit, so it came to be in power;
and it concerns Ministers more especially. If you that are Ministers would
speak powerfully to people, speak in demonstration, the demonstration of the
Spirit indeed it must be, there is a spiritual Reason in the Scripture;
Ministers must not think to scare Ministers must convince, not scare men.
men into the ways of Godliness, though I know some times God makes use of the
bare terrors of the Law; but the main thing whereby Ministers must have hope to
do good to their people must be by preaching convincingly, to overcome their
very reason as much as possibly can be, and to set the Law of God so before
them as if they will but judge between God and their own souls, they shall
condemn themselves, and approve of God. That Ministry is like to be the best
Soul-saving Ministry, that meets The most convincing Ministry the most powerful.
with every objection of their hearts, and at every turn the secrets of their
hearts comes to be opened; Oh! remember you preach to men and therefore you
make use of that reason that you find in Scripture: I know reason alone will
never do it; I, but God when he works to the salvation of souls, he works upon
them after the manner of men, and therefore the Ministers of God that are
Coworkers with God, they should work in such a suitable way.

And not only Ministers, but Majestrates too, they Majestrates (...) must deal
by reason rather than violence in difficult cases of consience.
must labor to draw them with the Cords of men also, that is, not by violence,
in thing, that men cannot be convinced of, to think to force them in a way of
violence, (I say) in things that they cannot be convinced of, in such things as
they are not wilfully ignorant of, they must not make prisons and fines to be
arguments, these are not the Cords of men; indeed in things that have the light
of common Equity and Justice, as Civil things that carry in the very face of
them a light of common Equity and Justice, there Majestrates need not stay for
any further convincement, and there (I say) they need go no further, but they
may deal with them in a violent way if they break those; but in all things that
are of a more dubious nature, and that are from connexions, and consequences,
and more difficult to be understood, and that are controversal even among godly
men, and wise men, there they must look to it, and people must have ways of
instruction first, and to be informed first, and likewise if they do not oppose
them in a wilful way, but if they see that they do desire to understand what
they are able and cannot, they must not think to go on in a way of violence
there, that is not to deal with men like men in that thing, to force them unto
such ways that they do not see reason for, and let them labor to the uttermost
they can, they are not able to understand, then certainly there must be
forbearance in such things; and especially the rather, because that Christ has
given us charge, not to yield to any thing in matter of Religion till we do
understand the rule of it; Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; Why Reason and
not Violence is to be used to tender consciences.
when Chist gives that charge, that we must not yield to it because such and
such men do so, till we do examine it and be able to understand the rule; now
then surely the uttermost that the power of violence and force can do is this,
To make men examine things, but no further.

And so for you that have any under you, your servants Parents and Masters must
use more Conviction than Correction.
and children, instruct them, show them the evil of their ways, do not fly
upon them with your rage and passion, but deal with them like men in way of
instruction.

The third Note is this, It Is a great aggravation of men's sin, not to be drawn
by these Cords of men; for a man to stand Obs. 3.
out against reason is a great aggravation: so men stand out against many ways
of God, and yet their consciences fly in their faces and condemn them. Oh! thou
art a wretch, that though the Lord has sought to draw thee with the Cords of a
man, with Reason, and has convinced thee, he has gotten the cords into thy
conscience, and God pulls, and thou pullest, and wilt not be drawn with those
Cords, Oh! this is a wickedness for men to go on in ways that their own
consciences do condemn them in* Some vain reasonings can draw men to sin as a
Cart-rope, that is the meaning of that place, They draw iniquity as it were with
a Cart rope; that is, their vain reasnings that they have for their sin twisted
together make a strong Cart-rope to draw iniquity; Oh! shall not Gods Cords be
as strong as the Devils Cords, or Man's Cords? Many there are, though God seems
to draw them with these Cords of a man, yet their lusts are so strong like
pamperd horses in a Team, they will break the Cart-ropes, break all their
harness to pieces; and so do many unruly Spirits even say like those in Psalm.
2. Let us Psalm. 2.
break his bonds, and cast away his Cords from us. Well, thou shall one day be
held by the Cords of thine own sin Who will nor be drawn by the Cords shall be
whipped with them.
(as the Scripture speaks) and thy conscience shall lash thee with those Cords
of Conviction that did not draw thee: Shall not the Cords of Conviction draw
thee from thy sin? they shall serve to be as whips to lash thy soul even to all
eternity; know that the Rules of Right-reason, and Scripture-reason shall stand
when thou, and thousands of such wilful fools as thou art shall perish
eternally. And these are the Notes for Gods dealing in a Rational way.

And then the second was, in a Gentle way. 2. How God deals with his people in
a gentle way.


First, Man's Nature, (if it be not degenerated) is of a loving, gentle
disposition, it is the nature of man to be of a gentle disposition, that is the
Note from hence, and I raise it thus: I dealt with them, with the Cords of a
man: that is, Gently, which is man's Nature, such a gentleness as fair means
will work upon it rather than ridged ways, and hence in ordinary speech,
Kindness is called humanity, let men have some humanity in them, that is, let
them be Courteous; to be courteous, and to show humanity we use for all one; so
that the nature of men, though it be fallen, yet if it be not twice dead, and
overcome by its corruptions exceedingly. There is an humanity, an ingenuity in
the very nature of man naturally.

Oh! you that profess Religion, labor you to be eminent in this; in
Courteousness, in Gentleness, in Humanity, Use 1. Saints should be eminent in
courtesy.
know, that Grace though it does elevate above Humanity, to Christianity, yet
it does not take away Humanity. No, it raises it higher; and therefore seeing
there is something left in man's nature of Gentleness, and Fairness, surely
those that have Grace, and have a principle to curb corruption, they should
have much Gentleness, and Fairness with them.

Secondly, Seeing that these are the Cords of men [Gentleness] 2. Draw our
relations with gentleness.
we should use them to draw those on to goodness that we do desire. Ministers,
Parents, Governors, Neighbors, observe the dispositions of those you have to
deal with, sure your selves to them, labor to gain their hearts that way if
possibly you can, that they may have good thoughts of the ways of Godliness,
do not put them on by bitterness and sowrness. Did not God gain upon your And
why?
hearts in a gentle way? however, if God did come in a harsh way to your
apprehensions at first, yet know, there is no such distance between you and
your neighbors, those that are under you, your children, or servants, as there
is between God and you; therefore it is for you to deal with your fellow
Creatures in a gentle, fair way. If a Hunter would get his Game, he does not
make a houting and noise, but he goes gently without any noise: An apt simile.
And so it is not through violence, noise, and horror; if you would get people
but in a gentle way, hire children and servants to that which is good. Learn
that way you that are of harsh tempers, to entice your children and Harsh
natures should observe this.
your servants to good: You do nothing but threaten them to good, and say, If
you will not do thus and thus I Will deal with you thus and thus, by way of
threatening: Oh! try what an enticing way will do; do not you so domineer over
others as to think that it is for you to satisfy your wills upon them, but
labor to suit your selves to them.

And never chastife Children nor servants but with greef, and put a difference
between weakness and wilfulness in your Children and Servants, and let your
hand be heavy upon them only upon mere necessity, when all other means are
tried, never but then let your hand be heavy upon them: Thus you should do
with those under you, as God deals with his people, with the Cords of a man,
gently. 3. Gentle meaus rejected agravate sin.


Thirdly, From hence it is a great aggravation of sin, That we stand out
against gentle means, the fair glosses of temptation they take our hearts. As
now, if you can bring gifts to a man you can quickly blind his eyes: we
Evidenced.
have found these cords of men, we have found that man's nature loves gifts, and
those in the place of Justice if they have bribes and gifts brought them; Oh!
those are the Cords of men, those are suitable to their natures indeed. Now God
does thus (as I may so speak) bring gifts, but if God shall not prevail with
his gifts, this will be a great aggravation of your sin. 3 How God deals
honorably with men Obs. 1 Preserve the honor of our inferiors, Yea, though the
faults be great.


And then the Third and last is, The honorable respect that is showed unto men.
The Observations are these.

First, In your dealings with children and servants, remember you have not to
deal with beasts, that is, Always preserve their esteem. It is a Rule that
will be very helpful to those that have young ones to bring up, though the
fault be great, yet put them not to so much shame before others as they should
have no esteem or honor to lose, they will grow desperate them; and so long as
there is that bridle you may keep them from much evil. And this is the reason
that your Goal-birds never com to any good almost; Why? because they have no
honor to lose, all is gone already and therefore they grow desperate; and
there is nothing more suitable to a man's nature to be kept from evil, than the
loss of respect, and the loss of honor; and therefore the very doom of the
damned at the day of Judgment it is expressed, that they shall rise to shame and
confusion of face; to shame, that is as much against humane Dan. 12. 2.
illustrated.
nature as any thing: and therefore you that have to deal with men, take heed
how you deal, always keep such a hand over them as those that are under you
may see that there is some honor that they have yet to lose, do not deprive
your selves of such a means to bridle your children or servants: Some of you
have for your servants of good birth in this City, diverse have children of
Masters that have Apprentices in the City.
very good birth, and very good education, that had very good breeding, use
them accordingly, draw them them with the Cords of men, and draw them with the
Cords of men of such education, and of such birth: If you be of meaner birth
and education, and had hard breeding, and were drawn by iron Cords, do not you
think to deal thus with others that had better breeding than your selves, but
deal with them fairly, Consider of what breeding and education they had, and so
deal with them according to that respect that is due to such of such a quality.

And then Secondly, How will the shame and confusion of men be aggravated
hereafter, which did disregard Gods using Obs. 2.
of them in an honorable way? This is the way to bring shame and confusion upon
you for ever, so as hereafter men and Angels shall say, and so your conscience
shall say: Just it is with God to punish me with eternal shame and confusion,
why? for God had respect to me when I lived, and God dealt with me in an
honorable way, and did seek to draw me with the Cords of a man, and it is just
with God that now he should give me my portion among Devils and Reprobates, and
that he should no more regard me as a creature but rather hate and abhor me as
a Devil, for I would not regard his dealing with me as a man: this will
justify God in that wrath that will be upon you another day.

And from all together observe, Not to be drawn to our Obs. 3.
duty but by violence and strength, it is beastial: bruit beasts can roar and
cry out when the pain is upon them: and so it is with many men, they never cry
out of their sins, never fear God, never yield to the hand of God but only then
when Gods strokes are upon them, then they cry out and bellow like beasts;
Well, God delivers them, but they to their lusts as formerly, and spurn against
God as soon as they are delivered, make Vows and Covenants to God, and then sin
again, and God comes upon them again, and they fall a crying out of their sin
again; Well, they are raised, and the hearing of the Word that never prevails
with them, but in their afflictions then they will repent and cry out, Oh! cry
out of their company, Oh! that we had spent our time in praying, and in
lamenting for our sin, that we spent in such and such company! Yea, this is
when Gods hand is upon you, To be drawn by the Word; is to be drawn like a man;
to be forced by blows is to be drawn like a beast.
But what do you do upon the hearing of Gods Word, that is to be like a man, to
be drawn by the Word, and not to be moved only by blows, Oh! thou have a
beastial heart, and brutish heart, and charge your selves with that brutish
heart: I fear some of you have cause to say, That in all the course or my life
my heart has never yielded to God, but just when blows has been upon me. I
beseech you brethren deal with God like men, God deals with you like men. (And
that might have been another Note in wind^^g up all.)

I drew them with the Cords of a man, and with the bonds of Love.

The Lord deals with us suitable to our Nature, Oh let Obs. 4.
us deal with God as far as we are able suitable to his nature. Why, does God
regard us as men; let us regard him as God then, let us glorify God as a God;
when the Lord has to deal with us he considers we are men, when we have to
deal with God let us consider he is God, and as the Lord is pleased to
condescend to us as men, Oh! let us labor to ascend up to him as God. With
Bonds of Love:

The word here translated Bonds, it is, Thick Cords, not (...) in densis
(...)bus a (...) contorsit condensavit torquendo.
only with Cords, (as you have it before) but with Thick Cords, so the word
that is translated Bonds signifies; for it comes of a word that signifies to
[Wreath] and to thicken with wrea hing; that as you see those that make Cords
and Lines, they take their Hemp and wreath one Wreath, and then they take
another and wreath that, and so another, and wind many Wreaths together, and so
make a strong Cord, that is the propriety of this word.

With the Bonds of Love.] That is, with such Bonds as Expos.
have many Wreaths in them, have many things joined together to make it to be a
strong Cord, a Cord as strong as a Cart rope: for so I find the same word is
used in Isa. 5. 18. where it is said, They draw iniquity with the Cords of
(...) Isa. 5. 18.
vanity, and sin as it were with a Cart rope. The word that is trranslated
there, Cords, it is the same that is in the former part of our verse, The Cords
of a man; But now the other: And sin as it were with a Cart rope, that is the
same word that here you have in the text, translated The [Bonds] of Love. With
a thick Rope of a Cart, with a Rope that has many Wreaths in it; so that
though the former word in your English [CORDS] seems to have as much as the
latter [BONDS] yet according to The Hebrew of the Te^ empharical.
the Hebrew this latter has more in it, and signifies such Cords, as have many
twisted and wreathed together; As indeed we shall find when we come now to open
the Bonds of Love that God did draw this people withal, we shall find many
Cords wreathed and twisted together to bind this people fast to God; you have a
suitable expression Jer. 31. 3.
somewhat parallel to this in Jer. 31. 3. With loving kindness have I drawn
thee, says God.

I have drawn them with the Bonds of Love; that is thus; I have used them in a
loving way; If love would have The Text paraphrased.
gained them, if love would have overcome them, if love would have bound them
to me they have wanted no love says God, whereas they had deserved the bonus
of iron to be upon them; instead of those iron bonds that their sins deserved,
they have had the bonds of love.

If you ask me what were those Bonds of Love The bands of love to Israel.
that God drew this people of Israel unto Himself by?

The first was this, God did wonderfully separate this 1. Separation from all
other people.
people from all the Nations in the world unto Himself, to be a people unto
himself, and that out of love, and this was a great fruit of love, and a strong
Wreath this was, had there been nothing else, That God should set his heart
upon this people above all other people in the earth to be his people, in Exodus
33. 16. Wherein (says Exodus 35. 16.
Moses) shall it be known that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight,
if thou go not with us? for thereby (says he) shall ne be separated from
all Nations of the Earth: it is in your books, only, shall be separated, but
the Hebrew word signifies (...)
wonderfully separated, we shall wonderfully be separated [Mirisicemut prae
omnibus pop Munster]
from all the Nations of the earth. Indeed the Lord he did wonderfully separate
the people from all the Nations of the earth, and this was only out of love, it
was not from any excellency he saw in this people. In Deuteronomy. 7 6. The Lord did
not choose thee etc. but in the 7. Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7.
verse, He did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more
in number than other people, for you were the least of all people.

Observe my brethren by the way, That the Lord does Obs. 1.
not always stand upon number, upon the greatest; this indeed is our argument
that so many go in such a way, and so few in another way, and so surely God is
most like to approve of that that the most go on in; No, God does not always
stand upon number; says he, I did not choose you because you were most in
number, for I knew that you were the least; therefore it was only love that
made the Lord choose this people at first, and separate them from other Nations.

And then the second Bond of Love is: I chose you, and your seed also: And this
was a great mercy; If I had 2. Election of the Parents and their seed.
but only set my heart upon your selves, it had been somewhat, but it was upon
you and your seed, so as to bring you, and your seed into Covenant with me.
There Is two twists (as I may so say) in this Bond of Love, that he should choose
them and their seed, and bring them both into Covenant, for thus you have it in
Deuteronomy. 4. 37. Because Deuteronomy. 4. 37.
he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them. and in Ezekiel.
16. 8. there the text says, It was a time of love; and I took you and entered
into Covenant with you. It was a time of Love: and that made the Lord to enter
into Covenant with this people. God showed it was a time of love indeed, that
he would take such a people as this was, and enter into Covenant with them.

And then the third Twist: I set my heart upon them to delight 3. Made them his
inheritance, portion, treasure, etc.
in them too; I made them my portion, my inheritance, my Treasure, the Deerly
beloved of my soul, my Glory, a Royal Diadem to my self; I could show you
Scripture for every one of these expressions that this people were taken by God
to be his chief Treasure, his peculier Treasure, and his Delight, Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people to himself: a special,
Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
and he gives them all those Epethites. Surely these are Bonds of Love.

And then in the fourth place, If so be at any time 4. Pitying the^ in their
afflictions.
they were in any afflictions, I pitied them, and looked upon them with the eye
of mercy, and releeved them, redeemed them out of their afflictions, in Isa.
63. 9. In his love and in his pity he redeemed them. Isa. 63. 9.


And then fifthly: I set on work all my Wisdom, and my 5. Engaged al his
Attributes for their good
Power, and my Mercy to do them good above all Nations, working great wonders
for them. Now this we shall not need to mention any particular Scripture for,
the whole story of God, carrying of them from Egypt along in the Wilderness to
Canaan, and there providing for them is a testimony for this, so in Isa. 63. we
named before Gods Isa. 63.
redeeming of them, he ads this too, And carried them all the days of old. The
Lord never was so glorious in his power toward any people as toward them, the
right hand of his Power and Excellency was stretched out for them, in Exodus 15.

And then sixthly, By the Bonds of Love, I had a continual 6. A continued
watchfuley over them
watchful eye over them, and their Land, mine eye was upon their Land where
they dwelt for good, above all other Lands that were upon the earth, in Deuteronomy.
11. 12. A Land (says the text) which the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 11. 12.
eareth for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the
beginning of the year, even to the end of the year. Canaan was a Land that God
cared as little for as any place of the earth before his people came into it, a
Land wherein God was as much dishonored as in any place of the Earth; but now
when his people came into it, now it is a Land that mine eye is upon, that the
Lord takes care of, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year: this
respect did God show to his people.

Seventhly. I gave them my Oracles, the Revelation of my 7. Gave them his
Oracles.
Will. This was another notable fruit of the love of God to this people; In
Judah was God known: his Name was Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
great in Israel, in Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He showed his Word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. I dealt not so with any Nation: And as
for my Judgments they have not known them, says God. This was a notable
Privilege that Israel had above all other people. In Romans 3. What Romans 3.
advantage has the Jew? (says the Scripture) or what profit is there of
Circumcision? Yes, every way, the Jew has much advantage every way above al
other people of the earth: Why, wherein? for unto them were committed the
Oracles of God Other men had the book of Nature, they could see Gods Name as it
were written in the Characters of the book of Nature; yea, but the special
things of God, the Counsels of God concerning the Eternal Estate of the
Children of Men, were not then revealed: but says he, I gave to this people my
Oracles, they had those Counsels of mine concerning man's eternal estate
revealed, I opened to them my whole heart and soul, all that I would have known
to the children of men for that time I opened to them; Oh this is a bond of
love indeed, to have the Oracle, of God committed to a people.

And then the Eighth Twist (as I may so say) in this 8. The Messiah to come of
them.
bond of love to make it a great Cable (as it were) to bind them unto God, was
this: I set my heart so upon, as to have the Messiah to come from them, in whom
all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; I rather chose this people than
another to have my Son to be born of them, to be of their stock.

And then Ninthly, I gave them a Law, the sum of which 9. A law of Love.
was nothing but love: (as I opened the last day, That the Law of God had
strength of Reason in it, and so God drew them with the cords of a man, his Law
was rational.) So I drew them with bonds of love, I gave them a Law, the sum of
which was nothing but love, as thus: What Is the sum of the first and second
Table of the Law? The sum of the first Table it is, Thou shall LOVE the Lord
The sum of the Law.
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul: And the sum of the second
Table is, Thou shall LOVE thy Neighbor as thy self: so that Love is the sum of
the whole Law.

And then Tenthly, I have out-bid all temptations, whatsoever 10. Gave the^
more than any else could offer.
good, pleasure, delights, honor they could expect in following any thing else,
I showed them that they might have it, and much more in my self; there was
nothing they could have in following after any of their false worship (...)
creature they would have any good in, I made it appear that they might have as
much in my Self, I out bid all temptations for the encouraging of them in my
ways, that is in the full course of Scripture, we find the Lord propounding
himself to his people as a lovely object, on purpose to draw their hearts away
from all other things that might seem to be lovely, that he might have the whole
soul to himself.

Yea, and in the Eleventh place, Whenever they were in any want, if they did
but cry to me, I heard them. What people 11. Heard the^ in all their prayers.
Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
is there so great as this people that the Lord is so nigh unto in all that
they call upon him for, says Moses?

Yea, and lastly, I have done so much for them, that it cannot 12. It could not
have been conceived God should have done more.
be conceived that I should have done more. What should I have done more for my
Vinyard than I have done, Isa. 5. 4? Let any one speak what love they could
conceive could be more from a God to his people than I have shown. So that put
all these together, and you see how God did draw this people with bands of
love. Now this for the Explication.

Now from hence our First Note is, That, Love it has Obs. 1.
strong bonds; Strong, as strong as death, Cant. 8. 6. None Cant. 8. 6.
are so strongly bound together as friends that are bound in Love. The bonds of
Nature are not so strong as the bonds of Love. A friend is nearer than a
brother says the Scripture. The bonds of Love are the strongest bonds, The
bonds of Love.
they are a twisted bond.

For First, Love it is in its self a lovely thing to behold, 1.
there is an amiableness in Love to draw the eye and the heart to it: In Cant.
7. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights? How fair and
how pleasant is Cant. 7. 6.
Love? Take Love for the affection of love, it is fair and pleasant for
delight; and when the beloved is called by illustrated.
the Name [Love] it shows that Love is very amiable, and very beautiful.

Secondly, Love it has much sweetness in it, much 2.
power to insinuate its self into the heart: As we know base love, adultrous
love it has a great deal of power to insinuate into the heart: in Eccles. 7.
26. the hands of the whorish woman are called bonds: If whorish love has
Eccles. 7. 26. observed.
such power so to insinuate and to be bonds, much more then has True Love,
Cracious Love.

Thirdly, Love it is generative, Love has a great generative power to beged
Love. Augustine says, There is no 3. Nulla est major ad amorem provocatio, quam
praerentre amando. Aug.
greater provocation to Love, than to begin to love. Magnes amoris amor.
Love can draw iron hearts. Love, it is the Loadstone of Love, it will draw
Love, and beget Love where ever it is.

Fourthly, Where Love is got into the soul it commands all, it commands all the
Faculties and Understanding where Love is got. Look what a man loves, so
accordingly his understanding will work: It a man loves his sin, Love commands
all the souls faculties
his understanding will be working for his sin; Oh what subtle Arguments will
men have for their sin when they love it! any way that a man's heart is engaged
in Love he will be very subtle to argue for it. So on the contrary, when once
the Lord has taken the heart with Love, this Love commands the understanding,
and then all reasonings are for God, and the soul it hearkens after no
reasonings that are against God, or against his ways, when once the heart is
taken with Love. If a man's heart be taken with love to a Woman, he will hear
nothing against her; but if his love be taken off from her, then every report
that he hears against her he will aggravate to the uttermost he can, and will
soon believe it. So it is, when a man's heart is taken with the things of God,
and of Religion, it will hear nothing against them; but if a man's heart be off
and do not love the ways of God, then they are glad if they can hear any thing
that makes against them. Love commands all the Faculties of the Soul, the
Understanding, and the Thoughts, it commands the Will, and Affections, it
commands the Body, it commands the Estate, it commands the Liberties, it
commands all that a man has, or is, or can do. Love has the absolute
commanding power of all, Oh! Love has strong Bonds.

And again, Love it makes every thing that is done for 5. Makes all services
delightful.
the beloved to be delightful; It does not only command to do a thing, but it
makes it delightful, I will rest in my love and rejoice over them with singing,
says God. When the heart is once taken with love, (I say) it does not only do
that which is good for that which it does love, but does it with delight.

And then, Love knows not any bounds, it never sets 6. Has no bounds.
its self any bounds at all, but would do, and do, and do, and do even
infinitely for that it does love, so far as love prevails no bounds are set.

Yea, and when it does much, it will not be weary 7.
neither. So far as the Soul is acted with Love, it will never be weary with
what it does. Men that love their pastime all night they will sit up at it and
never be tired; so those that love the ways of God, though the flesh may
Caution.
be weak, yet not the spirit.

And then, Love it is strong, so as it stands out against 8.
all oppositions, nothing that does oppose can prevail against love: in Cant.
8. 6, 7. Love is as strong as death, and Song. 8. 6, 7.
many waters cannot quench the fire of love.

And then in the next place, Love, it rejoices in suffering, 9. Rejoice in
sufferings.
not only delights in doing, but delights in suffering. If one that loves
another shall suffer for him that he does love he will rejoice in those
sufferings.

And lastly, Love, it suffers not its self to be its self (as 10. Seeks not its
own.
it were) to be at his own dispose. Love does wholly give its self into the
possession of him that it does love, it is not his own no longer; The heart
that is once taken 1 Cor. 13.
with love is no more its own, but gives its self into the possession of that
that it does love: so that put all these together, and you may see that love it
has strong Bonds. I drew them with the Bonds of Love.

And then a Second Note of Observation is this; Let us do as God does then;
that is, Labor to cast the Bonds of Obs. 2.
Love upon those we have to deal with; it is Gods way to his people to bind them
to himself, to throw upon them Bonds of Love, And then says God I have enough,
I have them strong enough if I get them with the bonds of Love. Oh let us do as
God does, labor to draw people with bonds of Love; If you would draw any to
you, let it be by Love, do you desire to draw any to you, you Ministers duty to
open Gods love.
that are Ministers, especially you are appointed to draw others to God, it is
your work: what should you do? open the Love of God to them, present the Grace
of the Gospel to souls, labor to work upon their hearts by all the mercies of
God, By the mercy of God tendered to them, by the mercy of God received by
them, bestowed upon them: There Is no such way to draw souls to God as this.
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, that is the preaching of the
Gospel. The first preaching of all Mark, 1. 15. applied.
Christ's Sermons, and of his Disciples was, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand. As if he should say, Oh! Sirs, look about you, Consider your ways,
there is a glorious Kingdom now at hand, a Kingdom of righteousness, and mercy
wherein the glory of the Grace of God comes to be revealed to the children of
men in another way than ever formerly. This is the way to bring men to
repentance. It Is true, it is good to use all means, to show the greatness and
the justness, and the holiness of God, and the like; But the prevailing
argument above all to bring men to repentance it is, That the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand; and indeed we would do so if we did consider that repentance it is
a Gospel Grace, it is not that Repentauce a grace of the Gospel, not of the Law.
that comes by the Law, the Law takes no notice of repentance, but the Gospel,
and therefore to present the Love of God as it is in the Gospel, so there God
manifests his love to the children of men, and that is the way to draw to
repentance; there is a notable story that we have in the book of Martyrs, not
far from the beginning, as Book of Martyrs, lib. 1. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20.
also in the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius: speaking of John the Apostle
that did commit a young man which was very hopeful unto a Bishop, to take care
of him; but afterward proved to be very wicked, and got among a company of
thieves, and so came to be the Captain of a company of thieves and robbers, and
was wholly bent to slaughter, and murder, and extreme cruelty, and lived in the
mountains: Afterward John comes to this Bishop to whom he had committed the
young man, and bid him restore unto him the charge which he and Christ had
committed into his Custody, then the elder looking down with a heavy
countenance, sobbing and sighing, said, He is dead. John enquiring how, and
what kind of death, he answered he is dead to God, for he is become the Captain
of a company of thieves in such a place. The Apostle then rending his garments
in great sorrow, said, Prepare me a Horse and let me have a guide, and so rode
in post, being come unto the place he is taken by the theevish watch, he
neither flies nor resists, but says, for this purpose came I hither; bring
me unto your Captain, who being armed beheld him coming, but when he knew that
it was John, he was stricken with shame, and fled away. The old man forgetful
of his years pursues him flying, and cries: My son, why fliest thou from me
thy father, unarmed and old? O son! tender my case, be not afraid, as yet there
remains hope of salvation, I will undertake for thee with Christ. And thus he
runs after him crying that yet there was hope of mercy and pardon, and that he
would die for him. He hearing this, first stood still, turning his countenance
to the ground, next shoke off his Armor, then trembled for fear and wept
bitterly, so that this broke his heart and he returns back and falls a weeping
upon the neck of John, and became an eminent Christian afterward.

Whatsoever is to be thought of this story, yet certainly there is no such bonds
as the bonds of Love to draw the hearts of people unto God. Have you to deal
with stony hearts? the way it is to lay them upon the soft pillow of the
Gospel, and so you may break them; lay a stone upon a stone, and so it goes
from you and does not break, but if you lay it upon a pillow you may presently
Simile.
break it with a hammer. The Word is compared to a hammer, yea, but we must
labor to lay the hearts of people upon the pillow (as it were) of Love, upon
the Grace of God in the Gospel, and that is the way to break their hearts; there
are none so bound to God as those that are bound to him by Love, those that are
bound to God by fear, that has not Love mixed withal, their bonds will not
hold, they will seek quickly to break the bonds of fear; there is no men (I say)
that are held to God by the bonds of fear but they will seek after any
occasions to break those bonds, and if they can but get any opportunity to get
themselves out of those bonds, they will, and commonly at last they do break
them and get themselves out of the bonds of fear: but now those that are held
by bonds of Love, they are held for ever unto God.

I beseech you observe this Note, When men cast off the sweet of their sin, by
the sweet of the Love of God, then they will never return to their sin again.
Oh! but if it be only the bitterness of the Law, of punishment, that makes them
cast off sin, they will be ready to turn to their sin again, as a dog will
return to the vomit, as a dog casts out the vomit merely in regard of the pain
he does feel; but Simile.
when it is cast out by the sweet of Love, when one sweet enters for another,
such hold on their way. Austin has a notable expression for that in the 9.
Book of his Confessions, about the beginning, speaking of a swee^ of sin, Thou
Lord (says he) did cast out those sweetnesses, Aust. Confess. lib. 9. cap.
1. Eji^^^bas eas a me tu vera ac sumum suavitas ejici^bas pro (...) omni
voluptate dulcior.
and thou did enter in thy self instead of them, who art more sweet than any
pleasure whatsoever. And it was from hence that he held on so in his way,
because God casting out the sweet of sin, instead of that sweet he had by sin
before did himself (I say) enter into the soul, that was more sweet to Austin's
soul than all other sweetnesses whatsoever. Oh! says he afterward, The sweet
it is to want those sweetnesses, when he had the Love of God come in instead of
whatsoever sweetness he had before. No mervail though Grace be so persevering,
and we read Why perseverence more frequent under the Gospel than under the Law,
so much of perseverance, especially in the times of the Gospel, because that
there is none truly converted unto God but they have that sweet come into their
souls through Love, that is more delightful to them than all the sweet they had
by sin before.

Never be afraid, you that God is beginning to turn to Use to young converts.
himself, never be loath to part with any sweetness you had in the ways of sin,
for by turning to God you shall find that sweetness in God and his ways that
will be a thousand times more. Oh they are things that they love and they are
loath to part with them; Yea, but when you are turned to God, God will be as
lovely to you as ever any thing in the world was. If the Ice be but broken over
night by the Husbandman, he comes the next An apt simile.
day and it is frozen up again; but let the Sun come with his warm beams, and
then it runs down with flakes, then it breaks throughout many Countries
together, it breaks all at once by the beams of the Sun: And so the beaking of
the heart by the terrors of the Law, it is but li^ the breaking of the Ice with
a pole by the Husbandm^^ to give the Cattle drink, but when the Love of God
co(...) to the heart, then the corruptions of the heart dissolve even as the
Ice dissolves when the warm Sun comes upon (...).

Th(...)ay therefore to gain the hearts of men, it is by love. And we should
the rather do it, because it is the great design of God in the Gospel, To
manifest his love Gods great design in the Gospel.
to the Children of men, he has opened his heart, and the treasures of love in
the Gospel; What is the Gospel but the treasures of the love of God opened?
those eternal loving kindness, of God toward mankind they are opened in the
Gospel; and no Minister can be a faithful Minister of the Gospel, but those
that shall endeavor to open the heart love of God to the children of men in
Jesus Christ, and go to gain souls unto himself; Oh! it is a pleasant work to be
a Minister of the Gospel in this respect, to be always searching into the
treasures of Love, and to make them known to souls for the gaining of them unto
God.

And then likewise, If you have to deal with men, you 2. Gain men with love in
dealing with them. Phil. 2. 1, 2.
must labor to draw them with the bonds of love; in Phil. 2. 1. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels, and mercies; fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like
minded, says the Apostle. Oh! let it be through Love, that you come to be like
minded; and do not think to force men into the same mind, to use bitter
language and expressions to men if they differ in judgment from your selves:
But if there The way to uniformity.
be any Love, be of the same mind, labor to get into one another hearts, if
you would do good to one another. As a Minister, if he would do good to his
People, he must labor to get into their hearts, that the people may love him:
therefore it has been observed that your wrangling Ministers, and bitter men,
that if they be but crossed in Spleenful Ministers.
any thing they presently went their own bitterness, they never do any good at
all. But those that can be willing to deny themselves, and willing to suffer
for the Case of the Gospel, they prevail most. And so, if you would do good for
any of your kindred, do what you ca(...) get Deal with kindred in Love.
into their hearts that they may love you, and so (...) may be a means to draw
them to the ways of God: (...)y Love you may come to have any liberty in their
hearts that you would, you may say what you will if once they be persuaded that
you love them, then you may ask more liberty to reprove any thing that is evil
in them, and to persuade them to any thing that is good, then they take nothing
ill from you; and therefore it is a great disadvantage that men of sour and
bitter spirits have in obtaining A sour disposition does disadvantage much.
their own designs; if they once speak any thing though never so good, yet it
is rejected, because that people think it is not out of Love: But on the other
side, it is a mighty advantage that a sweet and loving disposition has, let
such an one speak never so, though the thing be never so harsh, yet the party
will take it well, because he knows he loves him. Oh! these bonds of love, my
brethren, they are mighty strong. When you meet together in any Society, if you
would have any thing, do not seek to get your will by wrangling, and
frowardness, but by bonds of Love. I confess there are some men that are of
such perverse spirits, that the nearer one comes to them, the further they go
from one, that they have even But perverse spirits are otherwise to be dealt
with.
lost all ingenuity; but if you have to deal with men that you think to be
gracious, and to be ingenious, then do not think to gain any thing from them
but by Love.

These bonds of Love that here we have in the Text the Devil seeks to break,
the great design of the Devil it is, to make men to have hard thoughts of God,
and his ways, Satan's great design.
and to make them believe that God hates them, and that though they have some
good things from God for the present, yet that the heart of God is not toward
them, and so labors to make a separation between the soul and God. And so the
great design of the Devil is to break the bonds of Love between Christian and
Chistian: It was a fearful judgment that we read of in Zach. 11. 14. when
Zach, 11. 14.
the staff that was called Bonds was broken, even the Brotherhood between Judah
and Israel, he threatens it as a Judgment; I Will break the bonds of brotherhood.
And then you find that the staff of Beauty was broken when the staff of bonds
was broken.

My brethren, never was the bonds of Love more broken among Christians than
they are now. We read of bands of Love, but what is become of them? They are
broken. They were in former times so twisted (as I told you the word in the
Hebrew signifies) love so twisted into so many The love of Christians one to
another in England formerly compared with our divisions now.
Wreaths as one would have thought they could never have been broken; but
whatsoever the matter is, we find they snap asunder. Oh! how justly might God
bind us with Iron bonds, seeing that the bonds of Love will not bind us! God
has cut the Cords of diverse of our yokes asunder, and has broken the bonds of
the oppressor, and now behold we break the bonds of Love; Oh! unworthy wretches
that we are, every one of us looks with a jealous eye one upon another, every
one shifting for himself, there are no bonds of love in our hearts; the wicked
in Scripture are said to die without bonds, that is Gods patience, that they
shall die without bonds; but woe to us, we live without bonds, and that is our
sin, and the wrath of God upon us, in Eccles. 3. 8. There is a time to love;
when is the time? Certainly if ever there Eccles. 3.
were a time to love, then this is a time to love. And there is a time to hate.

Oh Divine Love! whither art thou gone? have thou left the earth as unworthy of
thy beauty and glory? An Apostrophe to Love.
Oh! that thou would come again unto the hearts of the Saints, and bind them
together! The want of the bonds of Love every one complains of, Oh! those
soulrefreshing, and soul-ravishing meetings that we were wont to have. But
especially more publicly, we find the bonds of Love quite gone, and quite
broken: read but over the 1 Cor. 13. and see the effects of Love there,
Public Love gone out of England.
and by that you will find the bonds of Love quite to be gone; Love, the
Scripture tells us, it thinks no evil, it maks the best interpretation of
things that can be; Now surely there is a great deal of want of love amongst us,
that when men in the uprightness and sincerity of their hearts shall desire to
find out the mind of God, and the will of God, and merely out of conscience
because they dare not go any further than they see the mind of God to go before
them, therefore they shall be judged to be a stiff-necked people, and to be the
great hinderers of Reformation; Is this the best interpretation that possibly
can be made of things? Is it not possible why there should be some other
grounds why they differ from their brethren, but merely stiff-neckedness? how
if it should be owned by Jesus Christ at the great day, That it was out of
sincerity, because they did desire to know the mind of Jesus Christ fully, and
yet they could not see what their brethren say they did? We should make the
best interpretation of things that possibly we can. Love it cures all things,
and it bears all things; now for such public striking against any such
forbearance, and crying A conviction of the consciences of some
out that we would have a Tolleration of all things u^ Religion, this is the
great argument when they know in their consciences that their brethren do join
with them in the Doctrinal part of Religion, and in the main things, and those
things wherein they differ are things of no such great moment, but may be
forborne with peace enough if men's hearts were peaceable and still; now to in
fuse that into the peoples heads that if they were but in any thing forborne
there must be a tolleration of all things, surely this is not any fruit of
Love, this is not that which the holy Ghost says, That Love bears all things.
I am loath to mention any further, lest there should be any occasion of stirring
up any spirits, and so hindering the fruit of Love: Let me say on the other
side, there may be too eager censure the other way, that Many of both sides in
matter of discipline and Churchgo ^rnment sincere.
is; to censure such as are of a different way and judgment that they do it
altogether out of their self ends, and self-aims, I verily believe that on the
other side, those brethren that do differ, they may be conscientious in their
way, and do it out of zeal to God, and to what they apprehend to be truth; We
should apprehend one another so, if we see there be nothing else wherein they
do manifest corruption of heart but merely in their Caution.
ways of difference in their judgments and opinions. Now if both could but
thus judge each of other, that they both are upright in what they do pursue: One
side imagins that our part is Gods mind, and the other side judges that that
party is Gods mind; let us judge now that they do it in uprightness except it
apperrs some other way, then we should quickly come to close and join hearts
together, if we had such upright opinions one of another, therefore the more it
is the design of the Devil to break We should countermine Satan.
those Bonds of Brotherhood, and of Love, the more should we labor to unight
together.

And you who are Superiors, labor you to gain your 3. Superiors should win by
love.
Inferiors by love, Oh let those tie together; do not say of your inferiors,
they are of untoward dispositions, and how can my heart be toward them, to
love them? Oh! none of your inferiors are more untoward unto you than you are
unto Christ; and Christ, if he should not love you because of your
untowardness, what would become of you? Now consider of this, when your
servants and children are untoward, Why should that hinder love, when as my
untowardness does not hinder the love of Christ to me. I remember I have read
of Monica, Austins Mother, her husband being an Heathen, and that Monica the
mother of Austin.
some of her neighbors that had Christian husbands wondered how they came to
live so lovingly together, says other Christian women that were neighbors, Our
husbands are Christians, and yours an Heathen, and yet you live more lovingly
with him than we do with our husbands. She answered them, It may be when your
husbands do any thing that provokes you, you are presently froward with them,
but I labor to overcome my husband by love, and so to gain his heart to me, and
upon that we live so lovingly together, Christianity teaches me to perform the
duties of a wife to my husband, though my husband be an Heathen. I verily
believe there are Godly couples for want of love live worse than when one
yoke fellow is carnal oft-times.
many godly men and women, that sometimes when the one is godly and the other
is wicked. You will say, How can that be? Yes, though there be godliness, yet
there may be such frowardness and passion as may cause wonderful disturbance:
but on the other side, where there is godliness and love, there is such an
overcoming with Love, that though the man be wicked and never so harsh, yet he
has the nature of a man in him, and so long as he has the nature of a man in
him he will be overcome by Love, and therefore that is the way to bind men and
women together; Would you be united more than ever yet you have been? labor to
cast the Bonds of Love one upon another; let the husband study how to overcome
his wife with love, and so the wife the husband, and then there will be a sweet
union indeed: and so for Masters and servants, there should be Love there to
unite one to another, though the master be above the servant, The distance
betwixt Christ and us greater than betwixt us and our servants. A masters
comfort.
yet the master should account it a happiness to him in that his servant does
love him; there is not such a distance between you and your servants, as there
is between God and you; Oh! it is a sweet thing when a man can say in his
family, I bless God all my family loves me; And whatsoever they do, they do it
out of love to me; It may be you are harsh toward your servants, and you will
make them do what you command them to do, and they dare not do otherwise, yea,
but what is that? but do your servants love you? do they do all for you out of
Love? you might have as much obedience from your servants as you have, and have
it a great deal better than you have, if you have it out of love; and so
likewise in a family, when one servant loves another; as it was said of David
in 1 Samuel 18. 22. All his servants love 1 Samuel 18. 22
thee, all Saul's servants did love David; so those that are servants should
labor to live so in families as all the other Servants should love one another
servants should love them.

But you will say, They are so wicked that how can I hope to have love from
them? Object.


Yes, Though they cannot love thee as thou art godly, Answ.
yet godliness has something in it that is common to the excellency of man's
nature.

Yea, and those that are in place of power in the Magestracie, they should
labor to gain those that are under Magistrates should govern by love.
them by love: as the greatest in a family if he be a Lord, or an Earl, should
not think it too much to gain a servant by Love; so those that have the
greatest power in Government, they should not think it too much to gain their
meanest Subjects in a way of Love: we see it was thus with David, 1 Chronicles. 28.
2. Then David the King 1 Chr. 28. 2.
stood up and said, Hear me my Brethren, and my People. See what a sweet
expression is here of a great Prince, Then The difference betwixt the gesture
and language of David, and the Princes of these times
David the King stood up, and he said, Hear me my Brethren, and my People; he
did not sit down Majesterially and say, My People, and you that are my
Subjects, and that are under me, I command you to do thus and thus; but he
stands up unto them and says, Hear me my Brethren, my People: This was a way
to gain the hearts of people unto him. You know Absalom he sought in a false
way to steal away the hearts of people by a gentle carriage. I remember I have
read of John the Second, a John 2d King of Portugal
King of Portugal, he chose his Emblem to be a Pelican, that he might express
his love to his Subjects upon this ground; for the Pelican when her young ones
have been The property of the Pelican.
bitten with Serpents, she feeds her young ones with her own blood, and thereby
cures them: now upon this, this King of Portugal chooses the Pelican to be his
Emblem, thereby he would testify his readiness to let out his blood for the
good of his Subjects, for the healing of his Subjects. He would not feed upon
his Subjects blood, but he would rather let out his own blood for their good.
This is the commendations of a Prince, not to seek to feed upon Subjects blood,
and to raise up his Honor, and Prerogative by his sheding of their blood; but
to love them A Princes pattern.
so, as to be willing to let out his blood for their good if it might be. The
maxim that some have labored to infuse into Princes, I had rather be feared,
than be loved; it is Timeri quam diligi. A pernicious state maxim
a maxim only beseeming Tyranny, and no way suitable to an ingenuous spirit, but
to a base and sordid spirit; Certainly that man, be he what he will, that is
acted by that principle, is a man of a sordid and low spirit: a man of a
generous spirit, and of an ingenuous spirit would rather be beloved than be
feared: Let every man The evils of striving otherwise than by love.
seek to gain another by love: If you strive otherwise to gain any but by love;

First, You are not likely to prevail.

Secondly, If you do prevail, there will be so much trouble before you do
prevail, that it will not be worth the having when you do prevail.

Thirdly, When you have your will upon them, they do the thing that you would
have them, they dare not do otherwise; I but they hate you though: What good is
this, for a man to have his will upon another, if in the mean time he hates him?

Then Fourthly, If you do not prevail by love, They will do no more than just
needs must; and this is the Why Hypocrites are hide-bound toward God
reason indeed why Hypocrites do so little for God, God has never gained their
hearts by Love, but only by fear, and therefore they will do no more for God
than they must of necessity; whereas (as I said before) love never propounds
bounds.

And then Fifthly, If you do not get them by Love, they watch for all
opportunities to fling off. Now what a poor gain is this, to gain one with a
deal of trouble, and for him to do what I would have him, and yet to hate me,
and to do no more than needs must, and then to wath for all opportunities to
appear against me? Where fore my Brethren, for the close of this Note, let us
follow after Love, and provoke one another to Love, you will find sweetness in
your own Love, and sweetness The benefits of love.
that you get by Love, in the very exercise of Love you will find sweetness,
and then the Love that you get by others you will find that sweet, and you will
find it so much the sweeter because you get it by Love.

And then further, another Note is this, Seeing Love Obs. 3.
has such bonds in it, Let us make use of the Love of God to bind our hearts
to him.

You have heard that Love has bonds; And then you have heard that we should do
as God does. And then Thirdly, Is this Gods way? Oh! let us make use of all the
Love that ever God has shown unto us for to gain our hearts unto himself.

And this would be a large Theme to speak of, if we should lanch into it; if I
should come to open unto you what the Love of God has been to you, how much
Love God has shown to the Nation, and to our selves for the gaining of our
hearts, Oh the many twists of this Cord! it is a strong Cord indeed to bind us
to God. In Deuteronomy. 11. 13. If thou shall diligently love the Lord thy God;
there is Deuteronomy. 11. 13.
that that he requires of them, after what he has done for them. If thou will
but diligently love the Lord thy God. That Is that that God seeks by all his
love, to work our hearts to Love.

Not to speak now of the Love of God to you as you are Creatures, nor as you
are Men; But a little to speak of the Love of God to you as you are Saints. I
shall show you very briefly what strong Cords of Love God has cast upon you,
to gain your hearts to himself to love The cords of Gods love to his people, 1
Eternal.
him.

As first, Gods Love to you (if you be Saints) it is eternal Love, before ever
you were born the bowels of God yerned toward you, (as I may so speak with
holy reverence.) God was twisting these bonds of love from all eternity that he
might gain your hearts, God was thinking that in such a time there shall be
such and such men and women that shall live upon the earth; I Will make Gods
thoughts from eternity concerning his Elect.
preparation by such bonds now as shall unite and fasten them close to my self
when ever it comes to be revealed to them. It was love from eternity, Oh! the
Transactions that were between the Father and the Son from all eternity for to
manifest love to your souls! the great Counsels (I say) that were transacted
between the Father and the Son before the world was, were about these Bonds of
Love to you.

Secondly, It Is choice Love, when he left many thousands, 2 Elective and
separating. Malach. 1. 2. Use.
he set his heart upon you, Mal. 1. 2. Was not Esau Jacob's brother, says God?
Yet I loved Jacob.

So were not thou of such a Family? and yet thou see how God has cast off a
great part of that Family, and yet has he loved thee? Were not thou such a
ones brother, such a ones sister that remained wicked and ungodly, and it may
be died so? and yet God has loved thee, he has past by so many great ones in
the world, and so many of thy kindred, and rather pitched his Love upon thee.
It Is choice Love, and therefore this might gain thee to himself.

Thirdly, It is free Love, the Love of God is free; so you 3 Free. Hos. 14. 4.
Deuteronomy. 7. 7. discoursed.
have it in Hos 14. 4. I will love them freely: and in Deuteronomy. 7. 7. The Lord did
not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in number than
any people: for you were the fewest of all people. God there would manifest his
love to his people to gain their hearts to him: says he, The Lord did not set
his love upon you, because you were more: (Why then did God set his love upon
us?) in the 8. verse, but because he loved thee. It Is a strange arguing: The
Lord did not set his love upon you because you were more, but the Lord did set
his love upon you, because he loved you; he could go no higher. There can be no
other reason why the Lord should love you, but because he did love you. We use
to say, it is a woman's reason to say, I will do such a thing, because I will do
it. Now if any of you would have a reason why God loved you: why thus, He loved
me, because he loved me. The Lord did not set his love upon you for this
reason; but he did set his love upon you, because he loved you. So, it is a
free love. Oh! let the freeness of it be another Ingredient, so as to bind your
hearts unto him.

Fourthly, God has so loved you, as he gave his Son for you. 4 He gave his Son
for them
So God loved us. Sometimes it has been in the thoughts of men whether there
might not he more worlds than this world. Certainly God in his infinite power he
might make a thousand worlds more glorious than this, such worlds, as the
meanest Creature in those worlds might be as high in excellency above the Sun,
as the Sun is high above a piece of earth. But now this we may know, let there
be never such excellent Creatures made, they cannot have a greater fruit of
love than mankind has from God; Oh! this is the love of God to mankind, this
calls aloud to the children of men to love God, here is a fruit of love beyond
that which is to Angels; for the Lord Which he did not for Angels.
took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Nature of man.

Fifthly, God so loved his people, as he has given himself 5 And Himself also.
too, as well as his Son. Not only given the Second Person in Trinity, but
Himself. He does not think enough to give Heaven and Earth to thee to be thy
Portion, but he will make Himself to be thy portion, he will be thy God. You
would think it a great matter if God should say, Well, all this world I will
give to be thy portion; This is set forth by gradation and prosopopie.
yea, that I might give a testimony that I love thee, I will make another world
for thy sake, and make thee the Emperor of it all; but in that God has given
thee his Son, and given thee Himself, this is a greater degree of Love; and the
soul of man, were it enlarged indeed so as it might be, yea, so as grace does
enlarge the hearts of the Saints, such a soul would say, Lord, what will thou
give me, if thou give me not thy Son, if thou give me not thy Self? though
I be less than the least of thy mercies, yet except I have thy self to be my
protion, this is not sufficient for me. Well says God, That thou may know
that my heart is set upon thee for good, I Will give thee my Son, I Will give thee
my self and my Spirit. Oh! what love is this to the children of men, that ever
we should live to have our ears filled with this sound from Heaven, that God
should do such things as these are for the children of men!

Sixthly, God does so love his people, as in comparison 6. Regards nothing
else. Isa. 43. 4. illustrated.
of his Saints he cares not what becomes of all the world; in Isa. 43. 4. I
loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. If thy
case be so that it shall not be well with thee without great evils that shall
come upon the children of men, the generality of men, and many people and
Nations; I do not so much care for them (says God) my heart is upon you: so as
in comparison of you I care not what becomes of all the world. Oh the Love of
God unto his Saints!

Yea further, God has loved thee so, as he has pardoned 7 Pardoned all their
sins. Revel. 1. 5.
all thy sins; here is another twist of Gods Love, in Rev. 1. 5. Unto him that
has loved us, and washed us from our sins, by his own blood. For his giving
himself for us that is in Gal. 2. 20. He has loved us, and washed us from our
sins by his own blood: here is a fruit of Love. You do not Gal. 2. 20.
hear it said, that Christ has loved us and has purchased great Kingdoms for
us, has made you Lords, and observed.
Earls, and Countesses, and so has loved you; no, But he has loved us, and
washed us from our sins by his blood. Now it is a good argument; that the Love
of God is upon you, if you account this to be a great fruit of Love to wash you
from your sins by the blood of Jesus Christ; Surely if he will do so much for
you, as shall cost him so dear as his own blood, he loves you; the Love Jesus
Christ broke through these difficulties, for when there were such transactions
between the Father and Son about redeeming the Soul, says God, If thou will
take upon thee to deliver them from their sin, thou must come thy A
representation of the love of Christ in coming to take away our sin.
self and be made a Curse for their sins. What, will you undertake such a thing
as that, to deliver them from their sin? it will cost you thus much. Says
Jesus Christ, Lord, thy will be done in it, yet let me deliver them from their
sin, though I lose my life, though it cost me my blood, though I be made a
Curse, whatsoever it cost me, yet let their sins be washed from them. He has
washed us from our sins, though it cost him his blood. Oh! the Love of Christ
to his Saints! what Bonds of Love have we here! I have seen some that they may
twist and bind their cords An apt simile.
the more fast, they will wet them that so they may close and bind the more. Oh
the Cords of the Love of Jesus Christ, are wet with his own blood.

Again, Loved thee, surely his Love has been great, he 8 Puts loveliness upon
them.
has put loveliness upon thee, he has put upon thee his own Nature. If one
can say any thing greater than has been said, this one would think should be
very high and great, tor God so love us as to put his own Nature into us, to
make us partaker of the Divine Nature, so to love us, as to put his own Life
into us, to enable us to live the very same life that himself does live, so to
love us as to put his own Image upon us, Oh! this is the Love of God to his
Saints.

Again, He loves thee with the very same Love wherewith he 9 Loves them with
the love he has to Christ. Joh. 17. 23.
loves Jesus Christ himself; In John 17. about the latter end, That thou may
love them with the same Love wherewith thou have loved me, says Christ to the
Father. Oh! to have the same Love that the Father loves Christ withal, Is not
this a strong Bond to bind thy heart to God? If God had loved thee only so, as
to give thee an estate and honors here in this world, this is no other love but
that the Reprobate may have, and will this Love satisfy thee? Oh! the
difference between the Love of God to his Saints, and the Love of God to other
men! he loves the great ones of the world that are wicked with no other love,
but with the love that he loves a Reprobate; but he loves the Saints with the
same Love wherewith he loves his Son, and this Love will bring thee one day, to
be one with the Father and the Son, and is not here a strong Bond of Love to
gain thy heart to Himself?

And further, from this it must needs be, that the Lord 10. Hence God delights
in his Saints.
must delight in Communion with his Saints: and indeed God does all this for
his Saints, puts the Divine Nature into them, and the Life of God, and sets so
much Love upon them; why? that he might have a people to enjoy everlasting
Communion with him; says God, I would fain have some Creatures that might live
with me, Why God does all the former things for his Saints.
to enjoy communion with me, that might live to see my face, and see all the
Glory that I intend to manifest to all eternity: Oh blessed God! have not thou
the Angels that are with thee to enjoy thy Glory, to have communion with thee?
no says God, but I would have these poor creatures that are so low and mean in
the world, I would have them to be raised up to enjoy communion with my self;
this is the end of Gods bestowing any Grace upon his Saints, it is that he
might raise them to enjoy communion with him, and to delight in him, and he to
delight in them, that he might have creatures to communicate the treasures of
his goodness too, and that thou might communicate what thou art able to him.
Surely Christ does not account himself to be full without his Saints; and
therefore you find in Ephesians. 1. 23. that Ephesians. 1. 23. illustrated by Joh. 17. 24
the Church is called, the Fullness of Jesus Christ, and therefore he prays,
Father, let them be where I am, I shall not account my self so full except they
be with me, and see my Glory. Oh the Love of Jesus Christ to his Saints!

And then further, This Love it sweetens and sanctifies all 11 Gods love
sweetens and sanctifies all.
for good; thou may see Love in every thing, now though thou have less of
the creature than others have, yet thou have it out of Love; when thou come
home it may be thou have not so much as others have, perhaps but a piece of
bread and small drink; yea, but I have it out of Love: look upon all thy
mercies, and thou may see the eternal Love of God to thee in them. They are
all sanctified to me for the furtherance of eternal good, the Lord from all
eternity did see that such a kind of life was A meditation for afflicted Saints.
the best for me to further the eternal good he intended for me, and therefore
he has disposed of me to this condition rather than another condition. Oh! how
sweet may the life of a man or woman be when as they can reason after this
manner, Well, this condition that now I am in, the Lord from eternity saw the
fittest condition to work my heart to himself, and therefore it is that I am in
this estate rather than another. And then Love; thou find daily by
experience, how has the Lord helped thee in thy straights, and heard thee in
thy prayers, and answered thy desires. This I told you in the opening of the
text was a fruit of Love to the people of Israel, and so it has been with thee.

And this love is very strange too, for though the Lord 12. Gods love overcomes
all our unworthiness (both before and after conversion) which he foresaw.
did forsee all thy weakness, and all thy unbeseeming carriages, thy
unworthines, etc. yea, the Lord did not only foresee what thou would be
before he did manifest love, but he did forsee how thou would walk unworthy
of his love after it was manifested to thee, and though he forsaw all this, yet
still his love was not quenched toward thee, but says the Lord, My love shall
break through all this. Many times you set your love upon some, and they prove
untoward, and unworthy, and you think with your selves, Could I have but
foreseen this untowardness they should never have had my love: but now the Lord
did foresee al thy il requitals, and yet it did not hinder the love of God
toward thee.

And then further, In the love of God there is the love 13 Gods love has in it
the love of all relations.
of all relations. As now, The love of a father toward a child: the Lord takes
upon him the relation of a father, and the love of a husband; the Lord takes
upon him the relation of a husband, and the love of a friend too, that is sweet.

And then, that that crowns all it is this, That it is an 14 An everlasting and
unchangable love. Zeph. 3. 17. Jer. 3. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
abiding love, an everlasting love, a love that shall never be quenched: He
that the Lord loves, he loves unto the end, he will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.
17. Jer. 31. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. If thou know that he has loved thee in his
Son, thou have hereby an everlasting consolation; let Heaven and Earth meet
together, let there be what changes and alterations there will, yet there is
everlasting consolation for thee, if thou knew but this love of God.

Now my brethren, all this I have done to that end, that your hearts may be
gained unto God; And what Application.
will thou do now? Wilt not thou now love the Lord thy God? shall not all this
love of God to thee in Christ constrain thee? The love of Christ constrains me,
says the Apostle. Oh! love the Lord, all ye Saints; if the Lord has 2 Cor. 5.
14.
thus loved you, love ye the Lord all you his Saints. Then God is Love himself,
he is the Element of Love; And whither should love go but up to the Element?
Air it desires to be in its proper place; and Earth will descend to God the
Element of Love
its proper place: the proper place of Love, is God, God is (as it were) the
Element of Love, for so the Scripture says, God is Love: And he that dwells in
God, dwells in love. 1 John 4. 16.
Oh labor to be rooted and stablished in love. in Ephesians. 3. 17. Being rooted
and stablished in love, you may be able to comprehend Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.
with all Saints, what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and
to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge. Being rooted in love,
thereby ye come to comprehend with all Saints, the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge. It
is not the strength of natural parts, Learning does not so much teach us what
the length, and height, and depth of the love of Christ is, as Love, get but
your hearts rooted in Love, and you will come to understand the glorious things
of the Gospel in another manner than ever you did. And mark what follows: That
you might be filled with all the fullness of God. Had The rarity of the
expression in Ephesians. 3. 19.
we not such an expression in Scripture, we should not dare to make use of it;
What, for a poor creature to be filled with God, to be filled with the fullness
of God, to be filled with all the sulness of God! This is the reason why
Christians are so scant in their obedience, and empty in their spirits, because
they are not acquainted with Why Christians ar so scant in their obedience, and
empty in their spirits. Cant. 7. 12. noted. God regards nothing but love. Our
love should be eminent toward Christ Minus te (...) Deus diligit, qui praeter
te aliquid diligit qui propter te non diliget. August. Confess.
this breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of Christ: Oh
know, that God prizes thy love, and he is satisfied with nothing but thy love;
in Cant. 7. 12. There will I give thee my loves, says the Spouse. When thou
come to the Ordinances, to hear the Word, receive Sacraments, or Prayer, yet
if thou come not to give the Lord Christ thy loves, it is nothing; There will
I give thee my loves. Oh! Christ prizes love at an high rate: and that love
that will serve for other things, certainly will not serve Christ. He loves
thee too little (says Augustan) that loves any thing besides thee, who loves
not that thing for thee. You may love Wife, and Children, and Friends, yea, but
you must love them all for God; when you see any thing lovely in Husband, or
Wife, or children, or Friends, yea, but think this is but a beam of the
loveliness of God. And thus I have endeavored now to raise your hearts to God
by Love; the Lord has cast Bonds of Love upon your souls, On! that by the
Ministry of his Word this day these Bonds may be somewhat strengthened, that
you may feel some strength in these Bonds, that you may go away with your
hearts more strongly united to the Love of God than ever. I drew them with the
Cords of a man, With Bonds of Love, and I was to them as they that take off the
yoke on their Jaws, and I laid meat unto them.

Part of the last Sermon it was spent in opening unto you these Bonds of Love.
And showing,

First, What were the Bonds of Gods Love toward the people of Israel, the
several expressions of Gods Love to them in several particulars. And showed you
how that all those that had to deal with men to draw them to God should do as
God does, labor to draw them with Bonds of Love? I have especially directed my
self unto the Saints of God, and showed to them what bonds of of Love God has
laid upon their hearts to draw them to himself. I have not applied this point
generally yet; for indeed one principal Bond of the Love of God toward the
Nation will follow in the words after; But certainly the Lord has sought to
draw this Nation to himself with Bonds of Love. We may say concerning Gods
special love to Engl.
God, he has loved this Nation: Loved it. It was the first Nation that ever
received Jesus Christ by the countenance 1.
of public Authority, of the Supreme Authority in the Nation.

And when Antichrist had darkened the light of the 2.
Gospel here, the bowels of Gods Compassions yerned toward it, and God wrought
wonderfully to deliver this Nation from Antichristian Tyranny.

Moreover; The Lord has not sent the light and power 3.
of the Gospel to any Nation under Heaven more fully; nay, without prejudice to
any other we may say not so fully as to this Nation; though there are many of
the Saints of God else where, yet in no place under Heaven has God more, yea,
so many Saints; (I might almost say, put all the Nations of the earth together)
so many that know him so fully, and have that power of godliness in the
worshipping of him, as here in this Nation. Oh! the Bonds of Love that are upon
us!

Yea, If we look upon our outward mercies, those liberties that we enjoy,
there is scarce any Nation that 4.
has the Commonalty of the people that live like men in comparison of ours;
for the most part of all the Nations in the world, the generality of people are
like slaves rather than any Freemen, their Governors rule over them with
Tyranny; but here the Common people have Liberties, and God works mightily for
them, for the vindicating of the Liberties, that they have both for their
bodies and outward estates, and their souls likewise, and Oh! the Love that God
has shown unto us of late in working so miraculously for us as he has done!

But there is one point more observable in these Bonds 5.
of Love that God draws people unto himself by.

The scope of the Prophet here in mentioning these Bonds of Love, it is to
aggravate their sin, from whence The scope of the Text.
there is this:

That there is nothing more aggravates sin than that it is against Obs. 4.
Love. God has Three Bonds to bind us to Obedience.

There Is the Bond of his Law.

And the Bonds of Afflictions. Three sorts of Gods Bonds.


And the Bonds of Love.

But now to break all these Bonds, The Bonds of the Commandments, and the
Bonds of Afflictions, and Bonds of Love too, this aggravates sin very much.

Oh charge thy sin with this aggravation, Oh thou sinner! What against such a
God, such Love, Oh what Use.
a vile heart have I! Says Augustine, Oh it is too hard a spirit; Ni^^^ durus
est animus, qui amore and si nolebat impendere, noltt rependare. August.
that though it will not bestow Love, yet it will not requite Love. O! let not
there be such a hardness in the Spirits of the Saints. Thou did not begin
with God to love, thou did not begin to bestow Love; be not so hard toward
God as not to requite Love. Do not we see how base Love can gain upon men's
hearts, adulterous love, Adulterous love. Gifts.
what strong bonds that love is, the giving of gifts and bribes, what bonds
they are to tie men's hearts, their hands and tongues! and shall not the Love of
God and the fruits of that be a stronger Bond to tie thy heart unto him?
Nothing goes more to the heart of Man of God than the abuse of Love: A man can
better bear the abuse of his money, the abuse of any thing he does, or has,
than the abuse of his Love: Gods Spirit is grieved with his Saints: we do not
read that the Spirit of God is grieved with the Wicked, God may be angry with
the wicked every day, but not grieved, but when the Saints sin against him the
Spirit of God is grieved, because their The Spirit grieved only by the Saints.
sins are against Love; when thou sinnest against God the Lord looks upon thee,
as Caesar once upon Brutus; What, thou my Son! What, thou whom I have so loved!
What, (...)
break all those bonds. When we read in the second Psalm. of the Kings and
Princes of the Earth, that said, Let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast
away their Cords from us, We think that is great Rebellion; but for thou that
professest thy self to be Gods, it is a greater evil to break these bonds of
Love; Oh! thou my Son, my Child, thou whom I have bestowed so much Love upon,
yet thou to sin against me, when thou art committing of any evil, A meditation
for a Saint about to sin.
conceive with thy self as if God were looking upon thee, and pleading with
thee, by all those fruits of his love that ever thou have received from him,
and will thou yet sin against him for all this? We read in Mark 14. 72. Mark.
14. 72.
when Peter had sinned, Christ did but look upon him, and he wept bitterly; Oh!
Peter saw love in the looks of Jesus Christ, and therefore we know after when
Christ came to him, he pleaded with him with this argument of love, Do thou
love me? and do thou love me? Oh! when he saw the eyes of Christ so
sparkling of love, and then considered that he had sinned against that Christ
that had so loved him, broke all those bonds of love, then he went out, and
wept bitterly; the word is in Mark 14. 72. (...), He did break out in weeping.
(...). Erupisset. Beza. Ovelatione capitis: he covered his head as Mariners
use to do. Theophylact.
For so it may signify, that force that there is in doing any thing, to lay a
force upon ones self to do a thing, He did break out, break out in weeping, he
was not able to bear it, his heart burst even in sunder, when he considered how
he had burst asunder the bonds of Love. Oh that after such manifestations of
Mercy and goodness, such warmings of heart in Communion with Jesus Christ, what
thou, Oh my soul! what, can thou find in any ways like Gods ways? can
thou find the like love and the like sweetness in any as thou have done in God,
yet for all this unkind, unloving dealings, God follows thee with Love, his
heart is yet open unto thee; As a man that goes from the Sun yet he has the
warm beams of the Sun that follows him, and does warm him; Simile.
so the hearts of the Saints do many times go from God, decline from him, yet
they have the warm beams of Love that follows after them to draw their hearts
again to him; Oh! return, return into this bosom of infinite Love, here thy
soul may have everlasting imbracings. And I was to them, as they that take off
the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.

Here Is a fruit of Love in delivering them from their bondage; as a Husbandman
who is merciful to his beast he will not tire it too much with hard labor, but
takes Simile.
off the yoke, lifts up the yoke with his hands and gives it food; so did I
says God, I did not tire Epbraim with labor and servitude. When you were in
Egypt, and often afterward when under your enemies yokes, I freed you from
your bondage; as the Husbandman when the beast has been plowing and begins to
be hot lists the yoke up to cool the neck that the beast may refresh its self.
From their jaws.

Because of some Instruments, some bridle that was Expos.
fastened to the yoke that was on their neck and put into their jaws. Therefore
there is this phrase, Lifting up the yoke from their jaws.

Luther upon the place understands this of that spiritual Luther.
ease that there is in the yoke of Jesus Christ: so says he, The Lord by his
Spirit does help us to obey; he does not only command, and tell us what to obey,
but assists us with his Spirit, and gives us power, and lifts up the yoke, and
bears it together himself with us, and hence Christ tells us that his yoke is
easy, and his burden is light. Indeed it is an easy yoke in comparison of the
Law, the Law says, Do this, and live; do not, and die: the Law takes advantage
upon every infirmity, It admits not of endeavors without performances, It gives
no strength to what it commands; Oh! but the yoke of No command in the Gospel
without a promise. Simile.
Christ is easy, Christ continues strength; there is never a Command without a
promise to give strength; As an artery that runs together with the veins. And
Christ accepts of endeavors, Oh! the yoke of the Gospel is far easier than the
yoke of the Law.

So, I have taken off the yoke.] We must not think this too far fetched, because
we find that the holy Ghost in the new Testament interprets the beginning of
this chapter concerning Christ, that we would never have thought to have been
meant of Christ; I called my Son out of Egypt. I opened there how this was to
be understood of Christ. Now if so be that God had an eye to Christ, when he
said, I have called my Son out of Egypt: why should we not think that there
might be an eye to Christ in this, when he says, I took the yoke from off
their Jaws; I delivered them from the yoke that neither they, nor their fathers
could bear; and I brought a more easy yoke of the Gospel upon them.

But though the holy Ghost had an eye to this, yet that that is firstly and
literally meant, it is, the deliverance from oppression, I delivered them from
the oppressions that were upon them. From whence then the Observation is this,

First, That deliverance from oppression is a great mercy. Oh! Obs. 1
Deliverance from Oppression a great mercy. Levit. 26. 13.
what ease is there in it! Oh! how does it cool our necks! In Levit. 26. 13. I
have broken the bonds of your yoke, and made you go upright. There was a time
that we had heavy yokes upon us, that made us stoop, we stooped under them,
but through Gods mercy these bonds of our yokes are in a good measure broken,
that we may go upright, and woe to us, if we go not upright now. In Ezekiel. 34.
27. They shall know that I am the Lord, when I have broken Ezekiel. 34. 27.
the bonds of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that
served themselves of them. My brethren, If ever God manifested himself to be
the Lord toward us, it has been in breaking the bonds of our yoke, of the
yokes that were upon us, and in delivering us from those who served themselves
of us; we were under a proud and cruel generation of men, that minded
themselves, and cared not what became of the Consciences, of the Estates,
Liberties, and Lives of men, so be it that they could have their humors, their
lusts served upon us; and what means could we see for the deliverance of our
selves from their yoke? But the Lord has appeared; and then says the text,
They shall know that I am the Lord; If we Expounded.
did not know that God was the Lord before, yet now we may know him; and the
truth is, such has been the wonderful works of God toward us in the breaking
of our yokes, that it were enough to convince an Atheist me thinks; those of
you that have been heretofore troubled with temptations of Atheism, The strange
ways of God toward this Nation in freeing of us from those A cure for
Atheistical thoughts.
yokes that have been upon us, may convince you of a God, may make you say,
Surely there is a God in Heaven that beholds the ways of the children of men,
the Lord is God; Then shall you know that I am the Lord.

Oh! that upon the manifestation of God in this way of mercy, we may come to
know that God is the Lord, the Lord might have forced us to have known that he
was the Lord, by laying more grievous yokes upon us, by bringing us under more
dreadful evils than ever yet we were, but the Lord has rather been pleased to
choose a way to make us to know that he is the Lord, by taking our yokes off
from us. This God has done.

The Second Observation is from the Scope that the Prophet brings this for,
which is, to aggravate their sin so much the more; as if he should say, I have
taken off the yoke from your jaws, and yet now you are wanton and kick and
spurn with the heel against me. From whence Note;

That to grow wanton, to abuse our ease, when God is pleased Obs. 2. To grow
wanton after deliverance from yokes is very sinful.
to deliver us from yokes, is very sinful, a very great evil. What now when we
come to have a little liberty more than we had before, to be freed from that
yoke and bondage that we were in, and begin to feel our necks freed of those
yokes that were before upon them, What! now to begin to frisk, and spurn, and
kick, and against God Himself, that has taken the yoke from off us, Oh! this
is very dreadful. What, to abuse our liberty that we have from our bondage, to
all manner of licentiousness in horrid and wanton Opinions, in wicked and
abominable practices; certainly this is an ill requittal of this fruit of Love,
in lifting up the yoke from off our jaws. This is a very great evil which we
are this day guilty of; if ever there were a people guilty of this evil, of
kicking and spurning against God so soon as he has taken off the Englands sin.
yoke from their jaws, than we are at this day: Could any have believed that if
it had been revealed from Heaven, but Six years since, That within six years
this People of England should be delivered from those sore yokes that they
cried to Heaven because of the burden of them, and the Lord would work in a
miraculous way to deliver them; but upon their deliverance there shall be such
wantonness, such horrid, blasphemous opinions, and wicked licentious ways,
yea, that those that make profession of Religion shall be guilty of, presently
upon the taking off of their yoke, Could it have been believed? Certainly if
our forefathers that were under the yoke, that were godly, and cried to God for
deliverance, if they should rise out of their graves now, and as soon as ever
they were risen out, ye should make a full Narration of all that Liberty that
God has granted to his people in England, in the breaking of all that yoke of
Tyranny in the Civil State, and the yoke of Tyranny in the Ecclesiastical
State, they would presently think that they should see wonderful glorious
effects of this in England; but if within a month or two after they should have
conversed with men they should hear of such monstrous opinions, they should see
the extreme licentiousness and wantonness in the hearts of men, expressed in
their ways, Oh! they would be ready to spit in the very faces of their
children, of those that now live in such times as these are. The wantonness The
Evils of licentiousness after deliverance.
and licentiousness of men hearts in abusing of our freedom from our yokes,
it is very evil in these Respects:

First, Because this hardens the hearts of former Oppressors: 1 It hardens our
Adversaries
Our former Oppressors, our Prelates and others, will not they say, (or do not
you give them occasion to say) Now you see what is the fruit of casting of us
out, Was there such wantonness before? were there such horrid Opinions before
when we had power? We kept down all such things, we could easily curb these,
when we had power; but you see what extravegancies there are, how men run wild
as soon as our power is taken from us. By this means they are hardened: And
others that are of Prelatical spirits, they are hardoned, and begin to think
surely the other way is the better way; and indeed Suppression of Errors by
violence no argument of the truth of Church Government. [Omnes licentia
deteriores sumus]
if this be a good argument, That the keeping men in union, and the keeping
down errors by violence shall prove the truth of any way, or of any Government,
it may as well prove Prelatical, as any other, for we know that they kept men
from venting of such notorious errors by violence; but shall we, because there
is not this violence upon us, shall be more erroneous, and more wanton in our
spirits?

Secondly, This wantonness and abuse of our Liberty, 2 It obscures the work of
God.
and licentiousness, it darkens the glory of this great work of God in our
deliverance; the Lord has been pleased to magnify his Name in the deliverance
of these Kingdoms from the yoke; Now what should be the care of all the people
of God, but to seek to magnify the great work of God, to make it beautiful and
glorious before the eyes of all? But now by this wantonness and licentiousness
men do darken the Glory of God, they take off the luster and beauty of it,
Psalm. 149. 4. the Lord there promises, to beautify the meek with salvation, He
Psalm. 149. 4. enlightened.
will beautify them with salvation: now the Lord has wrought so toward us as
to beautify us with salvation, and indeed there is a great beauty upon the
work of salvation that he has wrought; but this does (I say) darken the Glory
of God, and it takes away the beauty of the work of God in our salvation; What,
has God done all this for us, that men might turn wanton and run w^ld into
monsterous opinions, and blasphemies? Oh! woe to thee that thou should live
in such a generation as this is, how unfit art thou to live in such a time as
this is to darken the glory of such a glorious work as God has wrought for us
here in England!

Thirdly, By abusing our liberties from our yokes, you 3 Deprives others of
just liberty.
do wrong others, wrong those who are wise, and holy, and peaceable, and you
make them to be denied that liberty that otherwise they might have. It is for
your sakes who are so wanton and run so wild in opinions, and in the looseness
of your lives, that (I say) those that are otherwise discreet, wise, and holy,
and peaceable, and that would make use of what liberty Christ would have given
to his people, they must be denied it for your sakes, it will be upon your
account one day, what ever denial they have of that liberty that they would use
in a gracious and peaceable way for the honor of God (I Which will be charged on
the ocasioners of it.
say) you must answer for it one day, for it is your wildness that is the cause
of it.

Yea Fourthly, This wildness, and looseness, and abuse of deliverance from
bondage, it will be the means to 4 It ^a^ bring the yoke on again.
bring others to be under greater yokes again, it were just with God (at least)
that it should be so.

Yea, It might make any that have but any Civility, or Morality in them, to
think that they shall do God 5 It justly provokes men against liberty.
good service in yoking these men in another way than ever they were yoked, (I
say) it might make them to think that they do God good service when they see
the Name of God dishonored, and Religion so abused; I say, by this means they
may come to think it would be a good service to God to lay yokes upon such kind
of men as these are. If ever, instead of the great strings that have tide yokes
upon you, you should have lesser strings, if you should have them multiplied to
tie yokes upon you, yet thank your selves, you are the cause of it, in Lament.
1. 14. The yoke of my transgression is bound by Lam. 1. 14.
his hand: The Lord may justly bind the yoke of your transgressions upon you;
Oh! that God would humble us for the abuse of our liberty of the freedom from
our yokes, Oh let us take heed of this, and say with our selves, Surely this is
not the use that we should make of What use we should make of our liberty.
our deliverance from our yokes; no, but rather this use, we will rather so
much the more willingly take the yoke of Jesus Christ upon us: In Exodus 12. 25.
after the Exodus 12. 25.
people of Israel were delivered from the yoke of Egyptian bondage, presently
upon it, Thou shall keep this service (speaking of the passover that was to be
kept upon their deliverance from Egypt) Thou shall keep this service. The word
that is there, Service, it is the same that is used sometimes (...)
for their Service and Bondage under the Egyptians; as if the Lord should say,
You were once in Service indeed, there was a Service that the Egyptians
required of you, a servile Service it was, and your necks were under
illustrated.
it, now I Will work thus miraculously to deliver you from that servility that
you were under, and now you shall keep this Service, Oh my service is a great
deal better than the service under your Enemies. And indeed this should be the
use, we were slaves to our Adversaries, let us be willing now, seeing we are
free men, to be servants of Jesus Christ, and to take his yoke; but the growing
wanton upon the taking off our yoke, is a great aggravation of Sin.

But further, As it is a very great evil to grow wanton Obs. 3. Oppression of
others after deliverance from oppression, a crying sin. Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
when we are delivered from our yokes; so certainly to oppress one another
after we are delivered from oppression must needs be a great evil likewise. In
Deuteronomy. 28. 48. (but that belongs to the former Note that we should serve God
with the strength that before was spent in serving our Enemies.) Because thou
servedst not the Lord with joyfulness and gladness of heart, therefore shall
thou serve thine Enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger and
in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke
of Iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

But surely, If this be a mercy that we should bless God for, That we are
delivered from the yokes of men, and the abuse of it in our wantonness be
great; Then this must needs be greater, That we should fall upon laying yokes
one upon another. If it be the mercy of God to take off your yokes, we should
seek to take off yokes from our Brethren, and to make their ways to be as
easy to them as possibly we can, not to seek ways to pinch their consciences;
Conscience oppression of all opp^ssions Conscience oppression the most grievous
is the worst, There was heretofore a generation of men who studied what would
pinch conscience most, and that that they found would most pinch conscience,
that they would urge to the uttermost upon men; this was devilish; I hope we
have not many so vile as these What Statesmen should consider in imposing
things. Object.
were. But you should consider what though such and such opinions and ways
will serve my turn, will they not be burdens to others?

Well, but though they be burdens, if they be truths, why should they not be
urged?

Nay, Suppose they be truths, yet except they be necessary, Answ. Such Truths
as are not of necessity, not to be imposed
let not men be instrumental in imposing them upon them: If there be a
necessity then there is no plea, but some men are so happy (if I may so call it)
as that they have a latitude in their judgments, that which way soever the
times turn they can find out a distinction Men of latitude in judgment.
to help themselves, that so their fair necks should never come under a yoke,
so it falls out that always their judgments suits with the times.

I will not condemn these men, for possibly it may be God gives them to see
further than others do, but yet, by this they have ease: but now were these men
ingenuous, they should consider their brethren thus. I have a Latitude, and I
could go along with the countenance of the times as they were before, the
former times, and now the times are changed, I can go in these times too; But
some A meditation for such: And necessary at this time.
others whom I have reason to judge, as faithful, as gracious as my self, they
have no such latitude, it falls out unhappily for them, for in former times
their judgments could not suffer them to do what was enjoined them, they were
fain to suffer and to be deprived of estates and livings and whatsoever they
had; well, now the times are changed, it falls out so that their judgments
cannot suit now neither with these times, and yet surely it is not through
frowardness, nor through perverseness, for take these men in all things else, I
find them as conscientious, as spiritual as my self, Alas! must they now
suffer, and shall I ad to their afflictions? shall my hand be used to lay the
yoke on them and to press it hard? God forbid, I Will rather study, though I will
not bauk any truth, I Will stand to defend what ever I am persuaded in my
conscience is a truth, yet I Will study what possibly I can to ease them, and to
make their lives as comfortable to them as I can; I know God has given them
ability and hearts to do him service, and it may be as much as I, Oh! why
should they be hindered and discouraged in their work? I Will study what latitude
there may be for them: This were somewhat like, Oh! this were ingenuity indeed,
this would savor of a good spirit indeed, This would be a good testimony of
your thankfulness unto God for breaking off the yokes that were upon you: My
brethren when our yokes are taken away, or lifted up we must have regard to
others as well as our selves, and not think or say, let them bear, let their
necks bear; Oh no, what are our necks more than theirs? If God pities his
people and will lift up the yoke, let us do what we can to put under our hand
although we bear somewhat our selves. Some men they glory in imposing upon
others; but it is the Glory of God to take off the yoke from the Jaws of
others, and from their necks, that is his Glory; it is not such a glorious thing
to lay yokes upon others, but the glory is in lifting up the yoke from them.
Christ professes his yoke is easy, his burden light; Oh! let not ours be hard
and heavy then, If Christ's be easy; and especially in these days of our
Fasting and Prayer, Oh! let us be very careful to lift up the yoke from our
brethren as much as possibly we can without sin, Isa. 58. Isa. 58. 6. 9.
6. Is not this the Fast (says God) that I have chosen, To loose the bonds of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is not this the fast that I have chosen, that ye
break every yoke etc. and in the 9. verse, Then shall thou call, and the Lord
shall answer; Thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am: If thou take from
the midst of thee the yoke. Still mark how God urges this, when you come to
fast; Is this the Fast that I require, to do thus and thus? no says he, but to
undo the burden, and to let the oppressed go free, to break every yoke: and
again, if you shall do so, Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer;
thou shall cry, and be shall say, Here I am. God stands much upon this in the
days of our fasting, that we lay no burdens and yokes upon our brethren; but
that we do possibly what we can to take off yokes, that we may be able to
appeal to God, Lord, We should make the lives of Believers comfortable.
thou know that I do what possibly I can, and I pray that thou would
direct me to do any thing to make the lives of those that I believe to be
faithful and conscientious to be comfortable to them.

This is not to let liberty to all licentiousness and blasphemy In what things
we should bear with our brethren.
whatsoever, but when I see that such and such things are no other but that may
stand with Godliness, and godly and peaceable men may have many doubts among
them, and especially seeing I hold this now of late, and did not see it
heretofore as now I do, I will do And why.
possibly what I can with a good conscience that my brethren may enjoy thy
Ordinances in what liberty thou will afford unto them, this savours like the
Spirit of a Christian indeed.

And likewise you that are Governors, seeing God account; Use. To Magistrates
and Governors of families.
it his Glory to take off the yoke from his people, Oh! be you tender toward
them that are under you; as Majestrates, so all Governors, Parents, and
Brethren, and Neighbors, not to lay too heavy yokes upon Children and
Servants; Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, and Masters they should
be gentle toward them that are under them, knowing they have also a Master,
and therefore give them what liberty may be without sin, even outward
liberty, not to keep them continually at work, but some times of recreation,
some times Times of Recreation to be permitted to servants. 1. It would drown
the memory of the superstitious Holydays. 2. It would forward the
sanctification of the Sabbath.
of refreshment, it is true, your Holy Days are taken aken away, but surely
there was no such way and means to bury them in Oblivion that they should never
be thought of again, then to have some set times for Servants, and Children to
have their recreation; It were the only way to keep the Sabbath pure, for if
they have it not in the week day, they will have it on the Sabbath, or
otherwise they will keep up that which they were wont to have in their former
Holy days. The beast must not always be plowing, sometimes the yoke must be
lifted up, and must have some refreshing. It follows. I laid meat unto them.
Expos.


Luther. I so wrought for them, as they should eat their meat Faciam eos edere
quiet. Luth.
quietly: as if he should say, You did not provide for your selves your meat, I
prepared it for you, and came and laid it before you; thus God laid meat before
them when he rained Manna from Heaven; when the Quails were he provided it.
Whence observe:

Mercies prepared, and provided for, laid before us, are to be prized: When we
come to have a mercy, I say, that did Obs. 1.
not cost us much, when it is prepared and set before us, this is to be prized.

How many of you have all your mercies prepared for you! When you go abroad
about business, now you take Use. To the Rich.
no care for provision at home in your families, you do but dress you, and go
abroad, it may be to a Sermon, or other company, and return home again; you
have your Tables spread, and find full Dishes upon your Tables without any care
of yours, it is all prepared for you. Oh! consider of the mercies of God toward
you in this thing. Whenas many poor people they are fain before they can get
bread, to be working hard to prepare food for their families, their wives and
children; but the Lord laiet meat before you. God is to be acknowledged in this.

The propriety of the word is, I made it to descend, it came down from Heaven,
it was neither too high nor too (...) a (...) descendere ferit
low, but it came just to you, fitted for you; which teaches us thus much:

In the receiving of our food, we must look up to Heaven, we are more beholden
to the Heavens than to the Earth for Obs. 2.
our bread; God is to be acknowledged, in that he satisfies the poor with
bread, yea, and that he satisfies the rich with bread; you that are the richest
of all, you are to see how it comes from Heaven; I made it to descend. I say,
our very food we should look from whence it does descend, it does descend from
Heaven; lift up thine eyes to Heaven when as thou art eating meat, be not as
the Swine under the Tree that looks downward to the Achorns, but never upwards
toward the branches of the Tree from whence the Achorns fall; but look up to
Heaven from whence thy meat and provision did descend. I took off their yoke,
and I laid meat unto them.

I made their service easy, and I made their provision comfortable. It Is quite
otherwise with many ridged and cruel Obs. 3.
Governors, they make the service of those that are under them hard, but their
provision to be very scant, quite contrary. The service of Gods people is
easy, and their Use to Hard Masters.
provision is bountiful: Now the service of your servants is hard, and your
provision is very penurious, you would have your servants to do your hard
labor, and yet provide little food for them; Oh this is a baser cruelty than
any, to put their servants to hard labor, and yet not to provide comfortably
for them for their food.

But my brethren, the main thing that I would note from hence, is;

How great the Mercies of God is to us, who has eased Use. 2.
our yoke this day, and laid meat before us too; my brethren, who would have
thought four years since, that there should be Civil Wars for almost four years
together in our Land? and such cruel bloody Wars, and so overspreading the
Kingdom as they have, and that yet we should at this day have provision so
plentiful as we have? Did not all say, even at the first year when the Wars
began, Surely things would be very scarce? many began to lay in Corn and other
provision, and we had cause enough to have feared it; but behold the
bountifulness of the love of God, that has eased our yokes, and has laid meat
before us, that the poor is satisfied with bread, there is no complainings in
our streets; we have not only our bread, but our Tables fi'ld; What difference
do you see upon the Tables of men now from that they were in former times? If a
stranger should come into this Kingdom, hearing what miserable Wars there has
been, as bloody and cruel as in any Kingdom, and yet come to see every man's
Table so filled, he could not but stand and wonder; Certainly strangers think
our condition to be far more sad in respect of provision than it is; let us not
be wanton with our plenty: we were wont to say, if we might have but Bread and
Cheese and the Gospel it were good cheer. Now my brethren we have outward food,
and the Bread of life too. What, Is this sweet, to be freed from outward
bondage, and to have meat laid before us? how sweet is it then to be freed from
spiritual bondage, and to have the food of life laid before us? yet this is our
condition. Our blessing is specially in having our spiritual yokes taken off
from us, and having the Bread of Life laid before us in a more plentiful
measure then ever we had; Was there ever a time that this City The misery of
other places, cy. mer
had so much meat laid before it for the soul as at this day? the misery of
other parts of the Kingdom is your mercy; the Lord grant that you do not loath
your Manna, and despise it, God has ways enough to cut you short.

VER. 5.
He shall not return into the Land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his
King; because they refused to return.

He shall not return.

TO give you first a short paraphrase of the words, 1.
for there is no difficulty in them, and then the Notes of Observation. It is,

As if the Prophet should say: Howsoever he thinks to help himself with ease,
to shelter himself there, yet The Text paraphrased.
he shall not, but he shall go into Captivity into Assyria, for all means that
have been used would not bring him to return. So then the Observations:

First, That which hardens men's hearts against threats in Obs. 1.
their sin, is some shifts that they have in their thoughts; let the worst come
that can be, yet I have such a relief.

My Brethren, it is a great mercy of God to take men's Use. A great mercy to be
thoroughly taken off from carnal props.
spirits off from all their vain shifts and hopes, so as to be thoroughly
convinced that there is no help in any thing, in the creature, in Heaven and
Earth, but only in my turning to God, and casting my soul down before Mercy; if
that saves me not; I am undone for ever: when the heart comes to this, (I say)
God is in a gracious and merciful way working, I see my sin, my affliction that
is upon me, and feel it, though my heart would be shifting this way and that
way, yet God has convinced me, nothing can do me good, but I am lost and
undone, what ever course I take, except I return to God, and humble my soul
before him, and seek his face, and obtain meroie from him

Secondly, He shall not return to Egypt. 2.


It was a very strange perverseness to think of this shift, to go back to
Egypt, why was not Egypt the place of his bondage, and the Egyptians still
retained their cruelty, and yet they thought of this help that they would turn
to Egypt rather than to God.

From whence the Observation is, A stout heart cares Obs. 2.
not whither it goes, rather than it will return to God. As the Prodigal will
rather go to the Swine to feed upon husks, than to his father; like some stout
children, they care not what miseries they suffer rather than they will come
and humble themselves to their parents, They will hang themselves, and drown
themselves, and seek their fortune (as they use to say) rather than be
persuaded to come in and submit themselves; No, never as long as they live,
though they die, yet they will not, and thus their hearts are stout, and while
they think they are stout against their parents they are stout against God too,
yet God has ways to bring men's stout hearts to yield.

Thirdly, A stubborn heart though God be in any way of mercy, God calling them
to ways of mercy, yet if any thing Obs. 3.
crosses them they will foolishly and desperately wish their return to their
former condition of misery. If you make any thing that God does, an argument to
a stubborn heart for duty, if it pleases him not, he will reject all that is
done for him and say, he had rather be as he was before, let me go into Egypt
again; stubborn hearts if they meet with any cross in their way, this is their
unthankfulness, that because they are vexed and crossed in some one thing they
will (I say) foolishly and desperately wish that they were in the the condition
that heretofore they have been in.

Oh! thus it is with many of us, how foolishly, how Use for England.
wickedly have we thought and said it was better with us heretofore then now,
let us return to our former condition! This is thy folly and thy desperate
wickedness; But says the text, He shall not return, though he thinks of
returning; as if the holy Ghost should say, do not please your selves to think
it is but to return to Egypt, you cannot be worse than now you are, for God
has worser things for you.

And my brethren, this is our case this day, let not us think of returning to
our former condition, certainly if we should take such a course to return to
our former condition, we should be far worse than we were before, our danger
would be far greater; this is certain, to the view of any men that have their
eyes open, that our condition Englands condition must be far worse, if it think
of returning.
in England must either be far better than it was, or far worse than it was:
There Is many say, Oh! we were thus and thus in former times, and if we were but
as we were, we should do well enough; Oh! let us not think of that, we must
certainly either be far better, or far worse than we were, for if we think of
returning it will not be to Egypt, but to Assyria, which will be worse.

The Fourth Note is this, God knows how to cross wicked Obs. 4.
men of their wills, to spoil them of their plots; they please themselves with
this and the other thing, they will do thus and thus, if they be put to this
shift then they have a second, and a third, yea, but there is a God in Heaven
that has determined otherwise.

Never were wicked men more cross in their plots than they are at this day;
They have said, that they would do thus and thus, but God has said they should
not, and they have not done it.

Now God in his Mercy crosses his people of their wills that are set upon sin;
but when the wicked are crossed upon their sin, it is, because God has other
ways to bring about greater evils to them, To bring them to Assyria. Well
then, whatsoever any man's thoughts and desires are, the Lord deliver us from
turning into Egypt again. And likewise the Lord grant the Assyrian may not be
our King. It follows. The Assyrian shall be his King.

The Lord deliver us from both, That an Assyrian may not be our King. Why an
Assyrian? why was he threatened Who the Assyrian was.
to be their King? You shall find that he was one of a cruel stout heart, an
hard heart, and a proud heart, the Assyrians were so; They were a generation of
men of cruel, proud, stout, hard-hearted men. Isa. 10. 5. Oh Isa. 10. 5. 7. 12.
Assyrian! the rod of mine anger, says God, and in the 7. verse, It is in his
heart to destroy, says God, of the King of Assyria: and in the 12. verse, When
the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem; I will
punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of
his high looks. Oh! it is a sore evil to be put under the rage of a proud and a
stout hearted man, who will set his heart against God himself, who though God A
Character of a stout heart.
fights against him, yet will stand it out, though his design is crossed yet he
will not come in, he will not give glory to God though his will cost him the
blood of many thousands, yet he goes desperately on, he regards more his own
will and lusts than the blood or lives of millions. For people to have such a
stout heart, armed with power, raised with pride, enraged with cruelty to reign
over them, how sad and dreadful condition are those in? This is that the Lord
threatens here; and why? Because they refused to return.

I beseech you observe this; says he, They shall not return to Egypt, but the
King of Assyria shall reign over them; because they refused to return. From
whence the Observation is this.

If we will not do Gods will, God will cross us of our own. Obs. 1.
They would have their will, they would return, but they shall not says God,
for they will not return to me, therefore they shall not return whither they
will themselves. God can cross us in our own wills at every turn. Foolish men
who will presume to cross God in his will, when God has them at such infinite
advantages to cross them every way in every thing! If you cross God in that he
delights in, you may expect God will cross you in that you most delight in.

Oh! when you are crossed in your minds in any thing Use.
that you have set your thoughts and heart most upon, reflect upon your own
hearts and think thus; Have not I crossed God in his mind, in that which God has
set his heart and mind upon? It Is a good way, my Brethren, to take a holy
revenge upon our selves, if we cannot get A way of holy revenge.
our hearts to work for God as they ought, not to suffer them to work for our
selves as they would.

Again, For they would not return, says God.

God is not so much displeased at our sins, as at our not returning. He does
not say, that the Assyrian should rule over Obs. 2.
them because they had sinned, but because they refused to return. It is too
much that thou have sinned, but as soon as ever thou have sinned it concerns
thee to think of returning, God expects presently as soon as ever the sin is
taken notice of, that thou should begin to return, it is dangerous to
continue in sin in the least; this aggravates thy sin dreadfully, and endangers
thy sealing up to wrath everlasting.

And then Thirdly, He refuses to return, after all means used, after all
mercies tendered, after all callings after thee, yet to Obs. 3.
stand out, this is yet worse. Not to return is evil, but to refuse to return
notwithstanding means used, mercies tendered, Oh this is fearful indeed!

Oh! lay this to heart thou convicted sinner, what offers Use, to the convicted.
of mercy has God made to thee? what calling unto mercy have thou heard,
outward calls, inward calls of the the Spirit of God. Oh! how has God called
after thee, Return, return thou Shulamite; Return, return, return thou wretched
wilful sinner, Oh come in and return, what means of all sorts have thou had to
cause thy heart to return to God, and yet stand out? think of that Scripture
in Job, 9. 4. Who has hardened himself against Job. 9. 4. to be observed by
such.
him and has prospered? What, do thou think to harden thy self against God,
and yet think to prosper? Who has hardened himself against him and has
prospered? and mark what follows; Which removes the Mountains, and they know
not; which overturneth them in his anger, which shakes the Earth out of her
place, and the Pillars thereof tremble. And yet cannot thy heart be overturned,
nor tremble? In this that thou refusest to return, thy sin is aggravated above
the sin of the Devils themselves, for we do not An obstinate sinner worse than
the Devil in some respect.
know that ever the Devils refused to return; for they were never offered
mercy, God did never offer the Devils mercy, God never sent to preach to
them, either by his Ministers, or Spirit, and to call them to return and you
shall have mercy; here is a price paid, here is a salvation for you, your sins
may be pardoned; the Devil had never such an offer, Who knows what the Devil
might do if such an offer were made to him? But now these offers are made to
thee, and thou refusest to return; Oh! return therefore, O thou sinful soul who
art wandering from God in the ways of death and destruction, give in thine
answer; as we read in Jer. 3. 22. where Jer. 3. 22. should be our example.
the Lord there calls his backsliding children, Return, ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your back slidings. Mark the answer that they give to
God, Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God. Oh! that there
An exhortation to backsliders.
might be such an answer given this day from some backsliding soul that is
turned from God! Oh poor soul! whither art thou gone? God calls this day to thy
soul, Return, return, and professes that he is willing to heal thy
backslidings, Oh! give in this answer, Oh Lord, behold we come; for thou art
the Lord our God: Oh! that some soul might return, and might refuse no longer
to return; Why wilt not thou return? God is content to return to thee, thou art
turned from God, and God in the ways of his Administrations is turned away
from thee; but mark the Promise, in Jer. 8. 4, 5. Thus says the Jer. 4. 5.
expounded.
Lord, Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return? by
then is this people of Jerusalem sliden back by a perpetual backsliding? they
hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.

Shall he turn away] Some interpret this of God: The Lord is not so turned
back, but he is ready to return; Oh! why should^^ thou backslide with a
perpetual backsliding?

And then the last Note is:

They refuse to return] The word that is translated, they (...) renuit,
fastidinit, P^el.
refused, may signify they scorned. What, talk to him of returning, tell him
of his sin against God, the greatness of his sin, and the greatness of the
danger, and the threatenings of God against his sin, he despises all these
things, these are poor things to scare children withal; Tell him of the mercies
of God in pardoning his sin, he slights all; this humiliation now for sin, this
breaking off of sinful courses, they deride the motions of them, they scorn to
return.

Scornful spirits when they are called upon in the bowels of Obs. 4.
mercy to return from their evil ways, they do not only deny returning, but
they scorn and slight what is said to them. Well, know there are some who admire
at Gods mercies, calling of them to return, who admire at mercy tendered to
them, and prize it more than all things in the world, they turn unto the Lord
with all their souls, nothing in all the world can stop them, they bless God
that ever their ears heard the call of God, calling them to return, and they
would not for ten thousand thousand worlds but they had heard Gods call, and
felt the Spirit of God working their hearts to him to return, howsoever thou
do scorn and contemn it. Thus much for the 5th Verse. It follows;

VER. 6.
And the Sword shall abide on his Cities, etc.

THey relied upon their Cities and therefore refused Expos. 1. Caepit vulg. and
Hierom. of (...) in Hiphil.
to return; but says the Lord here, The Sword shall abide on his Cities; The
old Latin has it, The Sword has begun: and Hierom in his Translation takes it
so.

If we should take it thus, we might have a hint of a very profitable
meditation.

It Is time for a people to return, when God does but where his Obs. 1.
Sword, or draw out his Sword; in Jer. 18. 7, 8. At what Jer. 18. 7, 8.
iustant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destray it; if that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil I thought to do
unto them. Oh! England.
happy had it been for us, if when the Sword begun with us we had turned from
our evil.

But we must rather take it as it is in our Books, and so the words are more
proper, for, The Sword shall abide on Expos. 2.
their Cities.

As for the evil of the Sword, that I have already opened in the latter end of
the former Chapter. But that which I here would note, is; The abiding of the
Sword upon their Cities; From whence observe; That the abiding Obs. 2.
of the Sword it is a sore Judgment. So it was here, for afterward in the
reign of Hoshea then was this Prophecy fulfilled, when Samaria was besieged
for three years together. When God threatens fearfully, he threatens the
abiding of the Sword; when he does not only threaten the Sword, but Bathing his
Sword, and being filled with blood, and made fat with fatness, and devour, and
shall be made Satiate, and made Drunk with blood. All these expressions we have
in Scripture, these six expressions, in two Scriptures you have them all. Isa.
34. 5. 6. and Isa. 34. 5. 6. Jer. ^6. 1^.
then Jer. 46. 10. Oh! this is a dreadful thing, for the Sword to abide. It
has abode long upon Germany, the Lord has been angry with them for almost
this thirty years: we think three or four years long for the abiding of the
Sword.

But if it be such a fearful judgment for the Sword to Use. Against protractors
of the War.
Abide; how vile are they that seek to prolong the abiding of the Sword upon a
people, and that for their own advantage? Oh! that is a cursed thing, these men
live upon blood, every draught they drink they drink blood, that have
endeavored the prolonging of the Sword upon this Kingdom for their private
advantages.

My Brethren, we have cause to bless God, that God The War taken by the great.
has raised up instruments for us, who have hazarded the shortening of their
own lives for the shortening of the War, who have done their work of late this
year, as The New-Model of the Army. Anno 1645, 1646.
if they took it by the great; there is a froward and envious Generation of men
that will say of some kind of men because they differ from them in somethings,
they would be glad that these troubles might continue because they might have
the more liberty. But we see that men, though of different judgments, they do
not take a course to have the trouble continue, you see how they hazard
themselves to make all the have possibly they can, and that to admiration, and
doing things in the winter season, that is not ordinarily heard of among other
Nations, and all this, that the Sword may not abide upon A blessing for those
that hasten peace.
their Country, but that peace may be hastened, so that the blessing of God be
upon such.

Again further, The Sword shall abide as long as God will have it; he that is
the Lord of Hosts, he gives the Obs. 3.
Commission to the Sword, and till he calls for his Commission back again, the
Sword it shall go on: We may think the wars may be at an end, Oh! let us look
to it that we make up our peace with God, and then we may Use for Engl.
hope it, but otherways the Lord may cause a Serpent to come out of the
Cockatrice Eg, the Lord may kindle fires otherwise than we can imagine;
therefore says God, The Sword shall abide. It may be they thought, that indeed
if the enemy come he will not stay long: Oh! but he shall abide.

I verily persuade my self, that there were many, yea, and the wisest in this
Kingdom, that did persuade themselves How men were deceived at the beginning of
this war.
at the beginning of the taking up of the Sword, that it would scarce have held
twelve months together, it was impossible to have foreseen the abiding of the
Sword so long upon us as it has. Yea, but if God gives Commission it must
abide: There Is a notable text for that in Jer. Jer. 47. 6, 7.
47. 6, 7. O thou Sword of the Lord, How long will it be ere thou be quiet? put
up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still. Mark the answer there: How
can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge? It must go on, it must
abide, seeing the Lord has given it charge.

And then, The Sword shall abide on his Cities.] Obs. A sad thing for the sword
to be in a City.


It is a sad thing for the Sword to be in the Field, but for the Sword to be in
the Cities it is sadder; for in the Cities there is the strength of the
Kingdom: when the Sword comes into the Cities, Oh! the fearful sights of houses
fired, of streets running with blood, the hideous noise of shreeking and
cryings out of women and children: I remember Joseph us in his story of the
Jewish Wars, reports of Jerusalem when the Romans came against it and took it,
Joseph de, Bello Iudaic. lib. 7, cap. 7.
that the narrow streets of the City of Jerusalem was so filled with dead
bodies, that there was no passage, and he says, That the streets ran with the
blood of men, and there were many things set on fire, that were quenched with
the blood of men and women that ran in the streets, so dreadful was the Sword
there; and the number of those that were slain, and died in that time that the
sword was stretched out against that one City, he says was, Eleven hundred
thousand, because it was that time that 1100000. slain in the siege at
Jerusalem.
the people came-up to the Passover, and then he says it was that they were
surrounded. Oh! for the Sword to come to populous Cities is very dreadful.

And the dreadfuller it is, the greater is the mercy of The mercy of God to
London all this War.
God to our City, the Lord has wholly delivered it from the Sword that it
has not come at all upon it; If the Sword should have come to this City, Oh!
it would have raged indeed: for this was the But of the malice of the
Adversaries, their fury it was reserved for this City, The Butt the enemy
aimed at.
Oh! but the Lord has protected it, it has been the City of the Lord of
Hosts, the Lord has commanded that no Army should meddle with it for hurt:
Isa. 37. 33. 34. Isa. 37. 33. 34. 35.
35. I will defend this City (says God) and I will save it for mine own sake.
Yea, it is for Gods own sake indeed that he has said to the Sword, Go through
the Land; and indeed quite through the Land except this City, and a few
Counties about it: as in Ezekiel. 14. 17. Or if I bring a Ezekiel. 14. 17.
Sword upon that Land, and say, Sword, go through the Land, etc. The Sword has
even devoured from one end of the Land to another, Jer. 25. 15. And yet this
City Jer. 25. 15.
preserved, Oh! not only preserved, but made a refuge and a succor for all the
godly party flying from the Not only preserved, but made the City of Refuge
for the kingdom.
rage of the Sword, great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in this City
preserved by the Lord, Except it had been preserved by the Lord, the Watchmen
certainly had watched in vain. It follows. And shall cousume his branches, and
devour them.

The Branches] that is, The Towns and Villages about the City; for the Cities
in a Kingdom are like the Root, Expos.
or the Body of a Tree, and the Villages or the Towns are as the Branches of
the Tree; and here is threatened both City and Branches.

And this City has been as a great Body of a Tree that has sent out juice,
and sap, and succor to all the Towns and Villages in the Kingdom. When the
Sword is upon the City there is little hope that the Villages shall escape,
Isa. 14. 31. Howl, O gaie; Cry O City, thou whole Palestina Isa. 14. 31.
art dissolved. When the City cries, then whole Palestina is dissolved; no
mervail then though there has been such This the cause why London has been so
aimed at.
plotting in this City, by making divisions, besides other treacherous and
villainous ways, to spoil this City, to bring the Sword upon it, What laboring
has there been to betray us, one plot upon another, as soon as one is broke
presently another, and all against this City? Oh! what a pleasant sight would
it have been to our Adversaries to have seen this City in confusion, and
wallowing in its own blood! But the more there is depending upon this City,
the more careful should all that love peace, and the welfare of the Kingdom,
labor for the good of Every good patriot, ought to labor the the good of London.
this City, every one should labor for the peace of it, that it may be a
City compacted with unity within its self, that all that are godly and
faithful may join in one, that every one may bear the infirmities of his
Brother, that there may be no grating upon one another Spirits, no
exasperation, no stirrings up violence one against another, especially against
those that are gracious and peaceable. The more plotting, and falsness, and
treachery there is against this City, the more should we be faithful and
labor By prayer and all good endeavors.
for the good of it, yea, and the more should we increase our prayers for it.
You have a notable Scripture in Psalm. 55. 9. I have seen violence and strife in
the City, Psalm. 55. 9. 17. explained.
day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof, mischief also and
sorrow are in midst of it. What then? in the 17. verse, Evening, and morning,
and at noon will I pray and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice. What says
the Psalmist? I have seen violence and strife in the City, yea, and deceit and
guile do not depart from their streets. What shall I do then? Evening, and
morning, and at noon will I pray. We complain of contentions and divisions, and
strifes in the City, and that there are so many plots and treacheries against
the City; Oh! let not us only talk of these things, but increase our prayers
in the frequencie, and fervency of them, Oh! let there be no family, but let
there be praying to God in the family, Evening and Morning at least; and if you
prayed twice a day before, then thrice a day now, because of the strife in the
City, and the treachery and deceit that is here, and the Lord will hear our
voice; and he concludes the Psalm thus, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live
out half their days; but I will trust in the Lord. Let them be never so bloody
minded, and desire to imbrue the City in blood, yet says the text, The bloody
and deceiptful man shall not live out half his days: but I will trust in the
Lord. Because of their own Counsels.

The Evil, Folly and Danger of men's own Counsels, we have spoken to, in the
10th Chapter, 6th Verse, They shall be ashamed of their own Counsels. Now only
a word of that, in reference unto the abiding of the Sword upon them.

The Sword has abode upon us diverse years; the wisest amongst us did not think
the Sword would have continued so long as it has don; And yet who can tell when
there will be an end of these things?

Among other evils, certainly this evil of our own Counsels is a great evil,
that has made the Sword to abide Our own Counsels a cause of Englands lasting
war.
upon us: Every man follows his own Counsel, one man for his friend, and
another for his friend: Men's own Counsels, both in Parliament, in City, in the
Army, in the Country, throughout the Kingdom has been a great cause of the
abiding of the Sword so long a time upon us. Their own Counsels.

The old Latin has it, Shall eat up, or destroy their heads, those men that
had heads amongst them, that seemed to Expos. Com^det capita torum. Vulg.
be the wisest, the chief Heads that were the wisest and most full of Counsel,
they were the cause of the continuance of this evil upon them. So Montanus has
it, Their Counselors. And so Vatablus. Because of those that put them upon
those Counsels were the cause of the abiding Propter consilia eorum. Pagn.
Ezekiel. 11. 2.
of the Sword, in Ezekiel. 11. 2. Jaazaniah, and Pelatiah, These are men that give
evil Counsels in the City; God has an eye upon them, upon such as give evil
Counsel in the City, as the men that are causes of the evil that is upon the
City: There is nothing more useful in troublesome times, than Counsel, if set
aright; and nothing more dangerous in troublesome times, than Counsel, if it be
wrong. The Lord deliver us, both Parliament, Army, City and Kingdom from their
own Counsels; This will ever be, men will ever follow their own Counsels, till
When Parliament, Army, City, and Kingdom will give over their own Counsels. Good
intentions may be seduced.
they be taken off from their own designs, their own ends, till they can trust
God with his work, and be willing to be swallowed up in the Public.
Squint-eyed, and selvish Counsel will destroy us, if God be not infinitely
merciful unto us, yea, and it may be there are some that have good aims for
God, and yet in their Counsels they may be led aside by carnal principles: As
for instance, only in this own thing: That there is no such way for the
furtherance A false religious and State principle.
of the Kingdom of Christ, but by the corespondancy of it with the Kingdoms of
the world. Certainly this Counsel is very dangerous in such times as these are,
this principle upon which many that have good intentions do go, they desire the
furtherance of the Kingdom of Christ, they can ^ppeal to God of the sincerity
of their hearts, and their ^earts are sincere in their desires of the
furtherance of the ^ingdom of Christ, and they think this principle is a very
good one. That the best way to further it is, to do that that may stand with
peace in a way of corespondan^y with the Kingdoms of the world, it will be the
best way (...) set it up, and if they did not think that were the best ^ay to
set up the Kingdom of Christ they would not do i(...) But certainly they are
mistaken in their Counsels h^e; For as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, so he way of the promoting of the Kingdom of Christ it is not by
endeavoring the correspondencie of it with this world; God has laid the great
work of man's salvation, Gods ways not our ways
the greatest work that concerns the glory of his Name, in that which is
foolishness to men, and almost all the great works of God, especially those
that have a more immediate subservencie unto the Kingdom of his Son, he brings
those works about, not by man's counsel, but by ways and means that seems folly
to the counsels of wise men, of men carnally wise. But we come now unto the
Seventh Verse.

VER. 7.
My people are bent to backsliding, etc.

IT may be sometimes they begin to reform, but they are quickly off again, for
there is a principle of Apostasy Expos.
in them, They are bent to backsliding; If they do any thing in the way of
Reformation, it is upon some external motive; but their hearts are another way;
They are like a bough of a Tree that is bent contrary to the Nature of it, by
an external force, it may be for the present yields such a way, but there is an
inclination, a propension in the Bough to go another way, the way that its own
nature carries it unto. Thus it was often with Israel, upon some extraordinary
work of God they would do such and such things, but they were as a deceitf^l
bow that soon starts back.

My brethren, let us search our hearts; there was a great forwardness of
Reformation in the beginning of Application, 1. (...) England.
the Parliament, then how did men stir? the Spirits of men did seem to be then
of another way than now thy seem to be, It appears that in many of them it was
any a spirit against those that had oppressed them, and a (...)umphing Why some
were (...)* w(...) at the beginning of this Reformation.
and rejoicing in having their wills upon them, and in the novelty of change of
things, but their hearts remain as carnal, drossie, and vain as ever, and
therefore when men's wills were a little satisfied, and they saw that the godly
people of the Land began to rejoice, hoping Why they started off again.
that now there should be a greater freedom for, and countenance of the
Religious party than ever, and finding that there were some difficulties in the
work of Reformation, and that thereby their lusts should be curbed, they should
not have that licentiousness in their sinful ways as before, upon this their
hearts are bent to backsliding, that is, they fall off from the godly people
of the Land, that they formerly closed with, and seemed much to rejoice in, now
their hearts are against them as much as ever they were with them, yea, their
hearts do vex, and fret at any Liberties they may possibly enjoy, or at any
work of Reformation that is begun. Thus it is in the public, men's hearts are
bent to backsliding.

And privately for the particular, men's hearts are 2. Private and particular
persons.
bent to backsliding from the ways of godliness that they began to profess, as
thus, Many young ones, and others, who have had workings on their hearts, and
have made Why these start back.
great profession of Religion, yet not having their hearts changed.

First, Gods ways have been unsuitable to them, and 1.
therefore have been hard and tedious to them.

Secondly, Other things they have had a greater mind 2
to, only they have been kept from them by the strength of conviction and
external motives.

But upon that they have grown weary of the ways of 3
God, that is a third degree, weary of them.

Yea, Fourthly, They have watched all advantages how they might get off from
what they have made profession 4
of.

Yea, Fifthly, They have been sorry that they have engaged 5
themselves so much as they did.

Yea, Sixthly, Any Objections against such ways, they 6.
greedily embrace, and diligently improve.

Yea, Seventhly, They are very ready to take any offense. 7


Yea, Eighthly, They watch for offenses. 8.


And Ninthly, Any Opinion that will give them a liberty from that straitness
they made profession of before, 9.
they are willing to embrace and entertain; if there be any practice that may
give them any more liberty, they fall presently to it, and so they come to
backslide. Now their actural backslidings are but a fruit of the bent of their
spirits, their spirits were bent to backsliding before, and what they do now is
but a fruit of the inward bent of their spirits. Let such know, that if they
have no need of the ways of godliness, the ways of godliness Admonition to
such.
have no need of them; the ways of godliness shall be justified and honored,
when they shall perish and be swept often as filth and dung from the face of the
earth. I Will leave only that Scripture with them, in Heb. 10. 38. If any man
draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

But I find the reading of these words [bent to back-sliding] (...) Suspenst
sunt. Calv. Par^us.
very various, and indeed the Hebrew does seem to countenance diverse readings;
and Calvin he does read it, and Pareus, and others of our later Writers,
Suspenst sunt, they are as men in suspense, hanging as it were in suspense; for
so the word translated [Bent] it is a word that signifies a propension to a
thing; and they turn it, Men that are in suspense; and so the Septuagints
translation, They are a people in suspense: and it is very proper to (...). 70.
the Hebrew word here to translate it thus, They are a people in suspense. Now
then, If the translation of the word be thus, which is for ought I know as
suitable, or rather more than the other, why then there are these two things
mainly in it.

First, They are in suspense; that is, They being in straits know not what to
do, I find in Deuteronomy. 28. 66. [Thy life shall hang in doubt before thee.] The
same word that here is translated [Bent] it is there [Hanging in doubt] and
that makes me the rather think that this Interpretation may set out the mind of
the holy Ghost in this Scripture; so then the meaning must be this.

They see themselves in a sad condition that they In suspense here what.
know not which way to turn themselves, they see their plots take not, their
designs prosper not, they see God is out against them, they would fain fall upon
new plots, but they see as great an unlikelihood to prosper in their new plots,
as in the former, what the Issue of them may be they know not, thus they are in
suspense, and in doubt not knowing which way to turn themselves.

And blessed be God that has put our adversaries in Applicat. to England.
suspense, and doubt: This is a judgment of God upon men who cannot trust God
in his right and holy ways, they must have ways of their own, they follow
their own counsels. and these counsels of their own insnares them, and brings
them into most miserable straights that they know not how to extricate
themselves. God makes the ways of the righteous plain to them, But the
counsels of men's hearts brings them into straights. They thought to deal more
wisely for themselves, but the truth is, their counsels in which their wisdom
was much applauded, brings them into most miserable straights and extremities,
that they know not what to do.

And then Secondly, Luther has a very good interpretation of this, he reads
the words thus: My people does Populus meus dubitat au velit redire ad me Luth.
doubt whether they would turn to me or no; thus he reads it, and interperets
it thus, They see they profit not in their way, their Consciences misgive them,
they have some thoughts of returning to me, sometimes they are persuaded it is
best for them to return, but the corruption of their own hearts stirs up
Temptations, Temptations present themselves to them, so they are off and on,
they know not what to do, they give many onsets, but they came not off freely,
my people do doubt and hang in suspense and do not come off freely to my way.

And this is according to the Populus men's haesitat se convertere ad Legemmeam.
Chald. Paraphrase.
Chaldae Paraphrase, They have plots, thus they do doubt to Convert themselves
to my Law. There are rowlings of their thoughts, this way, and that way, but
they are in doubt and come not to a full resolution.

Now my Brethren, This is a great evil, for men to strive Obs.
with their consciences. When their consciences puts them upon the ways of
God, they think, There is good in The conflict of conscience and corruption.
Gods ways, they think that God is not well pleased in the ways that they are
in, they think it might be very well if they did reform their way; yea, but
then on the other side, there comes in temptations, I but there are such
difficulties in the way, I shall discountenance such and such great ones, I
shall have opposition by such and such, in that they will be displeased, I
shall hazard my self, and the like, I must deny my self in many things, I must
go against the hair in these and these things, I must cross my heart in such
things that my heart is strongly bent upon, why may I not do well enough in
some other way without so much trouble to my self? And thus their hearts reason
within them, and yet again at other times they have serious thoughts begin to
work, and their consciences begin to stir again, but have not I to deal with a
holy and glorious God? how if things shall prove otherwise than they are
apprehended by me? what good will it do to me to cozen my own soul? were it not
better for me to return? [Oh! that I could but tell how to speak this day to
such as are perhaps yet in suspense, it may be there are some here this day
that are in suspense in their own thoughts, they cannot be quiet in that way
that now they are in, when they awake in the night season their consciences
trouble them, and yet when they come abroad among company then that carries
them away again, and thus their lives do as it were hang in suspense, and are
vexed and troubled in their own thoughts, not knowing what to do; Oh! that I
could (I say) speak to these hearts this day, that I could but tell how to
present some determining thoughts to such as these that are in this suspense:
I Will but in a few words present four or five Meditations to such that may help
them to determine, to come to a determination; for the truth is, This is the
cause almost of all the wickedness of such as Suspense a cause of much evil.
live under the means, that have enlightened consciences, They do not come to a
full determination: If thou be in suspense, let me cast into the scale these
thoughts.

First, These stirrings that are now upon thee, that Considerations tending to
settle the unresolved about the ways of God.
put thee thus to oppose the ways of sin, and to bring thee so far as to be in
suspense, know, they are the work of the holy Ghost in thee, take heed of
sinning against the holy Ghost; I do not say, that all going against such
stirrings and workings is, The sin, that unpardonable sin; but this I say, the
sinning against those stirrings and workings of thy conscience is A sin against
the holy Ghost, take heed of sinning against the good Spirit of God; The holy
Ghost has begun to conceive in thee, take heed thou do not destroy the
child in the womb. We know it is murder to destroy a child in the womb, when it
is but Simile.
beginning to be conceived; And thou that art in this suspense, thou have a
conception of the holy Ghost in thee; take heed of murdering of it.

Secondly, If the Spirit of God leaves thee after this, thou will be more
hardened than ever; let this be in thy thoughts; Thou have stirrings of
conscience, and some propension to the ways of God, but yet thy corruptions
hang off, look to thy self while these workings of God are upon thee, if they
leave thee, they will leave thy heart harder than ever it was.

And then Thirdly, Take this Meditation, When thou art about matters of
infinite consequence (as now thou art) certainly, the safest way is the best
way; it is not enough for thee to say, it is necessary, and why must I do thus
and thus? and what need it? and may not I do well enough without it? But when
thou art reasoning about matters that concern Eternity, though thou can not
fully satisfy thy self in this, or the other way, yet to take the safest way
is the best way, and that thou art upon the safest way, it is enough to
countervail what ever trouble thou meetest withal; Though it should not be
absolutely necessary that thou should take such a course in such a
particular, yet if thy conscience does but dictate to thee, that this way is
safer than the other; it is the best way to go the safest way.

And the Fourth Meditation is this, That there is more evil in the least sin,
than there can be good in whatsoever all the Creatures in the world can tender
to thee Resolve upon this: this is a certain principle that cannot be denied:
There is more evil in the least sin, than there can be good in all that all the
Creatures in the world can tender to thee.

And then Fifthly, That it is best for me to do that now, which I would wish I
had done if I were now to die. Put that Meditation into the scale; Art thou in
suspense, hanging this way or that way, whether fully to come off of those
ways of sin that thou art upon, or no? Put this Fifth thing into the scale, It
is best for me now to do that that I would wish I had done if I were now to
die: This will be a mighty thing to weigh down abundance of temptations that may
be put into the other scale; and so thou may come to a determination. They
are in suspense.

The old Latin reads it, My People they hang in a kind of hope that I will
return, and that all may be well with them at Populus meus pendebit ad reditum
meum (i. e. pendulus sperabit) vulg. Montanus.
last; that though they do thus and thus, yet all may be well with them at
last: God has often delivered them out of great afflictions, and why may not
he deliver them still? And so they hang in expectation of Gods coming to them.
So they make the word that is here translated, [Backsliding] to be a returning,
a returning of God, [They would have me to return first] And so I confess the
word has something in it that signifies Returning: But those that are skilful
in the tongues say, It is not used in a good sense, but in an evil; it is rather
a going from, than a returning. But yet, as the old Latin has it, The hope for
Gods returning, and that things may be well, is the cause of the hardening of
many hearts in the ways of sin; they hang as it were in the Air, thinking that
it may be well with them, and that things may not prove so bad as they hear:
But cursed is that hope of comfort that has nothing else to ground upon, but
only, that it may be things are not so bad as they hear out of the Word. But it
follows; Though they called them to the most High, yet none at all would exalt
him.

Though they called them] That is, The Prophets and Expos.
Messengers of God called them unto the most High, they wanted not means in the
Ministry of the Word, they were called to the Most High, that is, to God. Now
that God is The Most High, we have spoken to in Chap. 7. Verse. 16. there he
has the title of THE MOST HIGH. You who are highest, look upon God as above
you, know that God looks upon you, and all men that are lifted up in the pride
of their own hearts, as infinitely below him.

God is the most high: Well, but, They called them out unto the most high; that
is, They called them in the Ministry of the Word.

First, That they might know him, that is, the most high, that they might know
him to be the Infinite, Supreme, High, Glorious, Majesty, that they might know
the infinite distance that there is between God and the Creature, and that they
might know him to be the Highest end of all things, so as to work after him as
the most high.

Then Secondly, That they might acknowledge him, 2
that they might thus fear him, that they might worship him, that they might
love him, and trust in him, as the most high God.

That they might submit their wills to him whose will is supreme above all, and
especially in matters of worship. 3.


They called them to the most high, that they might come to have this high God
to be theirs, to enjoy him to 4.
be their portion; thus the Prophets called them to the most high. Whereas
their hearts were d^ossie, and low, and base, they minded only the satisfying
of their flesh, and having their wills one upon another, their hearts hung down
to their devised worship, though the thing it was suitable to their public
ends, and it was great wisdom for them so to do, yet God would not own that,
but did despise that worship of theirs that they thought to honor him withal,
and the Prophets therefore called them from these base, drossie things, called
them to the most high God. The Note of Observation.

First, Men's hearts they sink down to low and mean things naturally; unworthy
of their souls, unworthy of that Obs. 1.
excellent nature that they are endued withal: men indeed have swelling hearts
in their base sinful way, but this is their disease (this swelling) I say the
heart of man wants a true elevating principle, the knowledge of the most high
would raise them up higher than their pride Piety raises the heart more than
pride.
can do, the pride of man raises man's heart, yea, but that is their disease; but
the knowledge of the most high would raise them up higher than their pride: but
sin wheresoever it is it does debase man's nature.

Secondly, It Is the end of the Ministry of the Word, to call Obs. 2.
men to the most high God, to call after men that have their hearts grovelling
after low and base things, that they might come up to the most high God, to
know him, to fear him, to worship him, and to enjoy the most high God to be
their portion. Have not you found this fruit of the Ministry of the Word in
your hearts, calling you many a time to the most high God? Have not those
things sounded in your ears, that have called you from vain things that your
hearts were upon, telling you of the high God that you have to deal withal in
all your ways, who will have to deal with you to all eternity? I make no
question but many of your consciences have found this, have found a word darted
into your hearts that has called you from low base things to the high and
blessed God.

And then Thirdly, It is a great and a sore evil to stop our Obs. 3.
ears against the calls to the most high God, against the calls of the word
that calls you to the most high God; I say, to stop our ears against this is a
sore and a dreadful evil. What, not answer to Gods call! Does God call you, and
you not answer to him? We say to a child, Your father calls you, or to a
servant, your master calls you, will you not answer? Oh! to shut our ears
against the call to the most high Simile.
God is a dreadful thing, it will lie heavy upon thee one day, those calls
thou hadest in thine ears will prove to be terrors in thine heart; Certainly,
though thou let go the calls of the Word to the most high God, remember
this one Note, The calls that thou hadest to the high God being neglected by
thee, will prove terrors in thine heart; poor creature, what is it that thou
listens to? what invitations does take thy heart, that the calling to the most
high cannot overcome thee?

And then Fourthly: Their hearts are in suspense, though they called them to
the most high. From the connection of these two we have this Note.

That the calling to the most high God is a special means to cause Obs. 4.
those that are in a suspense, to come in to a full resolution. In Psalm. 97. 9.
Thou Lord art high above all the earth, thou art Psa. 97. 9, 10. illustrated.
exalted far above all Gods. What follows in the 10. verse? Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil. God is a high God above all Gods, hate evil then, set your
selves against evil, be resolved in the ways of God, for when you are called
to the most high, by this you come to see how infinitely worthy God is of all
glory from you, you may see by this what infinite good there is in this God,
and that there is infinite power in this God to avenge himself of you, if you
neglect his call, therefore there is a mighty deal of force to cause
resolution. In the 7. of Acts, we have a notable speech of Stephen concerning
Abraham. Abraham was called from his fathers house, and it cannot be imagined
but that Abraham had many thoughts to keep his Abraham's example.
heart in suspense, when he was called from his kindred, and all the contentment
and comfort he had there, it is impossible but flesh and blood would suggest
many thoughts to Abraham to keep his heart in suspense: But what took Abraham's
heart off from suspense, to resolve fully what to do in such a case? the text
says, The God of Glory appeared Act. 7. 2. observed.
to him; it was not only God, but the God of Glory. My Brethren, when God is
calling you off from all Creature comforts, from all things that may quiet your
hearts in the world, and you have strong temptations to keep you in the ways
of sin, let but the God of Glory appear to you, and this will take up your
hearts, this will bring your hearts to a full resolution. Oh! blessed, blessed
are those souls though they have continued long in suspense, yet at length the
God of Glory appears to them, in the midst of their doubts, and temptations,
and hangings off.

And if there be such a force in this, then learn to present Use.
before thy soul that is in such a suspense, the Glory of the great God, look
up to this great God, it is the infinite high God that I am called to; Oh! thou
suspending, thou wavering soul, look up to this most high, and answer this call
of God unto himself, answer it thus;

Oh Lord, Thou art an Infinite, Blessed, Glorious Being, the Supreme Being of
all; I am a poor, vile worm that A form of Answering to Gods call.
lie under thy feet, it is mercy that thou will vouchsafe to look toward me;
thou might have let me gone on in base ways, and perished to all eternity
without giving me any call to thy self; but now that thou should give me a
call to thy self, the high and glorious blessed Lord, this is mercy; Lord, I
come, and with fear and trembling fall down before thee saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Those who have been wavering and afterward settled they
have found that this has Note.
been the thing that has settled them, some dreadful authority of the high God
that has come to their hearts in some truth beyond what formerly he has done,
and this has fully taken off their souls to him.

And then Fifthly; The true Worship of God is an elevating Obs. 5.
thing. Then are they called to the most high when they are called to the true
Worship of God, for it raises the soul to the most high. Men's inventions are
low things, are base and unworthy things, Oh consider whether thou find this
in the Worship of God? do thou find thy soul raised up to the most high in
his Worship? thou do never worship God aright, except thou find in some
measure thy soul raised up to the most high in his Worship; let no man look
upon the Worship of God as a low mean thing; know, when thou art to come to
worship God, thou have now to deal with the high God, whom Angels worship and
adore; it is that God who is far above all Creatures in Heaven and Earth: thus
thou art to look upon the Worship of God. Oh! how far are most men from this
when they are worshipping of God! very few there are that lift up their hearts
to the most high; even in the duties of Worship. And so it follows in the
words, None at all would exalt him.

Why, If God be the most high God, how can he be Quest.
exalted?

I answer: He is so high, as he cannot be more high Answ.
than Himself, God cannot be more excellent than he is in Himself, God cannot
make Himself better than He is, nor more glorious in Himself than He is:
Therefore no creature can make him more than he is: all that all the Creatures
in Heaven and Earth can do for God, can ad nothing to him: In Nehem. 9. 5. He
is exalted (says the text) above all blessing and praise.

Yet then God accounts Himself to be exalted.

First, When he is known and acknowledged for the When we exalt God.
High, Supreme, First being of all things, when we fear Him as a God, when we
humble our selves before him as before a God, when we are sensible of the
infinite distance there is between him and us, when we are willing to lay down
what we are, or have, or can do for the furtherance of his praise, when his
Will is made the Rule of all our ways, and especially of his Worship, when we
make him the last end of all, when it is the great care of our souls, and work
of our lives to do what possibly we can that he might be magnified and lifted
up in the world, and when we account the least sin a greater evil than can be
recompensed by all the good that Heaven and Earth can afford unto us; and now
God accounts Himself exalted by us. And this is the Work that all of us have to
do; to give up our selves to the exalting of the Name of this blessed Note.
God; He is worthy, so worthy of honor from us creatures, that though ten
thousand millions of Men and Angels should perish eternally for the furtherance
of the least degree of his honor, he is worthy of it all, so high is this God,
and therefore know it to be our work to endeavor in our places to exalt him,
and blessed is that man or woman that when they are to die are able to say, Oh
Lord, thou have been high in my heart, thy Wisdom The comfort of a dying person.
I have adored, and submitted mine unto it, thy Will I have honored, and
yielded mine likewise to it, and it has been the great care of my soul that I
might do something in my place to lift up thy Name according as I have been
able; I say, thou may go out of the world in peace as having done in some
measure that thou came into the world for.

Oh! you whom God has exalted, let it be your care An Exhortation; 1 To great
men. 2 To the Saints. How God has exalted the Saints: 1. 2 3 4 5 6. 7
to exalt this God; and especially the Saints of the Lord, know God has
exalted you on high, and expects that you should lift up his Name; he has
lifted up you out of the depth of misery, from the nethermost Hell, he has
joined you to his Son, he has made you one with his Son, He has loved you
with the same love wherewith he loves his Son, he has made you Heirs,
Coheirs with his own Son, he has given his Angels to be ministering Spirits to
you, he has made it his great design to honor himself in your eternal good,
the greatest work that God has to do in the world it is the honoring himself
in your Glory; he has prepared a Crown of glory for you; Oh then, do you join
together to exalt the Name of this God who has lifted up you who were such
poor vile worms, let the high praises of this God be in your hearts and mouths
for ever; in Psalm. 108. 4. Thy Psa. 108. 4. 5. noted.
mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the Clouds; mark
what follows in the 5. verse, Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens, and
thy Glory above all the Earth: Oh Lord, we see thy mercy is exalted above the
Heavens, and thy truth to the Clouds: then Lord be thou exalted above the
Heavens, that is in our hearts, and in our lives; Oh! that God may be exalted,
in an answerable way above the Heavens in what we do for Him, as He has been
exalted above the Heavens in what he has done for us; let us all exalt Gods
Name: he will be exalted in spite of your hearts.

My brethren, God has exalted Himself of late in our eyes, in a glorious
manner, in Psalm. 21. 13. Be thou exalted, Also Psa. 21. 13.
O Lord, in thine own strength; Oh the Lord has exalted Himself in His own
strength: but mark what follows; So will we sing and praise thy Power: Oh! let
us sing and praise the power of God, who has exalted Himself in his own
strength, and for the good of his own people so of late. But none would exalt
him (says the text.)

God has little honor in the world; men seek to exalt Obs. God has little
honor in the world.
themselves, but none to exalt God; every man follows his own way, his own
lusts, but the blessed and glorious God is exalted by few, or none. Men will
appear to lift up Antichrist, to exalt him; the Kings of the Earth they will
give their power to the Beast, but none will exalt the Lord. Oh! let this
grieve the hearts of the Saints, to see that the blessed God, so blessed in
their eyes should be exalted by so few.

And consider, every one of you, how little he has Use.
been exalted by you in all your ways. And why should you vex and fret that
you have not honor and respect, when as the blessed God who is so infinitely
worthy of honor and glory, yet none (almost) respects Him. Well, let this be
the Meditation from it; The less glory I see God have from the children of men,
the more let me labor to honor him.

None would exalt him] So the words are read in your Books, and I think that is
the most proper sense. Yet I find Luther has another reading, and so others,
and that Luthers reading of the Text. Nemo erigeret se. Alij: ne unus qui se
erigeret. (...). (...)
might likewise stand with the Original; for if you observe the words [him] is
not there: But it may be (says Luther) there is none that lifts up himself;
he, and others turns it thus: That Is thus, Men are in a sleepy, sullen mood,
that when God calls them, they will not stir up themselves to listen to Gods
Call; and so Luther makes use of this similitude: As a stuborn servant, or
child when the master calls him, he will not stir and lift up himself Simile.
to his call; There Is none will lift up themselves; drossie, base, drousie
spirits, that are sleepy and sink down to base, low things, they will not lift
up themselves when they are called to the most high God.

It Is a great evil to give way to a dead, dull, and sullen heart, Obs. A
drousie spirit, a great evil to nourish it.
not to lift up our selves when God calls. When you come to the Ministry of the
Word, you come with hearts dead and sinking down with discouragements: Now when
God calls, you should stir and lift up your hearts to close with those Truths of
God that do concern you; and it is a great evil in many, when they hear
excellent Truths that might do them good, yet they do not lift up their hearts
to close with those Truths.

And now we come to the Eighth Verse, which is a Verse very full; and if in
any, you will give me liberty a little to enlarge in that Verse.

VER. 8.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall
I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together.

HEre, according to Luther, ends the Eleventh Chapter, and the Twelfth begins
at the next Verse.

For the words themselves, we have not a more full expression of pathetical
Affections of Mercy and Compassion in God, in all the Book of (...) than here;

How shall I give thee up?

I beseech you observe; God was in the midst of his threatenings of Judgment,
and charging of them with their sin: says he, The Sword shall abide upon their
Cities, and consume their branches: because of their own Counsels. And when
they were called to the most high God, yet none would exalt him: How! not one
would com in! What would follow? One would think, Now let wrath pursue them,
let the curse of the Almighty overtake them, one would wonder that it did not;
but mark a greater wonder, that after the charging of them for this wickedness,
and in the midst of Gods threatenings of the most dreadful judgments to consume
them by the Sword, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim, etc?

The Lord here takes upon Him (as it were) the person of a loving Father
toward a stubborn and rebellious Expos. general.
child, the child has gone away from the Father, and has continued in slout
ways, It may be the Father sends after it, it will not come, it will not
return, but goes on stubornly, the Father has many workings in his heart to
cast it off; he shall never be a penny the better for me, let him beg his bread
from door to door, he is unnatural to me; yea, but when he is in the midst of
these resolutions, and has these sad thoughts toward the child, yet there
comes a turning of his bowels on a sudden, Oh! but how shall I give it up? how
shall I disinherit it? how shall I do it? It is my child, though stuborn, why
may it not return? why may not yet God work good upon it; It Is very evil, but
how shall I give it up? I know not how in the world to bring my heart to it.
Thus the Lord breaks out here. Here we have in your books four [Hows] How shall
I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make
thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? I confess in the Hebrew there
are but two, but yet for the sense of it the Interpreters put in the other, and
they have the sense of four, How? How? How? How shall I do it? there are four
Interogations here, and four Answers. Four Pathetical Interogations that God
asks as it were Himself. Analysis of the Text.


First, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? Secondly, How shall I deliver thee,
Israel? Thirdly. How shall I make thee as Admah? Fourthly, How shall I s^t thee
as Zeboim?
God is here Interogating Himself in these four Interogatories that come from
his own bowels.

And here are four Answers to these, As thus;

First, Mine heart is turned within me. Secondly, My repentings are kindled
together. Thirdly, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger. Fourthly, I
will not return to destroy Ephraim. These are the Four Answers; and the Last
Answer has Two Arguments.
First, I am God, and not Man. Secondly, The holy One in the midst of thee.
Now what the force of the Arguments are, we shall see when we come to them.
But first to give you the brief The Text paraphrased
opening of the words in a way of paraphrase, and then the several Doctrinal
Notes from them.

First, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? Or as some Expos. in partic. 1.
(...). Al. (...). Simile.
others read it, What shall I do to thee?

I am as it were at a stand what to do; as the Father that has the rod in his
hand comes to correct, and lets the rod fall out of his hand, his affections
work so strongly;

What shall I do? As if God should say, Oh! were there but any repentings, were
they but ever so little, I would be glad of it, I would take any little
repentings, could I but tell how to vindicate mine honor any other way, I would
do it; Oh! what shall I do? It is your foolish, wilful stubornness, going on in
such a vile, finful way that puts God to such a stand; What shall I do? God
seems here to have his heart troubled in him, much like that in Exodus 33. 5.
when God was offended with the people Exodus 33. 5. Noted
there, says he, Put off thine ornaments, that I may know what to do with
thee. It Is a strange expression: as if he should say, come and fast, and pray,
put off your ornaments, and humble your selves before me, that I may know what
to do to you: Oh! why may there not be some hope? put off your ornaments, if
there be but any repentings and turning to me.

Or if you take it as it is in your books, How shall I give thee up? Then the
scope is thus: Thou art upon the very brink of destruction, wrath and misery
it is prepared for thee, thou art in the very mouth of ruin, It Is nothing but
only a giving thee up and thou art undone, wrath and misery stand waiting only
for my giving thee up, Oh! but how shall I do it? I see thee upon the very
brink of ruin, thy very neck upon the block, and thou now waitest for my giving
up, but I cannot tell how to find in my heart, How shall I do it? How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim?

Oh! here was a strong argument that moved the bowels of God. Ephraim, if thou
were indeed the refuse of Ephraim.
the world; I would not so much care for many thousand of them, but thou art
Ephraim, Thou art my deer child, Ephraim, my deer son, you know what God says
in Jer. 31. about the 18. verse. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee, Israel?

As if he should say, Justice calls for thee, that I would deliver thee up to
him, thou art called for to be delivered up to Justice, Justice plead, that
thou art her due; but, How shall I do it? How shall I do it? How shall I
deliver thee? It goes much against me to do it.

The Septuagint they turn the words,

How shall I protect thee? So the old Latin. (...) 68 70. Protegam. Vulg. a
(...) tradidit (...) ^lypeus (...) protexit (...) a


And the mistake comes from a little difference in the Hebrew word, so that the
same radical letters in the Hebrew word that is for [delivering] signifies a
[Shield] likewise, To protect as with a shield. And therefore they translate it
so, How shall I protect thee? but that comes to the same, thus: How shall I
protect such a one as thou art? How shall it be for mine honor that thou
should be under my protection? Men indeed do abuse their power they have, to
give protection to others, you know there has been a great abuse since the
Parliament begun by protections that have been given to others, but says he,
How shall I do it? that is, I who am a holy and infinite God, how shall I
protect such a one as thou art? How shall I protect thee, Israel?

Israel, here is another argument indeed; Israel, I remember Israel.
thy Father, I remember that mighty Prince who wrastled with me and prevailed,
and I account it my glory to be the glory of Israel, and his seed: What, art
thou the posterity of Israel, of such a one so deer to me, and such a Prince
that heretofore prevailed with me in prayer? What, art thou his posterity? Oh!
how shall I deliver thee up, Israel? Oh when God looks upon them he sees them
sinful and wretched, but when he looks upon what they were in reference to
their forefathers, How shall I give thee up, Israel?

How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim?

Admah and Zeboim, they were the names of two Cities, that were two of the five
Cities that were together with Sodom and Gomorah; now four of these five Cities
were destroyed by fire from Heaven, for the wickedness of them, and one of them
only was spared for Lot's sake. But this Admah and Zeboim were two of the
Cities that the judgments of God was most terrible upon; the Apostle Jude in
his Epistle, the 7. verse, says, That they did suffer the vengance of eternal
fire. Now says God here, The truth is, you have provoked me as much as Admah
and Zeboim have done, their sins were not greater than yours, and there is as
great wrath that belongs to you as to them, but oh! how shall I do it? how
shall I make thee as Admah and Zeboim? how is it possible for me to find in my
heart to yield to do it?

Hierom upon the place does move this Question. Why does he mention Admah and
Zeboim, and not Sodom and Ieroms Quest. on the place.
Gomorah?

The Answer that he gives is this, That Judab, those His Answer.
Tribes they are compared in their sin to Sodom and Gomorah, in Isa. 1. and
Ezekiel 16: for Judah had more means Sodoma and Gomorah principes fuerunt in
peccato, Adama and Zeboim earum exempla sectala sunt.
than Israel had, Judah had the Temple with them, and therefore their sin was
the more aggravated. Sodom and Gomorah they were the chief sinners; and Admah
and Zeboim they did but as it were follow them, (so he) And by following their
example they came to inwrap themselves in the same Judgments, but yet
altogether their sin was not like Sodoms and Gomorahs, therefore Judah that had
more means is compared to Sodom and Gomorah; and the ten Tribes, to Admah and
Zeboim. My heart is turned within me.

Luther has a Note upon this, according to his usual way in expressing the
Grace of God to the height, says Luth. Expos. Cor inversum, Cor concitatum ira
propter peccata h^minum, non sit verum Dei cor verum Dei cor quod afficitur
malis nostris quod ardet commiseratione
he, It Is as if it were, that the heart that is stirred with anger for the sins
of men, were not the true heart of God, and therefore says he, My heart is
turned to me, mine own heart; now I have my own heart indeed when I have
thoughts of peace; when I had thoughts of wrath that was not as it were mine
own heart, suitable to that expression we have in Scripture, That God calls his
execution of Jugment, his strange work. So that is Gods own heart that is
affected with our evil, and that does even turn with mercy toward us; so mine
heart is come to me says God, as if it were gone before.

But, My heart is turned within me.

The meaning is this; As when a man's heart is much The Authors
affected in love and compassion, there is the working of the Spirits and blood
round about the heart, and mighty motions and stirrings in the heart. So says
God, Me thinks I find all the blood as it were, and my spirits so working and
stirred, that I find my heart even turning up and down within me when I come to
the execution of wrath. And then, My repentings are kindled together.

It is a very notable phrase, Here, by [Repentings] I take is meant those
thoughts of God by which he came to Expos.
do such things as men do in their repentings.

My repentings together] That is, All the thoughts that I could (as it were)
possibly muster up, that could be mustered up together for to turn my heart
from the ways of Truth to the ways of Mercy, they are all come up together to
me (says God) and being all joined together, they make a fire, and have set my
heart on fire; As a company of brands being laid together make a great flame;
so all those thoughts that possibly may be any means to work my heart to good
to this people, they are all presented together, and being come and joined all
together in one, they set my heart even of a flame, and mightily are stirring
in my heart.

Oh! this is the goodness of God to his people, to have all things that any way
may be a motive to do good to his people, to come up all together before God,
all in one, and when they come in one there to make a fire in the very bosom of
God, all the reasonings as it were of my heart being joined together for them
have kindled a fire, so that I cannot hold, but I must needs vent my self thus,
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?

But you will say, Why does God express himself thus? God might without any more
ado pardon, and help, or deliver, why should he express himself in this manner?

It Is the Answer of Mr. Calvin here, He does accommodate Accommodat so ruditati
nostrae. Calv.
himself (says he) to our rudeness; God who disdained not to take man's nature
upon him, disdained not to act in the person of a man, who being much wronged,
is reasoning in himself what to do, his heart is full of pity, his bowels yern,
and he would fain find a way for mercy; and when provocation of execution comes
in in his mind, it is as a dagger to his heart. Oh! how shall I do this?

As if you would imagine any merciful man in the world Simile.
that were put to a straight, would fain have a way for mercy to save a
wretched sinner: God takes upon him the person (as it were) of this man, and
says, How shall I do it? God does (as it were) in this bring Mercy and Justice
both together, to plead the Case, both against, and for Ephraim.

Justice comes in and pleads, Lord, their Sins are great and many, their
Mercies have been great, their Means The plea of Justice.
that they have had has been exceeding much, thou have been exceeding much,
thou have been patient a long time toward them, and this has been abused,
their hearts are still hardened, thy Name is blasphemed because of them. These
Arguments come up against them. But now there comes up Arguments for them.

I, but than Mercy steps up and pleads, But Lord, art The plea of Mercy.
not thou a God: thou art a God: These actions indeed may overcome men, but
shall they overcome thee?

[And this is Ephraim.] Are not they thy People? are they not in relation to
thee? are they not in Covenant with thee? Spare them Lord for their for fathers
sake, for Abraham's sake, for Isreal's sake, who was so mighty with thee;
remember Lord the kindness of their youth, the wonders that thou have done
heretofore for them, when they were stuborn and rebellious; Lord, thou have
many of thine Elect among them, and therefore will thou utterly consume them.
Oh! when the Lord hears these prayers of Mercy on the other hand, How shall I
do it? I cannot do it. Thus you have seen the opening of the words, with the
paraphrase.

But now for the Notes. If any one of you should have The Authors Apology.
any thoughts that I do not briefly pass over this Scriptur in an Expository
way, I may even answer you, How shall I do it? It were a very great burden upon
one, to meddle with such Scriptures as these are, in an Auditory that does
desire to have something spoken to their hearts, and merely to pass it over in
a mere Expository way; therefore for the Notes, the first Observation is this,

The greatness of man's sin, hinders not the work of the bowels Obs. 1.
of God toward them.

There was none exalted him, but they followed their own Counsels and did what
they list, yet, how shall I give thee up? (this from the Connection.) I will
give you an instance, and that is a very famous one as we have in all the book
of God. What sins were greater than the sins of Jerusalem against Christ when
he lived? and yet Christ Jerusalem's exsample noted.
looks on Jerusalem, and weeps over it; weeps over it, when he considered of
the destruction of it. Yea, and mark, Though Jerusalem were guilty of the Blood
of Christ, took away the very Life of Christ; yet when Christ was risen again,
one of the first things that Christ does in the 24. of Luke, 47. when he was
going there to Emaus, Christ says, That Repentance, and Remission of sins was
to be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
Repentance, and remission of sins preached to all Nations: Oh! but surely
Jerusalem must be left, Jerusalem that did slay the Prophets, and was so
injurious, yea, Jerusalem that put Jesus Christ to death: though all Nation
should have Repentance, and Remission of sins preached to them, yet one would
think Jerusalem now should be excepted; No says Christ, beginning at Jerusalem,
Jerusalem shall be the first place where I Will have preached Repentance and
Remission of sins, even that Jerusalem that took away my life, I Will have
preached Repentance and Remission of sins there in the very first place of all,
Oh! Gods mercies are beyond man's iniquities.

My brethren, If the bowels of Gods mercies shall work toward us,
notwithstanding our great sins, why should Use. 1.
not the bowels of our compassions work toward our Brethren, notwithstanding
their infirmities? why should we upon every little discontent cast off all pity
and love to our Brethren? What, such great things in us, and yet moves not God
to cast us off, but still, How shall I cast thee off? Oh! when you look upon
your Brethren that once your hearts did close withal, and that were as your own
souls, and if now you should be any instruments of evil to them, you should
have such reasonings as this, How shall I do it? I see infirmities in them, I,
but notwithstanding my great sins, God says of me, How shall I give thee up?

And then Secondly, Why should great afflictions for God hinder your hearts
working to him, seeing great sins against 2.
God does not hinder Gods heart yerning to you? Why should any great
afflictions for God hinder your hearts working twards him? Surely if God will
he merciful to us notwithstanding our sins, we should go on in the ways of
obedience to him notwithstanding any afflictions that we meet withal for our
obedience.

Again, a Second Note is this: Sinners are at the very mouth of misery, the
brink of destruction when they think not of Obs. 2.
it, there is nothing but giving of them up.

And then Thirdly, It Is nothing but Gods free mercy that Obs. 3.
keeps us from being destroyed; le's the Lords mercy that we are not consumed.

In the Fourth place, Sin puts God to a stand; How shall Obs. 4.
I do it? It brings disorder into the world; God must set his infinite wisdom on
work to bring thing about to his own glory, sin has brought disorder and
confusion; Now says God, I must set mind infinite wisdom on work to bring
glory out of this confusion. If God has any good intentions to thee, know,
they sin lays such difficulties in Gods way to find out a way for thee, as
puts him to a kind of stand, as thus, For God to find out a way that all the
wrong that sin has done to him should The incompossibility of satisfaction and
salvation, puts God to the highest exercise of his wisdom.
be made up, and yet thy soul should be saved, it is the hardest thing in the
world: Thou can commit sin easily, but (I say) when the sin is committed, for
God then to find out a way that all that wrong that is done to him should be
made up (as it must be, for otherwise all the disorder will not be brought into
order) and yet thy soul saved, it is the hardest thing in the world; and were
not God, a God infinite in wisdom, it would put him so to it, as he were never
able to find out a way. God does seem as it were to be at a stand, How shall I
do to save these sinners, and yet not to wrong my self? Oh! this should humble
us for our sins: As if a child should do so much evil as to bring himself into
such briars and Simile.
troubles, as that his tender father being affected with his sad condition
would fain help him, but if he does help him, he is put to abundance of
difficulties for the helping of him, and he is fain to beat his brains, and
study ways and means how he shall come to save this his child from utter
undoing; now if the child has any ingenuity in him, he will not only think,
it is no great matter, so be it I be delivered, Oh! but this will break his
heart, Oh! what troubles have I brought my father into? It is thus with us in
reference to God, if we look upon God thus as personating a man.

And then in the Fifth place, The salvation of a sinner Obs. 5.
it breaks through a great many reasonings and workings of Gods heart.

How shall I do it, says God? We little think what reasonings there are
between Mercy and Justice about our lives, about our souls many times, could we
but hear what reasonings there are in Heaven between Mercy and Justice about
our lives, Oh! it would go to our hearts: The great salvation that comes by
Christ, it was not determined without many reasonings between Mercy and
Justice, there was presented to God whatsoever Justice could say, and what ever
mercy could say; What (says God) must my son be under my wrath for the
satisfying of Justice, and be made a Curse? yet this must be, Justice requires
satisfaction, How can it be done without the Son of God being made a Curse for
man's sin? these kind of reasonings there are in the heart of God for saving of
man's soul; in 1 Samuel 16. 8. we read of Abishai, and 1 Samuel 16. 8.
David's reasoning the case about Saul's life; says Abishai to David, God has
delivered thine enemy into thine hand Simile.
this day: now therefore let me smite him, etc. No, says David, do not smite
him, do not destroy him, and thus they reasoned one with another; Saul was in a
very ill case when there was that reasoning about his life; such a case are we
in many times, the Justice and Mercy of God does reason about our lives, and
souls, Oh! how do we depend upon God for our lives and souls? and if we be
saved, we are saved through many reasonings.

But the main Point of all is this, That according to the relation that a
people, a sinful people, or persons have unto God, Obs. 6.
So God finds it a difficult thing to execute wrath upon them.

How shall I do it? The wrath of God is many times brought to the birth, and
God cannot as it were (to speak after the manner of men) know how to put
strength to it to bring it forth. This is the reason that in Scripture we have
such sending after sinners, and crying to them, to return, such earnest wishes,
Oh! that they would return! and such pleadings with them, They will not come
in, and return; This is the reason why we read of the Lord whetting his Sword,
and bending his Bow, and preparing his Arrows.

Why, is not God ready at any time to execute judgment upon a sinner? Quest.


Oh no, he will be whetting, and bending, and preparing, Answ.
and all because it is a work that he is loath to go through withal (as it were)
and this is the reason why God will not stir up his wrath, or if it be stirred
up, he will call it back again. Lament. 3. 33. The Lord afflicts not willingly;
neither does he grieve the children of men; and all this is, because Gods
nature is to be merciful, mercy pleases The Reason.
him, and the Lord does perfectly foresee, and has perfectly in his view all
the reasons that might move him to mercy. As now thus: These are the things
that makes God to be at a stand when he comes to execute judgment upon a
people, or persons that have relation to him, where his Name is professed, and
where himself is Other Reasons.
worshipped.

First, This reason is presented, The many prayers of the 1. Prayrs of the
Saints.
Saints withstand against justice. Justice must break through all the prayers
of all the Saints of God that are in such places; and this is not an easy
matter; we account it not an easy matter for to break through a mighty Army;
God cannot come to a people that he is related to, and is worshipped by, but
that he must break through an Army, Simile.
the Army of the prayers of his people; now says God, How shall I do it? Oh!
it is a mighty Army that is between me and them.

Yea, Secondly, The Lord looks upon such a place 2. The little ones.
with pity, Because of the many children and little ones that there are in such
a place, yea, the children of his own people. You know when God was about
destroying of Neniveh, he looked upon the many thousands that knew not the
difference between the right hand or the left. But when God comes to destroy a
Kingdom that does worship him, he looks upon those many infants, and the little
ones, and sees them many of the posterity of his Servants; As they are but
littles ones that moves his bowels, they have not been guilty of those sins
that their parents have been guilty of, and they are the little ones of mine
own precious Servants, many of them, How shall I destroy this place, even for
their sakes?

Thirdly, God considers that he has but little worship in 3. Few worshipers.
the world, there are but few in the world that do worship him at all; and
though it is true, there are such mixtures in worship here, as in respect of
that I cannot accept of what they have done, yet it is somewhat that I am
worshipped, there are very few in the world that own me to worship me at all.

Fourthly, If ever God has been honored in such a Kingdom 4 Former service to
God.
by his Saints, either by their doing or suffering, the Lord regards all this
when he is about to draw out the Sword of judgment. It Is true thinks God, there
are but few that honor me now, but there are many of my Servants that have done
much, and suffered much, how many have I that have stood out to witness for me,
and my truth? Certainly my Brethren, the Lord in saving any Kingdom when the
Kingdom is in danger, if it be a place that he has been honored in, and that
his people have suffered much there for his Names sake, then he remembers it;
and there is not a louder argument next to the blood of Jesus Christ, in the
ears of God to save a place from ruin, than the blood of his people that have
been shed for him; and therefore such a place is beholding to all that have
suffered for God.

Fifthly, He accounts what number of his Saints are there: 5 A remnant of
Saints.
There are yet some of them left; And would I have saved Sodom if there were
but ten righteous persons? Now I Will reckon how many I have, not ten, or an
hundred, but (it may be) God shall find thousands of righteous persons; now the
blood of my Son that pleads for them, and therefore how shall I give them up?

Sixthly, I foresee the miseries they would endure, Oh! 6. Groans of the
afflicted.
the very cries are in mine ears already, if I should deliver them up into the
hand of their enemies, Oh! the extremity they would endure, how would they be
plundered of all they have, put into prison, put to miserable torments! Oh!
what shreekings and cries would there be, even from my people that would
worship me! And me thinks (...) ears are filled already with their cries
beforehand. Many times when we speak of the sorrows and miseries of people,
before they come we are a little affected with them, but when we are
eyewitnesses of the miseries of people; as if any of you have seen the woeful
miseries of those that have been under the power of the adversaries, then your
hearts would be affected indeed: but now all the miseries that they should
endure are present before God, as if they were now in real being, and
therefore, How shall I give them up? And that is the sixth thing that puts God
thus to a stand, that makes it hard for him to give up a people that are any
way related to him.

Seventhly, The Lord sees how the adversaries would insult; 7 Insulting of the
Adversary
If I should deliver them, they will not honor me, they will blaspheme, they
will scorn at their prayers, and fastings, and at all their trusting in God,
and at their good cause, and what is become of your good cause, and of your
pretending to God, so much as you have done? Now the Lord foresees these
blasphemies and insultings of the proud adversaries, how they will triumph, and
tread upon his Saints as dirt under their feet.

Eighthly, There are many of mine elect ones that are to 8 Elect in the loins
of their parents.
come out of their loins, and therefore though I do not preserve the Kingdom
for their own sakes, yet for those elect ones that comes out of their loins; If
I should deliver them up to the rage of the enemy, then the line of my election
would even be cut asunder, and therefore, How can I give them up? I shall wrong
my self in this thing, in cutting asunder even the very thread of election in
giving them up.

Ninthly, If my wrath and justice must be satissied, let it 9 Other objects of
wrath.
run out upon others, who will set the briars and thorns before me that I may
go through them and burn them up together.

Tenthly, If my Saints be afflicted, it will be my affliction; 10. Gods own
affliction.
It Is true, they will suffer very much, but in an their afflictions I must be
afflicted too; I foresee what afflictions it will be to mine own Soul.

Eleventhly, I am bound to fetch good out of all their evils. 11 God makes
himself work
Suppose I should give them up, yea, but then I must work for mine own glory,
and fetch out good from all their snfferings; And will it not be as easy for
me to be patient toward them, as to work good from their sufferings when they
are given up? God reasons in this manner.

Twelfthly, If I destroy them, what glory shall I have? I 12. Justice glorified
by others
shall have the glory of my Justice; I, but it will be but passively: And will
that be much, to have the glory of Justice in a passive way? I have enough in
Hell to glorify my Justice in a passive way.

Yea, Lastly, Why may not Mercy yet work upon their hearts? 13. Mercy may
convert.
Who knows but if ye I continue the Gospel amongst them, and deliver them from
those great straights that now they are in, who knows but their hearts may be
turned unto me?

Oh! my brethren, I make no question, but at this day Application to England.
all these reasonings have been in the heart of God, concerning England. When
we have been at the very pits brink, the Lord has been often saying even
concerning England, How shall I give thee up England? how shall I make thee as
Admah? and set thee as Zeboim? mine heart it turned within me, my repentings
are kindled together. At that time when Forces were raised (before the
Parliament) Instances of the workings of Gods heart toward Engl.
against our Brethren of Scotland, then said the Lord, How shall I give thee
up? And then at Edgehill, and at Brainford, and at Newbery, and Marston-more,
and Nazeby-fight, we were at every one of them even at the delivering up to the
rage of the Enemy; and then comes in these reasonings of the heart of God, Oh!
how shall I make them as other people, as Germany, and other people? besides
others in former times, as in 88. and the Pouder-Treason; I say, there have
been the workings of the bowels of God toward us, a poor, wretched and sinful
people. And let us now learn to acknowledge whence our preservation is; It is
not from this man, and the other man, so much as from the reasonings of the
heart of God thus for good unto us.

Hence let us learn what to do when any temptation Obs. 7. For the resisting of
temptation to sin, imitate God in the Text.
comes to any sin: What, is it thus with God? does God say when we are in
danger of being destroyed, how shall I do this? Then when any temptation comes
to us to sin against God, Oh let us say, How shall I do this, and sin against
God? As Joseph (you know) it was his reasoning, when he had as fit an
opportunity to fin as almost a man could have had, with his Mistress, yet
presently comes there this reasoning in his heart, How shall I do this, and fin
against God? Oh! there is reason it should be so with us, when God has fit
opportunities to destroy us, there comes the reasoning of Gods mercy into his
heart; so when we have our temptations to sin, there should com these
reasonings into our hearts, Oh! how shall I do this, and sin against the Lord
our God? Let us present al these reasonings to our souls. Men will gather
reasonings for their sin: and so we should gather all the reasons that possibly
we can against our sins. It were well my brethren, if men after they have
sinned would say, Oh, what have I done? But it is better if men before they have
sinned would say, How shall I do it? Oh! certainly our mind: are very barren
that we have not upon every occasion when a temptation comes, reasonings to
move us against it; Indeed after a sin is committed, men then can think of this
reasoning, and the other reasoning, Oh! if God should thus deal with us, First
deliver us up and and destroy us, and then God should think of this and God
reasons before, not after our evils are upon us.
that what might have been to have preserved us, it would have been ill for us;
therefore God, just when the danger comes for our ruin, then he thinks of all
that might keep off ruin from us: And so when the temptation to a sin comes
then should we think of all things that might keep us from this sin. How shall
I give thee up Ephraim, etc.

The last Exercise we opened unto you this verse, and made some Observations
from it; to proceed now: The next Note is this,

It is not the Image of God in any man to be prone to wrath, to delight in
wrath, to be sudden in, the execution of anger; when Obs. 8. Proneness to
wrath, not Gods Image.
God comes to execute anger he cannot do it, but he must have a how shall I do
it? before he does it, he must make a stop: proneness to anger, suddenness to
let out wrath, it is not the Image of God in any man or woman.

When any of you are about to do any thing, especially against your Brethren,
against those that you have Use.
relation to, be not over passionate, reason the Case first in thine own heart,
How shall I do this? True, I think such and such they are in the wrong, but
what good will come of it if I do thus and thus? Are they not those that I have
had sweet converse with, and experience of their godliness? would it not be
more for the honor of God if I did forbear? will any good come to the public?
shall not I rather serve the designs of the enemies with such sharpness and
bitterness? will they not laugh and scorn at Religion? Oh! How shall I do this?
Oh! when we have workings in our own thoughts as bitter as gall, if before we
vent them, we would but put this to our selves, how shall I do this? with
presenting all the arguments that possibly we can to stop it, much good would
come of it.

Yea, Ministers when they are to preach, when they Ministers should be wary in
using tartness.
have prepared to deliver something, yet if there will be any tartness in it,
they should think, how should I do this? what may come of it? I may vent my
self, but what good may come of it? what glory to God? what good to the Church?
We should make many pauses, and many stops to our anger. As sometimes when you
are traveling abroad in the Country, you come upon some Simile.
steep hill, you shall find that the Country men they lay here and there in
several places something to stop the Current of the water, for otherwise it
would gore too much, if it should run down swiftly, but when it has some stop
it does not do so much hurt: Oh! how does the anger of men gore deep; why?
because it runs headily, and violently down, and it has nothing to stop it.
Men in anger they are very full of thoughts, and resolutions, and continually
all the reasonings of the hearts of men and women in their anger tend to
nothing else but to heat their hearts more, all their thoughts work that way,
till their hearts are made fiery hot, and so they burst out and cannot stay,
they muse upon nothing else but that that may further their anger and
displeasure: And The effects of Anger.
those that are barren enough in their thoughts otherwise, yet are very quick
in invention, and witty for the letting out of anger and wrath. But this would
be your wisdom had you the Image of God prevailing in you, when you find anger
stirring in your bosom, you would rather muster up reasons that may allay your
anger, that may qualify it, you would muse upon those things that may serve to
be a stop to it for the present, as God does here: Oh! did men but do so, say,
How shall I do this? what peace and quiet might we have among us!

A Ninth Observation is this; you see when God, though he threatened very
sorely, and charges deeply, yet, How shall I do this? He reasons in his own
heart for ways of mercy toward his people. The Note from it is this;

Here we have encouragement, plentiful encouragement to come Obs. 9.
Encouragement to Prayer and Faith.
to God in prayer in seeking mercy, notwithstanding our wretchedness, and
sinfulness, yea, encouragement for believing, This Scripture may be a mighty
help to faith in our prayers, seeking of our resting upon God, as thus, What,
does God find it hard to him to execute wrath, does God muster up all arguments
that may be to stop his anger, and how he may manifest goodness and mercy? why
then if thou have any arguments to plead with God for mercy, thou may come
up with boldness, and freedom to him, he is ready to receive it, for thou
bring unto him that which is exceedingly suitable to him, suitable to his very
heart, thou bring matter to him that is agreeable to what his heart is set
upon; what, do thou apprehend the displeasure of God out against thee, or
against the Land where God has any relation? have thou any arguments at all in
prayer to plead with God, For so God gives his Creature leave to plead with him
as if he were a man; Oh! come (I say) with a free spirit, come cheerfully, come
with encouragement, for thou come now to do that which Gods heart is full of;
If so be that a man could know the thoughts of other men, know what thoughts
their spirits are most full of, and could come at that time and suggest
thoughts unto them suitable to what their thoughts are upon, what entertainment
would they have, why surely, when poor sinners (if they be penitent sinners)
shall come to God and suggest any arguments for mercy, I say thou do suggest
that which the heart of God was full of, and exceedingly suitable to it, The
same thing that thou pleadest, mercy is pleading already, and mercy carries on
those arguments with a great deal more strength than thou art able to do, but
it takes it well at thy hand to present any to it, Thou art loath to perish, and
God is as loath thou should perish, if God give thee a heart to come to him
to stop wrath, thou come to him to do a work exceeding acceptable to him,
it is as acceptable to God, such a work, as it can be acceptable unto thee: when
thou apprehendest Judgment ready to be executed, look up to mercy, Advice when
the blow is coming
it may (...) the holy Ghost may raise an act of faith, and this act of faith
will set bowels on work, the bowels of God are very ready to work; That which
is very ready to work, a little thing will set it on work; I say, Gods bowels
are very ready to work in the ways of grace and mercy toward sinners, and the
least act of faith in that mercy, would certainly set bowels on work a main:
Mercy calls thee to help, Mercy has been pleading a great while, and Justice
pleading; Mercy calls thee in to help, and assist her to plead for thee, and
who knows but the casting voice stays for thy coming in, though The casting
voice, Prayer.
there has been pleadings in Gods heart, yet the dispensations of God may be
such as the casting voice shall not come till thy pleadings be come in, and
then the business may be determined as it was here.

The Tenth Observation is this, Oh consider the different Obs. 10.
dealings of the Father with his Son; let our Meditations be raised from this,
Does the bowels of God thus work toward poor sinners, pleading for them when
wrath is ready to be executed, then we may here see the great difference
between Gods dealings with his Saints, and with his Son. When God comes to
deliver his people, these that he had relation to, where he had some of his
Saints, and for their sakes he speaks this, he says, How shall I deliver thee?
We do not find that God said so concerning his Son, God did deliver up his Son
unto wrath without a How shall I do it, yea, the Heart of God was in it,
there is no such expression of reluctancie about this work, but the Scripture
says that it pleased God to bruise him; It pleased him well, it was an act
that pleased God to bruise his Son: Indeed it was for glorious ends that he had
in it; why so? God might have ends enough for to bring forth his glory in our
bruising; but yet notwithstanding any ends that he might bring about, he says,
How shall I do it? God does not delight to grieve the children of men, but God
did grieve his Son, he bruised him, and it pleased him to bruise him. You shall
find such an expression in Isa. 53. and in Psalm. 40. In the volumn Isa. 53.
of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will: It was the will of
God that Christ should come and suffer what he did; when Ephraim was bemoaning
himself, Gods bowels were troubled within him, he does let the rod fall out of
his hand, in Jer. 31. 19, 20. When Ephraim Jer. 31. 19, 20
was bemoaning himself; mark how Gods bowels there works, but the Scripture
says That God did not spare his Son; God would spare Ephraim; Jesus Christ did
bemoan himself when he cried out, If it be possible, let this Cup pass from me:
and, Oh God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh what a bemoaning of himself
was this! and yet in Rom 8. 32. God spared not his own Son, he did not spare
with Romans 8. 32.
him, notwithstanding all the moans that he made unto him, but he delivered him
up. Here we read of the repentings of God that are kindled, and diverse times
in Scripture of Gods repenting of the execution of Justice upon sinners, but
when he speaks of Chist, I have made him a Priest for ever, that is, so as he
should be a Sacrifice, both the Priest to offer, and the Sacrifice its self, in
Heb. 7. 21. The Lord swear, and will not repent: Oh certainly it was from this
work of God, the delivering up of his Son, that the Lord has such working of
bowels toward sinners when wrath comes to be executed, to say, How shall I
give thee up?

Yet further, If the heart of God does thus work toward sinners when they are
ready to be given up, yea toward those that are very evil, for so these were,
Their hearts bent to backsliding; Hence then we may learn.

That the State of the Saints that walk close with God must needs be very
secure; If the Lord deals thus with rebellious Obs. 11.
Sons, what will he do with a Son that serves him, that walks close with him?
though a Son very vile, very sinful, yet there is a how shall I give thee up?
Oh then, thou whose conscience witnesses of thy sincere endeavor in walking
close with God continually, know that thy estate must needs be secure.

Yea further, if this be so, Surely whenever God delivers Obs. 12.
up his own people to any judgments, there is some great matter in it; some
great matter in it, for never does any affliction come unto them, but it breaks
through many reasonings of Gods heart, God intends some great matter; Does
judgment begin at the house of God? It is because the Lord has some great
intents to bring forth, it is not because the Lord takes pleasure in the moans
of his people, in the sorrows and sufferings of his Servants, but it is because
he intends some great things; for certainly these bowels of compassion would
not let such sore and grievous evils pass, if there were not some great ends
and purposes of God to bring about.

And yet further, hence observe, The difference between Obs. 13.
the day of patience, and the times of wrath: for the sakes of those that were
godly here, Gods patience speaks thus toward the body of the People, and so
was patient and long-suffering toward them. There is a time that God wile
laugh at the destruction of sinners, and he will mock when their fear comes,
when he will execute his wrath, and be comforted as the Scripture speaks: There
is a time indeed when God says, How shall I give them up? but there is another
time wherein God does give forth the wine of his wrath, The Wine, it does
delight the Lord as Wine does unto a man, when indignation shall Rev. 14. 10.
illustrated.
be as Wine to God, then mercy and patience shall hold their peace, for they
have then their glory already, they will never speak more, but turn over the
sinner unto Justice, yea, pleads unto Justice against the sinner.

And then lastly, Seeing that God comes off thus, when he Obs. 14.
is about the letting out of wrath, making such stops as he does, then surely
we should not hasten Judgment against our selves; but let us make use of these
dealings of God for the breaking of our hearts, and causing them to return unto
him; let not us assist Justice to our own destruction, seeing Mercy pleads (as
it were) against the execution of it, let us take heed of new provocations,
when God is about the letting out of his wrath, let not us pull it upon our own
heads, seeing God keeps off, and forbears, let not us hasten it (I say) and pull
it upon our own heads. If Sodom Note.
had but known Gods reasonings with Abraham in the behalf of it, one would have
thought it might have broke the very hearts of Sodom. And let us consider of
the reasonings of God in this, and lay them to our hearts for the breaking of
our hearts, and think thus with our selves, Lord, why should it be so hard with
thee to deliver me up, when it is so easy with me to sin against thee? there is
no pleadings has stopped me in the course of my sin, the Word has pleaded,
Conscience has often pleaded, but I have not been stopped in the course of my
sin; Oh! why should any pleadings stop thee in the course of thy wrath? The
Lord cause such kind of workings to be in our hearts for the breaking of them,
Considering, that indeed it is through the pleadings of Mercy that any of us
are alive, that we are out of the nethermost Hell. And thus much for those
words, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? It
follows; How shall I make thee as Admah, and set thee as Zeboim?

I opened the words the last day, what is meant by Admah and Zeboim, the two
Cities that were near to Sodom and Gomorah, that were destroyed in the same
destruction.

The Notes of Observation follow.

First, That Gods people may be in danger of as sore and great Obs. 1
evils as the vilest and worst of men, their sin may have such agravations upon
them, as may make them liable for the present in this world to as sore and
great evils as the worst of mankind. For indeed, the aggravations of the sins
of the Saints are such as makes their sins, if God should deal with them
according to a Covenant of Works, and not in a Covenant of Grace, their
condition would be sadder than the most wicked and vile: In Amos, 9. 7. says
God there, Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto me? You have had
(indeed) deliverances, and so have they, And are you not unto me as the
children of the Ethiopians? What are you better than the children of the
Ethiopians unto me, if I should look upon you as in your selves; Therefore in
Isa. 1. 10. The Princes of Judah are called the Princes of Sodom; and the
people, the people of Gomorah: And in Lament. 4. 6. The punishment of the
iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin
of Sodom. Ezekiel. 16. 48. As I live, says the Lord, Sodom thy sister has not
done, she, nor her daughters, as thou have done, thou, and thy daughters. [As I
live] God swears to Note.
it, that Sodom was not guilty of such great sins.

You will say, Yea, but we are delivered from such evils, Object.
by being under another Covenant.

Yea, but that should not at al hinder the work of your Answ.
humiliation, but rather further it, considering what you are in your selves.

Secondly, When sinners are at the worst, and the nearest Obs. 2.
Judgment, yet bowels of mercy are working toward them, when they do deserve
to be as Admah and Zeboim, even then. This Note rises from hence: but we had it
also from the dependence of the words.

Thirdly, Those that have relation to God have a great privilege Obs. 3.
that others have not: Thus: As if God should say, Let Admah and Zeboim perish
if they will, let Fire and Brimstone come from Heaven, and Eternal Fire pursue
them, what care I for Admah and Zeboim: But how shall I make thee as Admah and
Zeboim? Oh! I know not how to find in my heart to make thee so. Those that have
relation to God have a great privilege that others have not; God disposes his
Mercies as he pleases.

It may be some of you think that your sins are not so Use of Admonition.
great, or not greater than the sins of others, and therefore you may escape as
well as they. No, you may mistake in that, God may save some that are guilty of
greater sins than you, and yet damn you, damn you for sins less than the other.
Gods mercy is his own; If God will destroy Admah and Zeboim eternally; who can
say against Gods dealings with them? But, how shall I make thee as Admah and
Zeboim? God knows how to make a difference between man and man. Let no man
presume, and say, Because others commit as great sins as I, I may escape as well
as they; No, thou reckonest in this without thine Host; God may make a great
difference between his dealingswith them, and with thee, and do thee no wrong
neither; for the mercies of God are his own.

Fourthly, Seeing God is loath to make his people like to others, Obs. 4.
like to the wicked and reprobates in punishments, let not them make themselves
like to them in sin. Does God put a difference between Reprobates and his
People in punishment? Oh! let the Saints then labor to put a difference between
themselves and such as are of the world in matter of sin, let that be no
argument to them, Such and such do thus, and why may not I do so ^oo? that is no
argument with God; I have destroyed such and such, and why may not I destroy
thee? that argument will not prevail with God. Thou committest such a sin, and I
have some in Hell that I sent thither for the same sin: but this argument
prevails not with God: Oh! let not such an argument prevail with thee, that
because such and such sin, therefore I will venture too.

A Fifth Note is, Though God be never so inclined to mercy, Obs. 5.
yet this does not hide from his eyes the sins of his own people, he still sees
them, he sees what they are in themselves, and he sees what would become of
them if they were left to themselves: Now I am in a way of mercy toward you,
yet I look upon you now as such as have deserved to be as Admah and Zeboim, do
not think that because my mercy works toward you, that therefore your sins are
not before my eyes, I know your iniquities, and yet am gracious and merciful.

And is it so? Neither then should the hope, or encouragement Use. Direction.
of mercy from God hide our sins from us: As the thoughts of Gods mercies to us
do not hide our sins from him, so our hope of mercy from God should not hide
our sins from our own eyes, but at the same time when we think of the greatest
mercy, yet we should look upon our selves as the most wretched, miserable,
forlorn Creatures in our selves. It follows. My heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together.

The word here translated [Turned] it signifies some great stirring, some
change into another condition. And (...)
that expression of God here, My heart is turned, it is not Expos. 1.
only to note, (according as I see several Interpreters go) that God does
change the sentence of his wrath, yet without any change in Gods Nature, for
the same God working upon diverse objects, works in a diverse way without any
change in himself, so that though there were those things that might have
produced wrath, and reasoning for it, and (God speaking after the manner of men
as it were) inclinations to it, yet upon such considerations it should not be,
and though this would be a change in man, yet God is infinitely above us, and we
are not able to know his Nature, this is without any change in him.

But I think the words besides that, it specially has another 2. The Authors.
scope, and that is to note the strong affections (as it were) in God, for so
in all this we must speak of him after the manner of men, to note the strong
affections that there were in the heart of God; as now, We know that strong
affections in us, whether they be affections of Love, or of Joy, or of Anger,
They carry the heart along with them, and cause very strong motions in the
heart. I Will give you one Scripture that has this very phrase, that will show
you the meaning is not, Turned within me, that is, in a way of change so much;
as to note strong motions that there are in the heart of God toward sinners:
Lam. 1. 20. there the Church is lamenting for her sin, and expressing the
mighty workings of heart that she did feel in her self by reason of her sin,
and of her affliction, and you have there the same expression that you have
here: I am in distress, my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me.
The meaning is not there, that I am changed in my heart, so as I am turned from
my sin; But, My heart is turned within me, that is, I find a mighty moving in
my heart through the mighty workings of it, and the strong affections of my
heart, (as we say sometimes) You make my heart to leap in my belly, or pant, or
ach within me. Any kind of strong affections makes strong stirrings in the
heart. So it is here, My heart is turned within me, I find mighty strong motions
and stirrings in my heart.

The Notes.

First, When there are strong movings of the heart of a penitent after God,
such an one may be very well encouraged to come Obs. 1.
to God, for there are strong motions in Gods heart after him. My heart is
turned, there are mighty strong movings in my heart for mercy to you, do you
find such movings in your hearts as you never were acquainted withal before?
before your hearts lay dead, and dull, and nothing would stir your hearts; and
now you find your hearts mightily stirring and working; Does your hearts work
strongly toward God? be encouraged in those stirrings, there are as strong
stirrings in Gods heart toward sinners.

And then secondly, Let arguments to obedience for God cause stirrings in our
hearts; let them not lie dead and dull Obs. 2.
in us: As Arguments for mercy, Oh! how stirring are they in Gods heart! If any
argument for mercy toward finners be propounded, the heart of God mightily
stirs, Oh! what arguments do you meet withal coming from the Word many times,
that one would think might work upon the heart of a Devil to draw to obedience,
and yet your hearts lie dead, and dull under all those powerful arguments, Oh!
how unsuitable are your hearts to God! Do you expect that Gods heart should work
strongly toward you to do you good, and yet nothing stir in you?

And then Thirdly, My heart turned within me; we Obs. 3.
must not cast out wholly the sense that is given of it; Turned in respect of
the revoking of the sentence.

The Note is: When we have resolutions, strong resolutions to that that is evil,
let us not think it too much to have our hearts turned, to recall our thoughts,
and our determinations, and our strong inclinations: Many times men have strong
resolutions to a thing, and they see arguments that might turn them, but only
this, They have resolved, and they are loath to change their thoughts and
resolutions: Oh! take heed of this, for God expresses himself after the manner
of men, there have been many times strong resolutions to have destroyed thee
eternally, but the Lord does that which man would do when he changes his
resolutions, though there be no change in Gods Nature; and he would by
expressing himself after this manner to us, hold forth this Note, That we
should take heed we stand not upon our resolutions when there are arguments to
the contrary, but be willing to have it known that now we are otherwise than
before we were. My repentings are kindled together.

Surely God repents not as man does. But you know the answer of Divines; viz.
That his administrations are such as if he did repent: But the word here
translated Repenting, comes from (...) (...) Consolat poenituit, etc. (...)
root that signifies as well Comfort, as Repentance, noting that Repentance and
Comfort are very near a kin one to another: as the Hebrews express Sin, and
Punishment with the same word; so they express Repentance and Comfort with the
same word.

My Repentings are kindled. My bowels yern within me; so that expression you
have in Genesis 43. 30. Joseph's bowels did yern within him. And 1 Kings, 9. 26.
The mother of the child when she saw it would be cut pieces, her bowels yerned;
the word yerned there, is the same here with kindled, her bowels kindled within
her, she found a heat in her bowels. They are kindled [together.]

Whatsoever might cause any Repentings, they all come together, they lie
glowing at the heart. The Notes Expos.
are these Three,

First, Here Is mighty encouragement for prayer; when we Obs. 1
present arguments to God for mercy, to think, that those arguments we present,
and all other that possibly may be presented they lie glowing at Gods heart,
they lie glowing warm at the heart of God; they are not only before God, but
there they lie as a company of sticks that are gotten together and so glow and
are ready to flame out; so all considerations that any way may serve to do good
unto the Saints, they do lie glowing at the heart of God altogether. It may be
sometimes we come in prayer, alas we are straightned in our own bowels, perhaps
we cannot express our selves, it may be but in one or two particulars we are
able to express, and that which comes out of our hearts comes very cold; but
when we are straigtned in our own bowels, and can express but little for our
selves, and if we see such as belongs to Gods Covenant, we must know that all
considerations that possibly men and Angels can express, that may do thee good
they are all with God, and are in a heat in Gods heart. I do not know such a
full expression as this is of Repentings The Text remarkable.
kindled; kindled together.

Then Secondly, Let us gather as many arguments as we Obs. 2.
can to cause repentance, and lay them together, and never leave working them
upon our hearts till we find them kindled: Surely there is all the reason for it
in the world; Does the Lord gather all together that may be for our good, and
lay them upon his heart, and there keep them to his heart till they kindle and
work powerful workings upon his heart for good to us? then, when we would
repent, (for there is reason that we should repent as well as expect that God
should for us) we should be gathering all arguments that possibly can be, and
never leave till we find them kindled and warm at our hearts.

Oh! many of you, at some times you have one argument Note.
that sticks at your hearts, and at another time there is another; at such a
time there was some one truth darted in, and it took your hearts, and you would
say as those that went to Emaus, Did not we find our hearts burn within us? so
you found Truths coming in at such a Sermon, and at another, and another; yea,
but now could you get but all those arguments that ever God did dart into you
to ways of repentance, could you but get them together, and work them upon
your hearts, and never leave till they be kindled, and be crying to God as
Elisha did, till he got fire to come from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice: Oh
Lord, my heart has a deal of waterie stuff in it that will not kindle, till
the fire of the holy Ghost come to kindle these arguments and make them to
burn; Oh! if it were with us, as David in Psalm. 39. 31. says he, While I was
musing, my heart was hot within me, and the fire burned: so we should go into
our closets and be gathering all things together that we can to work upon our
hearts, and continue mufing till we find the fire burning within us. Nay, our
hearts heat so, as to break forth with our tongues, and even to say from our
souls, Well, the Lord is God, it is he that is worthy for ever to be feared,
and honored, and served, I have lived like a base, and sinful, wretched
creature, without a God in the world, but it is the Lord that is God, that is
worthy to be honored, from my Body, and Soul, and Estate, and Name, and
Liberty, and Life, and whatsoever I am, or can do; now if it would break forth
in such a resolution, how excellent would it be? Oh! let us be humbled I
beseech you for the coldness of our hearts, that nothing can kindle there; What
a damp is there upon our spirits, that when any argument is laid it goes out
presently? We have Truths laid upon us when we come to Note.
the Word, but our dampie hearts quenches them all, they do not kindle; many
are witty enough to gather arguments for sin, and lay them upon their hearts,
and so to kindle wickedness in their hearts, as in Psalm. 41. 6. Psa. 41. 6.
Opened
you have a notable Scripture there of wicked men that came to David, They
gathered iniquity in their hearts; all things that might suit with their wicked
hearts, and for the furtherance of their ungodly ways they gathered them
together for the encouraging, and strengthening of them in their evil ways:
But it should be the care of the Saints to gather all things that might further
repentance in them; That Is the reason why wicked men are so hot in that that is
evil, They gather arguments together; and hence it is that wicked men when they
have been in wicked company they come from it so hot in their resolutions
Company heals whether evil,
to sin, Why? because they have gathered a great deal together for the heating
of their hearts in their sin; and so should the Saints when they are together
in a holy communion and fellowship, they should be gathering or good.
one from another, every one come and afford something to lay (as it were) to
kindle the fire, But how? laying their light ends together, and not their dead
ends together.

And then the Third Note is this, Our mercies to others Obs. 3.
should not be cold, but burning: Let us be merciful, as our Heavenly Father is
merciful: That is, Not only wishing good to others, but let there be kindled
mercies in our bowels, that we may not be able to keep them in. I suppose many
of you, especially of estates, have had many thoughts, that you would do this
and this for such good uses, and you see some reason why it should be so; yea,
but now, have these arguments burnt in your hearts, so as to cause you to break
forth into resolutions? Well, though I have had thoughts and inclinations to
make use of my estate thus and thus, yet I have been kept off, but now they are
kindled in my heart, and I am resolved upon it. Thus it was with God; and let
it be so with you. And thus much for the Eighth Verse. The Ninth follows.

VER. 9.
I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger. I will not execute the
[burning] of mine anger (so the words are) (...)


It Is true, your sins, and arguments against you did Expos.
lie at my heart, and did even burn it; but I will not execute that, I will
execute the kindling of my mercy, but not the kindling of mine anger. Mark the
several phrases, Bowels was kindled in way of mercy, and Wrath was kindled,
there was burning Wrath, and burning Mercy, but that which prevails, It is, the
burning Mercy, that prevails, I will not execute the burning of mine anger;
why? For I have kindlings of mercy in my bowels.

But how was this true? Was not Israel carried into Quest.
captivity, and continued there many years, and never yet returned again (as
some think) and when they were carried into captivity for three years together,
there was a siege at the City, and yet God says here, He will not execute the
sierceness of his anger?

For the Answer: That which before was said, will Answ.
give sufficient answer to it, How shall I make thee as Admah, and Zeboim? that
is, though God did suffer them to be carried away captive, and their enemies
prevailed against them, yet he did not make them as Admah and Zeboim though:
There was not the fierceness of Gods anger, the Burning of the anger of God,
out against them. And the Lord had even in their carrying into Captivity, yet
he had respect to his Elect Ones, and has to this very day an intention to do
them good afterward: And so we shall find in the next verse, that there is a
promise of the returning from their Captivity, and therefore though they were
for a long time to continue in Captivity, yet still God did not execute the
fierceness of his anger.

Sin indeed stirs up anger and fierce anger in God. The Septuagint translate
the words thus, I will not do according to the anger of my wrath, that is, in
extremity, I (...). 70.
will not do thus with you, there were mighty stirrings in Gods heart,
pleadings of Justice, and pleadings of Mercy, but Gods mercy overcomes, gets
the day, as it were: Mercy triumphs over Justice.

The Observations:

When we have stirrings between Mercy and Wrath, the stirrings of Mercy should
rather prevail, the bent of our hearts should Obs. 3.
rather be in them. When we have workings this way and that way; which is the
most benign side? the arguments had need be very much the stronger for wrath,
than for Mercy; If the arguments have any equality, or near any equality in
them, certainly the arguments for mercy should prevail: they do so with Gods
heart; Oh! be you like God in this.

And then Secondly, When there are stirrings with God, and temptations to draw
to sin, the stirrings for God likewise Obs. 2.
should prevail. Have not you found it thus many times in your selves? you have
had stirrings in your hearts to such and such duties, and at the same time
there has been temptations coming to such and such sins; now I put it to your
Consciences, as in the Name of God, Cannot you tell diverse times how the
temptations to sin has got the day? you have been rather carried from God to
your base sinful lusts, and your Conscience has been overcom; Conscience has
pulled, and drawings of the Spirit have been very powerful, but yet temptations
have been more powerful, and you have gone that way; Oh! be ashamed of this,
that it should ever be said, That at such a time there were stirrings with
Conscience and Temptations, Temptations and Conscience stirring together, yet
that Temptation should overcome Conscience.

Thirdly, Gods mercies do not free his People from all fruits Obs. 3.
of displeasure. [But I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger.] And my
brethren, this is not meant merely of the times of the Law; for this anger of
God upon them is to this very day? But yet it is not fierceness of anger, like
that of Adamah and Zeboim: There are (no question) among them the elect Ones of
God at this day, God will not have this called the fierceness of anger.

So, it is displeasure, it is captivity, long captivity, They are a reproach, and
a byword to the world, and yet not fierceness of anger: Our discontented
hearts are ready to call every little affliction, fierceness of anger; Oh! how
fierce is God, if we suffer any little! And indeed did we but know what anger
our sins deserve, we would learn, not to call every affliction that is upon us,
no, nor our greatest afflictions, fierceness of anger.

Fourthly, We should acknowledge mercy, though we suffer Obs. 4.
hard things; If yet we be not utterly, not everlastingly cast off, acknowledge
Mercy; it is Mercy my Repentings kindled: I will not execute fierceness of
anger: Why? Because they were not as Admah and Zeboim.

Learn we all this: This day whatsoever afflictions are upon me; though it may
be you are ready to say, Such afflictions are upon me, as upon none; we are
ready to think our afflictions to be the greatest of all; yea, but bless God
that thou have not fire from heaven to consume thee and thy family, for this
might have been thy portion, this fierceness of Anger. I will not return to
destroy Ephraim.

God here compares himself to a Captain that comes Expos.
with his Soldiers unto a Town: I suppose many of you in this place may easily
come to understand the meaning of this word, by what they have seen and felt
themselves: Soldiers come to a Town, and there they pillage it and away they
go, and so the poor people think, Soldiers have been here, and I hope we shall
do well enough now, and think all is over: It may be within a month or two
after, the same Soldiers come again, and utterly ruin the place, and strip them
of all. But now says God, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, that is,
Though I lay my hand upon them, and afflict them, and take away many comforts
from them, yet when I have done that, there I Will leave, I will not come back
again with a purpose utterly to ruin them; This I might do, I might return upon
them with one evil upon another, but I will not do so. From whence note:

There is no cause that sinners should be secure when some evil is upon them,
to think this is all, now they know the worst: No, Obs. 5.
God may justly return upon them again and again; If thou turnest not to God
under thy affliction, God may justly return upon thee to ruin thee. Indeed if
thy afflictions were such as has caused thy heart to return to God, thou
may then hope that God will not return upon thee, but if so be thou behav'st
thy self frowardly under thy afflictions (I say) thou may justly expect that
God should return upon thee.

But Secondly, God is very gracious to his people when evil Obs. 2.
is upon them, he will not ad, and ad, till he utterly destroy them, but he
will forbear that he might have some subject for his Mercy, he will not
contend for ever.

For I am God (says he) and not man. Text.


Here Is an argument that is very full, I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, for I am God, and not a man.

Before God took upon him the person of a man in Expos.
those yernings of his bowels, that is, When he would express his mercy, mark,
there God would come in the most familier way to make us know the meaning of
his mercy; but when he comes to speak of Anger, there he would have us know
that he is not like to a man in way of Anger; in the way of Mercy, says he,
if there be the most merciful man upon earth, know that I am like him; but when
I come to anger, I am not like man in the way of anger: God is very desirous
that we understand fully his heart in the ways of his mercy, but when he
speaks of the execution of his wrath, I will not do that, why? For I am a God,
and not a Man: And mark the strength of this expression, the difference between
God and Man in the point of the execution of wrath, you will find it very The
differences betwixt God and man in point of Anger. 1.
useful to you; First for the opening of it, and then for the several
Observations to be drawn from it.

As first, Man is of a weak spirit, not able to rule his anger, Man, if he be
but a little heat with anger, it is turned into rage, and there is no rule at
all; but I am not man says God, I am God, I am no man, it is not with me thus,
I am not of a weak spirit, I am able to rule my anger, in Nahum, 1. 6. the
Lords anger there is said to be furious, but I find the word in the Original,
The Lord of anger, so Montanus turns it, a God that is able to rule his anger,
and expresses it in the midst of the expression of his greatest wrath, I am
God, and not Man, [Man;] the word is not [Adam] but [Ish] a strong man, or a
Noble -- (...)
man, but I am God [Ell] I am a strong God, and I am able to rule anger so as
man cannot.

Secondly, Man is of a revengeful and of a cruel disposition, 2
man cares not what he does so that he may have his lusts; but I am a God and
not a man, of a loving, sweet, and tender disposition.

Thirdly, Man, many times because he has not satisfaction within his own
heart, therefore he is in a rage 3
with every body: Man flies upon others, not so much for any thing that they
do, but because of the disquiet of his own heart; but I am a God and not man, I
am infinitely Note.
Alsufficient of my self, and there is no disquiet in me, all it at rest and
quiet within me, and this makes me to be of such a quiet disposition toward my
Creature.

Fourthly, If there be any mercy in a man, it is but very 4.
little, a little matter will stop the current of the mercy that is in man; but
I am a God and not man, there is infinite mercy in me, an infinite current,
and the current of the mercy that is in me cannot easily be stopped, for I am a
God.

Fifthly, Man is of a fickle and an unconstant disposition, 5.
but I am Jehovah and change not, and therefore the sone of Jacob are not
consumed.

Sixthly, If man passes by an offense, it is from some 6.
motives or some persuasions from without, if there be none of those motive and
persuasions from without, he is fevere, and he is ridged, but I am a God and
not Man, I have enough in mine own heart to persuade me, though there be no
arguments from without, yet there is enough within me, in my own bowels to
persuade me, for I am a God.

Seventhly, Man he think it a dishoner to him to begin 7.
reconciliation with those that have offended him, what shall I go and disgrace
my self to begin with my inferior? let him begin with me if he will; this is
man's disposition; but I am a God and not man, I account it my glory to begin
the work of reconciliation, there is not such a disposition in me as in man.

Eighthly, Man, he cannot foresee the consequences that 8.
may follow upon his forbearing, or pardoning of offenses, and therefore he is
loath to forbear or pardon: But I am a God and not man, I have infinite wisdom
and can foresee all consequences that will come.

Ninthly, Man, he cannot work good out of what ill 9
carriages there are against him, and that makes him not to forbear; but I am a
God and not man, I know how to work out mine own ends, and for the glory of my
Name out of all the sins of my people.

Tenthly, Man though he promises much mercy, yet 10.
oftimes, if those that he promises meroy to do offend him, he will recall his
promise again, and he thinks he may do it, and he makes all his promises but
conditional; yea, but I am a God and not man, I do not stand so upon it, though
I know beforeh and there will be many weaknesses, and infirmities is my
creature, yet I have some promises that are absolute promises to those that are
my Elect Ones, and I will not recall my Promises though they be unfaithful and
sinful. Man does not only recall Promises when there is occasion given, but many
times through unfaithfulness. And therefore I remember Brentius an approved
Divine, has this More upon this place, The word (says he) is Ish, not Adam,
and so he Brentius.
translates it, I am a God; and not a Noble man; you shall not have such
dealings with me as from your great men, many great then make great and fair
promise^ and you Noble men.
depend upon them, but they will deceive you, according to that in Psalm. 62. 9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; and your
Courtiers and great men, how do they deceive the expectation of those that are
with them, especially in their need, they leave them in the lurch many times;
but I am a God and not man, you shall not have such unfaithful dealings with me.

Further, If man forbears and passes by offenses now, 11
he cannot have the offenders again at advantage when he pleases, and therefore
he thinks he had best take the advantages now; Oh but I am a God and not man,
my Creatures I have them always at advantage; it is true, I can spare them now,
for I can have them under my feet again, and again, and again, and therefore I
have no such reason to take advantage of my poor Creatures as one man has of
another.

Lastly, I am God and not man; that is, Man he is bound to positive rules of
Justice that are set to him, but 12.
I am a God and not man, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and whom
I will I harden.

The Observations.

First, Goodness and mercy in God is that wherein he Glories: it is true, the
Lord is high above man in all excellencies, Obs. 1.
but mark here how he glories that he is a God and not man in the point of
execution of wrath: Many glory in their anger, and make that to be their
excellency, and their bravery, Oh they are brave men and of brave spirits when
they can vent their wrath, when they can rail and speak evil, and make others
to come and submit to them, and strike or punish them, why now they are brave
men, I Will make you do thus and thus: as in a Family you shall have sometimes a
poor man or woman manifest abundance of pride of spirit as if they were Princes
and Masters of Families.
Monarchs, they will do thus and thus, and you think your selves to be of brave
spirits; but mark, God glories in this, that he does not execute the fierceness
of his anger.

I am infinitely above man: Wherein O Lord art thou above them? I am above them
in this, That I can rule mine anger, and am merciful to those that are beneath
me: here is Gods glory.

My Brethren, this Scripture (were there no other) shows Use.
that passion and anger debases man, we have a notable Scripture for this, that
God glories in his long suffering and patience toward his Creature, in Numb.
14. 17. And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according
Numb. 14. 17. explained
as thou have spoken. What had God spoken, or where had he spoken any thing?
Mark, this Scripture has reference to the latter end of Exodus 32. there God
promised that Moses should see his glory, and in Chap. 34. God made his glory
pass by him, and what was it? The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundance in mercy and truth etc. Now Moses has reference
to this, Moses lays hold upon this, as if he should say, Oh Lord, was not
there a time that I was pleading with thee? and did not thou promise to show
me thy glory? and was it not the Lord long-suffering and of great mercy,
forgiving iniquity and transgression etc? why now Lord manifest thy glory, now
Lord show thy self to be a glorious God, in doing what? mark in the 19. verse,
Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of Verse. 19.
this people: That Is the glory that God should show forth, and manifest his
power in it; one would rather think that the power of God should rather be
manifest in the destruction of sinners; no, the power of God is manifest in
Mercy as well as in misery and destruction: And we find that those that come
up nearest to God, they are the Neerness to God most merciful.
most loving and gracious merciful hearts, yet if they do but come near to God
so as possibly natural men may, to have but any magnanimity, that is a little
nearer to God than a base sordid spirit, the magnanimousness of yea, if but in
amoralneernes.
of any man's spirit appears in his love and forbearance and meekness, and
gentleness, for so we know the Heathens could say, The greater any one is the
more placable is his anger, a generous mind not easily moved, and so he
compares the Lion, and Bears, and Wolves, (...), the Lion is a magnanimous
Creature, therefore says the Heathen, it is enough for to fall down before a
magnanimous Lion, but for Wolves and Bears they insult over those that falls
down before them; So those that have the most magnanimous spirits have the most
patient spirits, and forgiving spirits, and pardoning spirits: This is as cross
a Note unto a carnal heart almost as any thing, I mean to one that gives way to
the lusts of his passion, for he thinks himself only magnanimous when he can
vent his anger; and were it not for the thought that he thinks he should be a
fool, he would forbear his anger; it is not thy honor, but it makes thee base
in the eyes of thy servants, children, and wife, when thou come Masters of
Families.
into thy house like a mad fool, it makes them look upon thee, and despise
thee, when they see thee thus drunken in thy passion.

Secondly, Such are the provocations of God caused by sin, that if God were
like to you, sinners could not be forborne; as if Obs. 2.
God should say, The truth is, your sins were such as were not I a God, it were
impossible that I could bear; for so it is (though we think not of it) the evil
of sin is so great that if all the patience that were in all the men that ever
was since the world began were put into one man, if he knew the great evil that
there is in sin, he would destroy the world, he would not bear, if his heart
were but holy, as here God says himself.

Thirdly, It Is a good way to exercise says in Gods mercy, to look upon God as
a God beyond us, beyond any creature; for Obs. 3.
so this is therefore exprelled, to the end that the people of God might
exercise faith in beholding God as a God; that is the way to help thee in thy
faith; would thou exercise faith upon God? look upon him as a God, (...) do
not conceive him to be as a man; It Is (...), (...) (...) upon him sometimes as a
compassion at man is a little help, (...) that will not do it; I suppose it
would help a little, some that are here, suppose this, Thou hadest to deal An
apt simile.
with the most merciful man that ever lived upon the face of the earth,
would not thou hope then that thou might be saved if he had the dispose
of thy eternal estate: suppose there were a Judge that had the most relenting
heart that ever was in the world, and all relentings that ever were in all men's
hearts were in him, if this Judge had the dispose of thy eternal estate, would
it not help thee, to know thou have to deal with one that is infinitely above
that Judge: That Judge were a cruel Tyrant and Tiger in comparison of this God,
God is God, and not man, he is infinitely above man in the ways of his mercy:
We many times with looking upon God as our selves it makes us bold in sin
first, and afterward it makes us The Devil's stratagem.
despair in sin, as thus in Psalm. 50. 21. Thou thoughtest I was like to thy
self, says God there, that is, because I was patient and long-suffering
toward thee, thou thoughtest I was like unto a man; and a man though he be a
little offended, you think you may please him again, and so you thought I was
like to your selves, therefore you go on in your sins; So the Devil first makes
us look upon God like our selves, and so we think that God has no greater
hatred to sin than we have; but then turn the other side, when we have once
committed the sin, when the Devil would tempt to despair then he makes us look
to God, like to our selves, that is thus, I find that I could not forgive such
an one if he had wronged me in such a manner, and therefore they look upon God
like a man, nay, like a corrupt man; Oh! what a dishonor is this to God, that
because thou thy self have a froward perverse Discouraging thoughts in
afflicted consciences curable by the former doctrine. (...)
cruel heart that thou can not forgive, therefore thou look upon God as if
it were as hard for him to forgive as for thee. My Brethren, the looking upon
God as a God, it would help against many discouraging thoughts in poor sinners:
as first thus, My sins are very great; Men will forgive little offenses, but
God is a God, and not man, and therefore great mercies are little in comparison
to him.

A second discouraging thought is, I have sinned against 2.
many offers of mercy; but God is God, and not a man, and Gods mercy is such as
brings in men that have refused the offers of Mercy.

And then Thirdly, None is so sinful as I, but God is a God, and not a man, and
therefore he is above thee in the 3.
ways of his mercy, God has more mercy yet than ever he did manifest to any
one creature in the world, and though I be the vilest of all sinners, yet let
me look upon God as a God, and not a man.

Fourthly, I am unworthy (says the sinner) of any mercy from God. Indeed, if
you had to deal with a man it might 4
hinder, but God is a God, and not a man, therefore it is not unworthiness that
hinders mercy in God, it is that mercy pleases him.

Yea, But I am like to be of no use to God. It Is true, if you were to deal with
a man, he might not be pleased, 5
but God stands in no need of you, or any of his creatures, for he is a God,
and not man; thou do not honor God, as a God, if thou do not cast thy
soul upon his mercy, as the mercy of a God.

If I put this unto thee, I hope the glory of it will be so great as will keep
it from being abused, What, do thou think thy condition is grievous, but
do thou think that such mercy would not serve the turn as this is that now I
am naming, that thou should have such mercy as an infinite God should
therefore manifest, to A ground of strong consolation, from Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6,
7. Caution against the abuse of this doctrine.
that end that he might show to Men and Angels to all eternity what the power
of his infinite Mercy can do? would not this mercy serve thy turn, such a
mercy as this is? I Will name it again, abuse it at your peril Suppose thy
condition so low, yet would not this serve thy turn, such mercy as an infinite
God should show, to that end that he might appear to men and Angels to all
eternity, what he is able to do in the infinitness of his mercy, Would not this
serve thee, and help thee, and heal thee? Now this is tendered to thee in the
Gospel, even this mercy is tendered to thee in Christ to be an object of thy
faith; and the very presenting of this is a work of the Ministry of the Gospel
that it might draw acts of faith, The chief work of the Ministry.
for it has a power to draw forth faith, yea, to beget faith, the very
presenting such a thing as this is has a quickness in it: It Is true, if you
look upon God only as a merciful man, this is no such glory as the shining of
it upon the soul will ad life; As now, the shining of the Moon, or a hundred
Torches will never beget life in a Garden; but the shining of the Sun will do it:
so the apprehending of the mercy of God any other way but as a God, as a God in
Christ, will never beget life in the soul, but What is the imediate root of
Faith.
look upon him in the infinitness of his mercy, whose thoughts of mercy are
beyond ours as high as the Heavens are above the Earth, this is the way to
beget faith. And therefore those that cannot believe, they take very il courses
for themselves, only to have their thoughts upon such things as may discourage
them, and they think that this is as pleasing to God; but certainly the way to
beget or raise faith in thy heart is, to look upon God as a God in the ways of
his mercy.

Yea, but you will say, The truth is, this that you Objects
speak of, that God is a God, and not a man, is rather a discouragement to my
heart, it is a God that I have sinned against, and not a man; as one way it may
encourage me, so another way it may discourage me; Against thee, against thee
only have I sinned (says David) Psalm. 51. And indeed, this is the most
piercing thought in a true penitent heart, My sin is against God, I have lived
so long a time without a God in the course of my life, and I have struck at God
himself in my sinful ways. Oh wretch that I have been! I have been guilty of
the darkening of the glory of the great God in the world: Now I Will answer thee
this in a word;

And is this that which does aggravate thy sin in thy Answ.
heart? does this work upon thy heart most, that thou can appeal to God, that
of all the considerations of sin that ever thou hadest in thy life, there is
nothing grieves thee so much, as that it is against God? Because God is so
glorious, so infinitely worthy of honor from all his creatures; be of good
comfort, and take encouragement from this point, and mark what I am saying, and
with that I shall close all.

If the confideration of the glory of God above a man does thus aggravate thy
sin to thy humiliation, then it will aggravate the mercy of God to thy
consolation as well; If thou workest this thought upon thy heart, Oh my sin is
against a God and not a man, and therefore my heart is humbled, then the Lord
would have thee to make use of the consideration of his glory as a God for thy
comfort; God is a God, and not a man, in the way of mercy. The Holy one in the
midst of thee.

God glories much in his Holiness, and that in the midest of his people.

Gods Holiness is,

[He is] here said to be the Holy One. 1. To show that the anger He would let
out should be such, as should have Expos.
no mixture of evil. But what considerations might be to order and guide it
should not be wanting. Men's angers are very unclean, there is much smoke and
fill thy stuff together in their fire. But here in Exodus 15. 11. [God is said to
be] Glorious in Holiness. Gods vials [of wrath] are golden, Revel. 15. 7.

Let us labor to be holy in our anger. This is a rare Use.
thing, if there be any corruption in man's heart it usualappears in his anger.

2. Because of his gracious carriage toward them in regard (...)
of his Covenant, to make that good to them, he would remember his faithfulness
to Abraham.

Obs. 1. God delights to show the glory of his Holiness in mercy, and in
pardoning of sin rather than in revenging for sin.

Obs. 2. Gods faithfulness is a special part of the glory of his Holiness.

Use, 1. Hence see how Holiness will help our faith.

Use, 2. Let us manifest our holiness in our faithfulness. I am holy to make
them holy; to sanctify them to my self. In the midst of thee. (...).


Casting the beams of his Glory on every fide of him.

But how in the midst, when they so vile, and cast off Quest.
from being his people, a sink of Idolatry and wickedness?

In respect of some of his Elect Saints. Answ. Obs. 1


Obs. God continues among a people for his Saints, his Elects sake. The Saints
should consider of God, a holy God in the midst of them, and accordingly behave
themselves, Levit. 26. 12. I will walk among you, and I will be your God; But 2
Cor. 16. 16. I will dwell among them, and walk in them.

Obs. Men of Place and Government, should be in the Obs. 1.
midst of those that are under them, carrying themselves holily, though they
should be froward, pettish, sinful, yet they should carry themselves according
to rule in all holiness, gravity, wisdom, moderation, etc.

Rivit, Tarnovius, with some others, thinks that here is Expos. 2.
(Enallage Numeri) a change of the number (Sanctus, for Sancti) Holy, for Holy
Ones, or Saints, and so has reference to the destruction of Sodom, because
there were no righteons, here are.

Obs. The Saints are of great use in the places where Obs. 2.
they live. They are the cause of mitigation of Judgments. I will not enter
into the City.

Luther thus, God would [signifie himself] to be merciful Luth. Expos. Cultum
meum non ponum in una tantum civitate, sed per totum mundum from the rising of
the Sun, etc.
to scattered Israeh among the Gentiles, Vt tamen non redeant ad Politiam
Mosaicam, but so that they should not return to the Mosaical Law.

But rather it is to be taken in reference to the manner of Gods proceedings in
the destruction of Sodom; after he had done conferring with Abraham, he entered
into the City, and destroyed it by fire and brimstone.

Obs. God many times stands at the gates of a City, ready to enter in and
destroy it, but humiliation in prayer, Obs. 2.
and reformation keeps him out.

God has not entered in here thus yet; Oh! let not Use.
our sin cause a meroiful God to go out, and a provoked God to enter in.

VER. 10.
They shall walk after the Lord, He shall roar like a Liyon.

THey shall not walk after their own inventions any more; nor after the lusts
of their own hearts, nor after Expos. 1
the examples, or the counsels of men, but after the Lord, they shall see God
before them, their hearts shall be drawn after him, as they shall see God in
his various administrations, so they shall turn this way, or that way which way
soever God leads them; though in paths they have not known before, yet now they
shall walk after him, though in paths that few others walk in yet.

Through fire and water, though in difficult paths never so dangerous to
outward appearance; though God should lead them from their dearest comforts,
sweetest contents, though it did not appear to them, whither the way tended,
what God meant to do with them; yet seeing God before them, they shall be
willing to walk after him; they shall account that way God is in, the best way,
the safest way, the most comfortable way, Revel. 14. 4. These shall follow the
Lamb whither soever he goes, these were redeemed from among men, being the
first fruits to God, and to the Lamb. They shall walk in a constant steady
course of obedience after the Lord.

It is the Lord, the blessed glorious God, whom their Reas.
souls love; whom they desire to honor; to whom they have given up souls,
bodies, lives, liberties, names, estates, whatsoever they are, have, or are
able to do. When Peter heard it was the Lord he threw himself into the Sea,
that he might walk after him there.

Thus the soul converted to God, loves to walk after him.

But this is spoken of the Church, as walking after the Expos. 2.
Lord in times of Reformation, especially that famous time of the restitution
of all things, when God shall call home his people, the ten Tribes, who yet are
scattered up and down wandering and groping in darkness; They shall walk after
the Lord, the Lord shall be a Captain to them, leading them along as his
redeemed ones, working by them glorious things in the earth, and bringing them
through all opposition to places of rest, and fullness of all good; God shall
appear in such visible administrations of his, so as they shall say, Lo, this
is our God, this is the Captain of the host of the Lord, yea, it is even the
Lord himself, we will join together and follow him, whose wisdom, faithfulness,
and courage is infinite; we will follow no other but him, and in subordination
to him. The sight of such a Captain going before them, shall put life, courage,
and magnanimity into them, whatsoever they were before. Hence note,

Obs. It is the infinite goodness of the Lord, to be the Obs. 1.
Captain of his people.

Obs. It is the honor, safety, happiness of the Saints to Obs. 2.
have God before them, to be walking after him. He shall roar like a Lion.

If God appears thus it will make them fly from him: Expos.
No, they shall, notwithstanding this, walk after him.

Obs. That the majesty, and terribleness of God, in his Obs.
wonderful and dreadful works, causes the wicked, guilty conscience to fly from
him; But the Saints shall follow after him, and cling unto him: Isa 33. 14. The
sinners in Syon are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. Who
amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? He that works righteously, and speaks uprightly. Act.
5. 13, 14. Of the rest durst no man join himself to them. And Believers were
the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women. Psa. 46. (Luthers
Psalm) 2. We will not fear, though the Earth be moved, though the Mountains be
carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waves thereof roar, though the
Mountains shake. Verse. 6. The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved; be
uttered his voice, the Earth melted, The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our Refuge. Nahum, 1. 2. The Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, and
is furious; the Lord will take vengeance of his adversaries. Verse. 3. The Lord
has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm. Verse. 5. The Mountains quake
at him, the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his presence. Who can stand
before his indignation? who can abide the fierceness of his anger? his fury is
powered out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Verse. 7. The Lord
is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in
him. Joel, 3. 15, 16. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars
shall withdraw their shining; the Lord shall roar out of Syon, and utter his
voice from Jerusalem; The Heavens and the Earth shall shake; but the Lord will
be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. Hab. 3.
17, 18. Although the Figtree shall not blossem, etc. yet will I rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

Oh! the blessing of a clean Conscience, it looks on th(...) Use.
Terror of the Law, and of God, with comfort. Where there is neighing of
Horses, beating of Drums, rattling of Simile.
Pikes, foaring of Cannons, yet if a friend be the General, we fear not. All the
terror there is in God, is comfort to the Saints; the wicked have the dark side
of the Cloud, the Saints the bright. Deuteronomy. 33. 2. From his right hand went a
fiery Law. Verse. 4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the inheritance of the
Congregation of Jacob. Nehem. 9. 32. The great, mighty, and terrible God, will
keep Covenant and Mercy. Psalm. 47. 1, 2. Shout unto God with the voice of
Triumph, for the most high is Terrible.

Be godly, and keep Conscience clean in these latter times; train up your
Children in ways of godliness. Shall roar like a Lion.

The roaring of the Lion invites the rest of the beasts, Plutarch.
there is something for them.

Quest. But when was this? Quest.


Answ. Many think when the Babylonian Monarchy was Answ. 1.
broken by Cyrus; then Belshazzars knees beat together, and then the Captivity
returned, and that diverse of the ten Tribes joined in the return. But this is
spoken of the Rejected.
Body of them; and if any such remarkable return [had been] Ezra would not have
left out their Genealogyes.

Others refer it to the times of the Gospel, Heb. 12. 26. 8
Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. The voice of the
Gospel, Repent; and he that believes shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned, was a Terrible voice. When secure minds (says Luther) hear,
that salvation Quid faciomus viri fratres eum severe mentes audiunt, non
contingere salutem nisi Baptizatis and credentibus in Nomen Christi, vere
expanescunt; et de salutemsunt soliciti. Luther.
belongs to none but those that are baptized, and that believe in the Name of
Christ; they indeed tremble, and are solicitous concerning their salvation.
Junius when he read the first Chapter of the Gospel of John [was terrified]

But I take this rather to be meant of some notable work of Reformation and
calling in these ten Tribes to ^
join with the Church. The Lord will roar to terrif^ the hearts of their
Adversaries, that they shall not be ab^^ to hinder their return. Hence note,

That when Gods time is, come for a through Reformation and Obs.
bringing in his people; he will roar terribly in the world, he will appear in
such Majesty, Glory, and Justice, that he will make the earth tremble, Psalm.
102. 16. When the Lord shall build up Sion, he will appear in his Glory. It
has been his way in his appearing for his Church, Psalm. 76. 1. Thou, even thou
art to be feared; and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? Thou
did cause Judgment to be heard from Heaven, the Earth feared and was still
(...) God arose to Judgment to save the meek of the Earth (...) 12.) He shall
cut off the spirit of Princes, he is (...) Kings of the Earth. Isa. 34. 4. All
the host of (...) be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as
(...) and all the host shall fall down as a leaf; for my Sword shall be bathed
in Heaven. (Ver. 6.) The Sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat
with fatness. (Ver. 7.) The Land shall be soaked with blood. (Ver. 8.) For it
is the day of the Lords vengance, and the year of the recompenses for the
controversy of Sion. Ezekiel! 17. 10. Shall it not wither when the East wind
touches it?

At the raising of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm. 45. 4. Thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things, Revel. 6. 15. The Great troubls at the aaising of Christ's
Kingdom.
Kings of the earth, and the great Men, the rich men, the chief Captains, the
Mighty men hid themselves in the dens, the rocks of the Mountains, and said to
the Mountains and Rocks, F^l^ on us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the Thron and from the wrath of the Lamb. Dan. 12. 1. There shall
(...) a time of trouble, such as was never since there was a Nation all that
time thy people shall be delivered. Lactantius Lib. Cap. 15. as then Egypt
imitten, so now all places; as Lactant. Prodigia miranda per omnia elementae
mundi. Reas. 1.
then signs and prodiges, so now; admirable wonders in all the Elements of the
World, [Earth, Sea, Air.]

1. Because the ungodly have been cruel against the Saints, Psalm. 74. 4. Thine
Enemies roar in the midst of the Congregation.

2. The wicked will be secure; yea, his own people, [and will stand in need of
roaring to awaken them.]

3. The Adversary will be stout and proud, Consundetur omne jus, and Leges
perilunt. All right will be overturned, and Laws perish.

4. The difficulties will be great, so as when Christ comes shall he find says
on the earth [namely that ever his work shall be brought about] Luke, 18. 8.
There will Luke, 18. 8. eulightned.
(...)ighty changes of things. Hence observe,

(...)ir not though wicked men strengthen themselves Obs. 1.
(...)uch, God can soon make mighty alterations. (...). 14. Be not afraid;
remember the Lord which is ve(...) and terrible. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. Thoushalt not be
afrighted at them, for the Lord thy God is amongst you, a mighty God and a
terrible.

Again, Hence learn to prepare for thosetimes. Obs. 2. Text.
When he shall roar, the children shall tremble from the west.

Amos, 3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not tremble? There shall be mighty
stirrings of heart: Men's hearts shall shake within them, so as there shall be
way made for people whose hearts are awakened to come into the Church. There is
a trembling of the Enemies, they shall be struck with such astonishment, that
they shall not hinder; Their violence and rage shall be abated. They shall say
(...) once the Egyptians, Let us take heed what we do, the Lord (...)ts for
them.

And the hearts of those that God intends to call shall Saints need awaking
before times of Reformation.
(...)wakened, the slightness, and vanity of their spirits shall be taken off;
The fear upon their hearts, shall make them fear; they shall be roused from
their sluggishness; they shall make have to come in to join with the people of
God. Fear causes have, so the word (...) Turpide accurrent. Tremel.
Properabunt, Vatablus in notis.
here signifies, [and is rendered by some] Men delay and trifle, till God
strikes their hearts with fear. Spiritus sanctus nescit tarda molimma. The holy
Ghost likes not lazy laboring. Isa. 49. 17. Thy children shall make have. The
children shall tremble from the west.

Those afar off [which were] most unlikely, Isa 42. 4. Text. (...) Filij Maris.
Expos.
Legem expect abunt Insulae. The Isles shall wait for my Law. The
Mediterranean, the Mid land Sea is in the west. Isa. 49. 1. 12. Hence note that,

There are like to be great stirrings in the Western Obs.
parts.

VER. 11.
They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as (...) out of the Land of
Assyria.

BEing stricken with fear they shall hasten, so the word* advolabunt, they
shall fly. Expos. (...) Advolabunt. Vulgat. Expos. 1.


This some think to be fulfilled when diverse of the ten Tribes joined with
Judah in the return of their captivity; for the Monarcy of the Assyrians was
subdued by the Persians, whose King was Cyrus. Therefore it is thought that the
fame liberty was given in Assyria for the ten Tribes, as in Babylon for Judah.
And not long after Cambyses the son of Cyrus, overcame the Egyptians, as
Herodotus, Lib. 8. Justinae, Lib. (...). says. And it is like he would be
favorable to the ten Tribes, as his father had been to Judah.

But Ezra, as was noted above, in likelihood would Expos. 2.
not then have omitted their Genealogies: Howso(...) in the great Restoration
of things, this will be fulfill(...) The Jews were strongly set to go to Egypt;
now they shall as strongly desire to get out, to join with the Churches. Fly as
a bird, not come as a snail; get over all difficulties, [having] their spirits
elevated, raising them from earthly drossie things, they have no consideration
of them. Now all their desire is to join with the Saints, that they together
with them may follow after the Lord. And as a Dove out of the Land of Assyria.
Text


1. Doves are sacred there. Eusebius. Preparat. Evang. Lib. 8. 5. 2. They are
terrified with the least noise. Terretur minimo penae stridore Columba. 3.
Doves fly swiftly, Oh! that I had the wings of a Dove (says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 55. 6.) 4. They fly by flocks, Isa. 60. 8. Who are those that fly as a
cloud, and as the Doves to their windows? 5. It may be from those Countries,
Doves come at certain times of the year, as several sorts of Fowls do to to us
in their seasons.
And I will place them in their houses (says the Lord.) i. e. Text Expos.
I will provide lockers for them [he follows the the former metaphor of
Doves.]

Gods people have been tossed up and down, they have had no abiding in their
houses.

But God has his time to place them in their houses Obs. 1.
in rest, quietness, and safety; to deliver them from violence and wrong. 2 Samuel 7. 10. Moreover, I will appoint a place for my people, Israel, and I will
plant them that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more.

It Is a good work to be instrumental in this, that those Obs. 2.
who live godlily and are peaceable, may abide quietly in their houses and not
be tossed up and down, because they cannot believe or practice what others do.
This tossing such up and down, though it may be from a zeal for Christ, yet
Christ will never own it.

Those who walk after the Lord, shall be placed in their Obs. 3.
houses. They were willing to leave their houses that they might follow him;
and now God places them in them.

Trust God with your houses, Resolve to follow the Use.
Lord whithersoever he goes; he has time to place his people in their houses,
when others, who dared not trust God, shall wander in darkness. --. Says the
Lord. Text. Obs.


This must be the work of the Lord, it is only He can do it. That mercy that
comes beyond all means, it is the sweetest mercy. No matter what the means be,
whether any or no, so be it you have a Word of God for the thing.

VER. 12.
Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit.

THe Lord having manifested the bowele of his tender compassion toward
Ephraim, (the ten Tribes) he Cohaerance.
comes further to show what was that, that stopped the way and course of his
grace, of the grace that otherwise might have been let out unto them. Ephraim
compasses me about with lies.

Besets me with lies, that is the word, be besets me round; I am in respect of
the sin of Ephraim, (that is, of the Governors, (...)
and of the [house of Israel] that is the People) I Expos. general.
am (as it were) a man beset round. As a men that would have a passage such a
way, he goes one way and there he is stopped; and another way and there he is
stopped: so God compares himself to such a man, as if he would be going on in the
ways of mercy, and there he is stop^ in one co(...) of sin or another, and
going on in another way, there (...) is stopped again.

Ephraim has beset me with lies, that is, with false worcester Particular.
ship, (for that is a lie) with Pretenses, they put fair Glosses upon things but
all are but lies, he has beset me with politic shifts of his own.

These did beset God, yea, and beset the Prophet too, Expos. 2.
for so I find some turn it, they think it is spoken as in the person of the
Prophet, the Prophet complaining that he was beset with lies, that they might
prejudice his Ministry, that they might do what they could to take off the
power of his Ministry in their hearts, they beset him with lies, with false
reports of this and the other thing. Upon which one has that Note. A faithful
Divine, a Theologus fidelis nihil aliud est, quam Centrum, ad quod omnes
line(...) dolorum tendunt. Meisner
Preacher, is nothing else but as it were a Center to which all lies of
falsehood do tend, they all go that way, it is a great plot of the Devil to draw
his lines, and to let them make the Ministers of God (that God uses as any
Instruments of good unto his people) to be as the Center of them all. Thus
Meisnerus in his Comment upon the place.

But I rather take it as spoken in the Name and Person of God; Beset me with
lies, (i. e.) They do not only seek The meaning
to blind men, but they would do what they could (if it were possible) to
deceive me, says God. And indeed when men seek to blind their own consciences,
what do they but seek what they can (if it were possible) to deceive God. In
the very act of Worship (says God) they are false, they do profess, honor and
service to God, but they lie unto him, even when they are worshipping of Him.
Many in their prayers, in the solemn act of Worship, they beset God with lies.

Oh! how do many come into the presence of God Obs. 1.
when they are worshipping of him, and there profess to God the acknowledgment
of his Greatness, his Glory, his Majesty, his Power, his Sovereignity, his
Dominion over them, and profess a great deal of the fear of the Name of God!
and yet God knows it is not in their hearts, it is but as a lie to God; when
they are worshipping God there they acknowledge their sin, and judge themselves
for their sin, as if they were very much humbled, and troubled for their sin;
but God knows that this is but a lie to him, there is no such humiliation of
their hearts before him as seems to be in their expressions before God;
especially when they are in company they cry to God for grace, and would fain
above all things in the world have his Grace, but God knows it is but a lie, all
their prayers are even besetting God with lies.

Oh! Consider how far any of you have been guilty of this, especially in
praying with others, according to that Use.
Scripture, Psalm. 78. 36. They flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto
him with their tongue. The word that is translated flattered, it signifies
deceived, They deceived him with their mouth. (...)


Why, Can God be deceived? Quest. Answ.


No; But they did what lay in them to deceive him, if it were possible that he
should be deceived they would deceive God. No mervail though men do deceive men
so much as they do; many that are of upright hearts they wonder when they hear
of the falsness of men's spirits that they can be so. No mervail (I say) when as
God himself complains of being deceived by them, that is, They are so false,
and do so beset God with lies, that if it were possible he himself should be
deceived. That Is the first Note.

And then Secondly, As it was here with this people besetting God with lies,
Thus many do compass and beset Obs. 2.
businesses, the businesses and affairs that they manage they beset them with
lies, that is thus, They plot with themselves how they may handsomely contrive a
company of lies together, by a handsome putting of them together, that so they
may beset men's unsterstandings; there is such a cunning abroad in the world (I
say) to seek to beset the understandings of men, so as men shall not know what
to say to things, and yet they cannot tell how to believe them, neither do they
know what to say, things are so contrived, and so set, they think with
themselves, If such a thing shall be questioned, then I have such a shift Let
deceitful men note.
to put it off; and if another thing shall be doubted of, then I have such a
report to make it good, some fair pretense or other: And thus they beset
businesses with lies, and beset men's understandings. But Judah yet rules with
God, and is faithful with the Saints.

This of Judahs ruling with God, Luther, Meisnerus, Expos. 1.
and others, do think that it has reference unto the story that you find in 2
King. 18. the story of Hezekiah, of the great Reformation that he made: Truly
if it should be so, then it appears that this people had continued very long in
besetting God, and his Prophet with lies, for then the Prophet had been
threescore years and ten a Prophet to this People, and had been showing to them
their sin above seventy years; for from the time of Hosea's prophecy, The time
between Hosea the Prophet, and King Hezekiah.
unto the beginning of Hezekiah's reign, it will appear to be above threescore
and ten years, and still the Prophet is complaining of this people, at that time
when Judah did thus rule with God, That they still continued besetting God with
lies.

I would only note this Observation from it; Obs.


That when men maintain their way by shifts, and falsness, if they be once
engaged in falsness, and shifts and lies, they grow pertinacious then, there is
little hope of their recovery, then let what will be said against them, let
Gods hand never so much appear, let the Truths be never so clear before them,
they go on pertinaciously when they are engaged in such a way as that.

But for the words themselves,

Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.

That Is thus, Israel, the ten Tribes were not encouraged by her sister Judahs
example, for Judah did otherwise, Expos. 2.
though the ten Tribes they did beset God with lies thus, their worship was all
false, and nothing but a lie: yet Judah continued still in the true Worship of
God.

Though examples of evil in others are no excuses, yet where Obs 1.
there is no such temptation, the sin is so much the greater. That Is the Note
from it. If indeed Israel could have said thus, You indeed complain of our
false worship, Who does otherwise? Does not Judah do so as well as we? do not
they follow the same course as well as we? we took our example from them. No,
Israel could not say so, this would not have wholly excused, but it might
somewhat have lessened, evil examples do somewhat lessen, but not excuse
wholly. Yet when there is no examples at all, but men take up evil of
themselves, and are rather examples to others: this is a great aggravation of
their sin. Again, Note, That,

To continue in a false way of Worship when there is a right Obs. 2.
way held forth by others, this makes the sin the greater. It Is true, if we
could say, we have been all our days brought up in this way, we never knew no
better, we saw none that held forth any other to us; this might have been
somewhat. But they could not say so, for Judah yet ruled with God, Judah held
forth the right way of Worship according to the mind of God, and therefore the
sin of Israel is here aggravated.

Thirdly, Yet Judah rules with the Saints. It was more to the commendations of
Judah to continue in the true Obs. 3.
worship, after Israel (the ten Tribes) had broken off; for they were the ten
Tribes, they were more in number, they were a more flourishing Kingdom a great
deal than Judah was, yet for Judah to hold on in the right Worship of God, when
so many fell off from it, and when a more flo^rishing Kingdom than Judah was,
had continued so many years in false worship, this was a great commendations.
Indeed there is a great temptation in this, when we see a multitude go another
way; the Devil prevails much to draw men's hearts to that way; But the stronger
the temptation is, the greater is the commendations of those that shall stand
out; what though they be but a few, what though they see others for the present
seem to prosper, yet if thou can hold on in the way of truth, in the way of
Gods Worship according to his Word, God looks upon this as a thing very
pleasing to him; it is a very great commendations to those that do thus, and
God takes it kindly from them: yet Judah does thus, whatsoever Israel does.

There were many evils, and that very gross in Judah, but yet says the Prophet
Hosea here, Judah rules with God. Why? for the Prophet Hosea he was a Prophet
to Judah, he was not sent to Judah to enveigh against Judah, but to the ten
Tribes; and therefore though there were many evils in Judah, he takes not so
much notice of their evils, as of the evils of the ten Tribes. From whence the
Note is this,

That we should be more severe to those that are nearest to us Obs. 4.
when they dishonor God, than to others that we have not so much to do withal;
as now; A Minister he is not so much to enveigh Ministers]
against those that God has not set him over, that does not belong to his
charge, but if there be any evil in those that belongs to his charge there he
should deal more plainly; and so for others, you are not so much to meddle with
other men that do not concern you, as Masters of Families.
with your own family, those that are under your charge. It Is true, we should
not see God dishonored, but we should Al men should show zeal for God.
some way or other (as God calls us to it) testify for him; but the main thing
that we should look to, it is, To those that are under our charge; many are
very indulgent toward those that are under their charge, and very busy and
bitter against others.

Again, Judah rules with God.

Hierom upon this place tells of a Tradition that the Jews have here about
Judahs rule, and it is this, faith Jerome in loc.
he, When the people came out of Egypt, and Pharaoh pursued them, and the red
Sea was before them, the Mountains on either side, they were mightily
terrified, yet God bad Moses bid them go on, the people thought with
themselves, whither shall we go? and so were afraid. Now Judah had a spirit
(say they) beyond the rest, and was the first Tribe that ventured to go into
the Sea, and from thence obtained to be the principal Tribe: This is but their
Tradition.

But here the meaning is, Judah yet rules with God, that is, the Kingdom of
Judah yet continued according to Expos.
Gods mind in the house of David, and maintained the true Worship, and so ruled
with God. There are diverse excellent Notes further from hence:

First, That which men enjoy with God, though it be but a little, it is better
than to enjoy much, and not with God; as Obs. 1.
thus; The Kindom of Judah was but small in respect of the Kindom of Israel;
yea, but Judah rules with God: To have a little with God, it is a great deal
better than to have a great deal without God. As here in a Kingdom, Few regard
this.
so in an Estate, Have thou a little Estate, yea, but have thou it with God?
Oh! it is a great deal better than to have a great Estate? and have much
guiltiness with it, and not to have it with God; Israel maintained their Rule
by shifts, and that is a great evil; Though thou have thy desires, yet if thou
gettest them, and do maintain them by shifting courses, that is a sore and a
great evil, thou Shifts.
can have little comfort in the enjoyment of thy desires; for this is the
meaning of the Prophet, as if he should say, Israel rules, but how did they get
and maintain their rule? it was in false, sinful ways: It may be thou have thy
will over thy brother, yea, but thou have it in a sinful way, thou blessest thy
self in that thou have thy will, but thou have little cause if thou knew
all. Israel did not rule with God.

Luther upon the place, says, Papist, dare not venture to i(...) the true
Doctrine, for fear their Rule should Luther in lo(...)
be lost; so it is in many people, they are afraid of the loss of their Rule, if
they should entertain the true ways of Gods Worship, they think that the true
ways of Gods Worship cannot stand with their Ruling, and Power, and Why some
decline the ways of God
therefore they had rather have their Rule, and Power, and let the true Worship
of God go. Thus it was with Israel.

Or thus: Judah yet rules with God; That is, Judah continuing in a right way of
Worship, and does so reform Expos. 2.
as he rules in an honorable condition, Judah rules with God, Judah reforming
as he does, why Judah rules with God, is, in an honorable condition.

To serve God is to Reign the Kingdom that serves God, Obs.
reigns indeed, yea, that man or woman that serves God, reigns. It Is an
honorable thing to serve God; the Lord Christ has made us Kings unto his
Father, because the Revel. 1. 6. illustrated.
service of God is so honorable.

Judah rules with God. This says Meisnerus, and others, has reference to
Hezekiahs notable Reformation, and Victory thereupon over the Assyrians, of
which 2 King. 18. etc.

The old Latin has it* they translate Ruling with Testis descendit cum Deo.
vulg
God, thus: He does descend, or come down as a witness with God, so they render
it. And indeed the difference, though it may seem to be very much in our
English tongue, yet in the Hebrew the letters that are for ruling with God,
adhuc (...) testis (...) a (...) damnatus est (...) descendit (...) Riberain
loc.
and for coming down to be a witness for God, there is very little difference,
it is in the pointing, not in the Hebrew letters.

Ribera maintains this reading, and has these two meditations hinted from that
reading: first, others they leave the true Worship of God, but Judah continues,
and so witnesses for God.

God has never been without some witness to his Truth. Obs. 1.
And in evil times when others do forsake God, and his worship, then for people
to be willing to venture, and appear any way to witness for God is a very
honorable thing; Oh! it is a blessed thing to be a witness to the Truth,
therefore was I born says Christ, that I might bare witness to the truth, for
those that are faithful and upright in evil times they are Gods witnesses.
That Is his first Note.

And then Secondly, He descends, that is, he is content to be in a lower
condition so be it he may witness for Obs. 2.
God, though Israel be in a more flourishing condition, and we be kept low,
it is no great (...) so be it we may be Gods Witnesses, thus does a gracious
heart, I indeed see others in the world, they are brave, and have the
countenance of the times, and have all things according to the desires of the
flesh here, but we are kept low, it is no matter, so be it we may but witness
for God, let others take the outward glory and bravery of the world, let us be
witnesses with our God. It follow^. And is faithful with the Saints. Text.


He is faithful, that is, he continues in the right Government God would have
him, and in his true Worship.

To forsake the true Worship and Government God has appointed, Obs. 1
is unfaithfulness. And cleaving to it (...)lly through much difficulties and
suffering is a special p(...) of faithfulness; it is an evil not to be (...)
with the State in Civil (...), but not to be (...) with God in matters of
Religion is a greater evil.

Again, God has a (...) to a S(...) faithfulness with Obs. 2.
him in point of Worship; though there may be many evils otherwise, yet if they
be (...) ^o him in point of Worship, God has a special eye to that.

Lastly, (...) in good, Obs. 3.
it is not faithfulness only to profess good, but to continue in our
profession. Judah is faithful with the Saints. I Expos. 1
find diverse learned men to take this to be an E^^ll age of the number, and
read for, with the Saints, with the Holy One, for we may find such examples in
Scripture that the Holy ones for the Holy One
plural number is used sometimes for the singular, as I Will give you an instance
in this very word, how the Saints, is used for the Holy One; for God himself,
in Joshua, 24. 19. For be is a Holy God. The word that is translated Holy
there, is in the plural number, as here, and yet it must be understood and read
in the singular, He is a holy God, and so faithful with the holy God, so some
read it.

But to take it as you find it in your books, Faithful Expos. 2. 1.
with the Saints, that is, with Abraham, Isaac, and with Jacob, with Moses,
with the Prophets, with the Forefathers, he does continue faithful with them.

Or Secondly, Faithful with such as are sanctified; the 2.
true Priests of God, that God had sanctified to himself, faithful with the
Sanctified Ones: whereas Jeroboam took off the lower sort of the people and
made Priests to God, Judah he would have no other Priests, but the Sanctified
Ones of God.

Thirdly, He (...) faithful with the people of God; for all 3.
of Israel that were holy, that were godly, that were the Saints, that were not
detained by some special hand of God, as much as they could they went from the
ten Tribes, and went to Judah to the true Worship of God, now Judah entertained
them, and used them well, and were faithful to them; But on the contrary,
Israel, the ten Tribes they were unfaithful, by using the Saints of God evilly,
that would worship God according to Gods own way, they were cruel, and
oppressing, and unfaithful to them, but Judah was faithful toward such,
embracing and encouraging of them. For us to go on in faithfulness, though we
have none to join with, it is a commendation, and the ways of God are
excellent whether any or no do join with us in them. But it is a great
encouragement to be faithful with the Saints, that is, to go on in those ways
that we see the Saints go on in, and ^o join with the Saints of God, with such
as are the choice Saints of God, to join with them, that is a great
^ncouragement, it strengthens the people of God in their way very much,
Faithful with the Saints; Oh! it is good to be with the Saints, to be with a few
of the Saints, a great deal better than to be with abundance of the men of the
world.

Judah is faithful with the Saints. You should look more at the example of a
few Saints, than at the examples Obs.
of thousands of wicked men, yea of carnal men, of loose and carnal professors;
It Is true, the example of no man is to be a rule, but it is a mighty
encouragement, and has much probability in it, when the most gracious A Caution
and holy Saints are in such or such a way. And thus much for the opening of
this Eleventh Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
VER. 1.
Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows after the East wind.

WE read in the 8th Chapter of this Prophecy, the 7th Verse, that they had
sown the wind, and should reap the whirlwind, and now they feed according to
what they sowed, and of what they reaped; according to our proverb, (They drink
according to what they have brewed) They did sow the wind, and here they feed
upon the wind.

By feeding on the wind, is a proverbial speech, to note the following after
vain, unprofitable things, that is to Feeding on the wind.
feed upon the wind, when men please themselves in their own conceits, and in
their own counsels, and plots, and 1.
ways that are unprofitable, [and will certainly be unprofitable to them] these
men feed upon the wind. When men have vain confidences in such ways of their
own, leaving the ways of God, and blessing themselves in foolish plots, and
hopes of their own, these men feed upon the wind. When men think to please God
with their own inventions, they feed upon the wind; when they think to escape
danger by their own shifts they feed upon the wind; when they think to prevail
against the Saints by their deep Counsels, and fetches, these men feed upon the
wind; when they promise to themselves great matters by ways of their own, that
are not Gods, these men feed upon the wind: And the Prophet rebuk^h the ten
Tribes for this.

They feed upon the wind, and so their hearts come to 2
be puffed up, to be filled with pride by such food; you know according to the
food of a man or woman, so will the body be; so those that feed upon wind must
needs have puft-up hearts, proud hearts, puffed up with conceitedness of
themselves, and contempt of others that are not in the way that themselves are
in, they lie sucking of imaginary content and sweetness in their own ways,
they are full of themselves, wheresoever they come they must needs vent
themselves, they are so full of their wind, they feed upon the wind, yet one
prick of disapointment will quickly let out all the wind from such bladders,
they are quickly amort and dead in the nest if they be disappointed.

Evil men that live upon comforts, that are carnal in 3
any creature, upon the applause of men, upon honors, they likewise feed upon
the wind and are puffed up for a while, but any prick of Gods appearing against
them lets out the windy stuff and quickly they are dead; any member of the body
that is puffed up with wind it seems to be greater than any other part, but it is
not stronger, no, it is the weaker for being puffed up with wind: And so it
Simile.
is with the hearts of men that are puffed up with windy conceits, and with the
contentment of the creature, they have no strength by this puffing up, though
they seem to be higher, yet when they are called either to do, or suffer for
God, they appear to be very weak then, and therefore will change as the wind
changes. I remember Pliny observes this of the Chamaeleon (a creature that
feeds upon the wind) and he cites Democrates for it, (that has written The
Chamaeleon, the reason of its changablenes*
a whole book upon that creature) That there is no creature in all the world
more fearful than the Chamaeleon is, and the reason (says he) that it is so
changable, (that it will change into all kind of colors according to that that
it joins to) is, the fearfulness of its nature. And truly it is a very good
description of men that feed upon the wind, they seem big when they have no
opposition, and o, what they will do! they will do thus and thus, and great
matters; but the truth is, no men are of more None sink lower when
disappointed, than conceited and confident men.
fearful hearts than those men that are puffed up with the wind of their own
conceits, when God comes to cross them, or they are called to suffer in the way
that they go in, they will quickly turn to any color, this way or that,
because they do but feed upon the wind, therefore they come to be feeble
creatures, they have no strength at all in them.

And we know that the wind raises tempests and storms: 4.
and so men that are puffed up with the wind of their own conceits, they are the
men that raise such tempests and storms in the places where they live. My
brethren, the Saints have better food to feed upon, that that makes them more
sollid, and more staid, while the men of the world feed upon the wind of
applause, upon their own conceits, and upon their own vain counsels and plots,
and upon the creature, and think to fill their bellies that way; the Saints
they feed upon the Mercy of God, upon Gods Al-sufficiency, they feed upon his
Word, and Promises, and upon the Covenant of Grace, they feed upon Jesus Christ
whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed, and so they come
to have strength in them, for their food is ^great deal better than the food of
others; other men feeding upon the wind their stomachs are filled, and hence it
is that they cannot savor, nor relish heavenly things, the breathings of the
Spirit of God are not entertained by them, because they are filled with their
own wind; but the Saints are willing to empty themselves, and to receive in the
holy Ghost into their souls, and the blessed things that the holy Ghost does
bring, Christ comes in to sup with them, and they to sup with him, and thus
they come to be nourished to eternal life, and fitted for any service, or any
suffering that the Lord is pleased to call them to; their food is different. It
follows; And follows after the East wind*

This East Wind, especially in those Countries, it is noted to be a very
hurtful Wind; exceedingly hurtful to The East wind,
man and beast; and so we have a proverb of the East Wind, The East wind blows
neither good to man nor beast; but more especially in that Country. So we find
it in Scripture, in Genesis 41. 6. the text says, The seven thin Ears that
Pharaoh saw of Corn that came up, but were blasted with the East wind, and in
Ezekiel 17. 10. Shall it not wither when the East wind touches it? and in Job,
15. 2. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the East
wind? When you see men talk and utter vain things, they do but seek to fill
their bellies with the East wind. The East wind was so hurtful because there
came a heat of the Sun that made it dry and scorching in those Why hurtful.
Countries; and therefore the Septuagint translate this, the scorching Wind,
for the burning and heat of it. And (...). 70.
the vulgar Latin likewise, renders it, Heat.

Now you will say, What does the holy Ghost mean Aestus. Vulg.
here? It Is to hold out a very excellent Truth to us:

That those men that seek to satisfy themselves with creature comforts, the
thoughts of their own counsels Obl. Creatures hope will prove but wind,
and plots, their own inventions, their own ways, they do not only deceive
themselves, and will be disappointed at last of what they expect; but they will
find these ways of theirs to be very pestilentious; very hurtful, very
dangerous, they will find that such ways as these, will undo them, will bring
them to misery. Oh! how many have undone themselves with their own counsels;
were it indeed that men were but merely disappointed of their vain hopes, there
were a great evil in that, but if that were all it were not so much, if so be
that men at last should meet with no other evil but disappointment, it were not
so much, but you must not escape so, you that will feed upon the wind, and
bless your selves in And pernicious.
your own ways, you must expect to meet with wrath and misery, those ways
that you may think to shift from danger will bring you into danger; Oh! how
many upon their sick beds, and death beds, have cried out in the bitterness and
trouble of their souls, for following of their own conceits, and counsels, and
ways, and the ways of other men, they see how that they are undone, undone by
those ways: Oh! we have fed upon the wind, and we find evil ways that pleased
us then to torment us now, to bring anguish, sorrow, and trouble upon us.

And one Note further, Follows the East wind. They Obs. 2.
met with storms, (observe) for the East wind was very hurtful, and tempestuous
in those parts: Now to meet with storms, and tempests, and have nothing within
us to bear us out, but the wind, but emptiness, this is grievous, when they
shall meet with the East wind, and have nothing within them (I say) to bear
them out but merely emptiness, this is very sad and grievous. Suppose men meet
with the rough East wind, or there is such storms and tempests, yet if they have
had solid food whereby they come to get good blood, and marrow, and spirits,
they may be able to bear it; but when the body is empty and meets with
tempests, Oh! this is very grievous to the body: so it is with many when they
meet with afflictions, but the Saints they have such solidity within them that
bears them out; but other men that are empty, that have fed upon the wind all
their days, Difference in the Saints from others in Afflictions.
they have nothing to bear them out in great afflictions, but their hearts sink
down in horror and despair. But it follows; He daily increases lies and
desolation.

Ephraim together with the ten Tribes, with them all, Expos.
all the day long he increases lies, that is, he has new plots, and new
devises, and new shifts for himself, he increases lies, new opinions, and new
reports, so we are to understand the word in the latitude, increases lies.

First, In matters of Doctrine, there he increases lies, 1. Lies in Doctrine.
having forsaken once the Truth: if the truth be once forsaken, men do not know
whither they shall go: Grant but one error (we use to say) a thousand will
follow, and Vno absurdo dato mill sequuntur.
they will multiply abundantly, especially some errors, there are some such
breeding lies as if they be granted, there must be a great many others to
maintain them. Never was there such an increase of false Doctrine, of lies in
that sense, as there is at this day, in Revel. 12. 15. the These times.
text says, that when the Dragon could not prevail against the Church, against
the woman, by bloody persecutions, (for that is the meaning of it) then says
the text the Dragon cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the floo(...) this was the
policy of the Devil, first laboring by violence to prevail against the Church,
but that he could not do, and when he could not do that, then he cast w^ter out
of his mouth like a flood, that it, as Interpre(...) observe, he did labor by a
deluge of error and her (...) Rev. 12. 5. enlightened.
undo the Church, when he could not do it by open violence: Truly this
Scripture is even fulfilled, concerning us this very day, the Lord has been
pleased to curb the England.
Dragon in this sense, and those that were instruments of the Dragon in open
and violent perse(...)cution, so that they cannot persecute the Truths as they
were wont to do; now this is the way of the Devil, this Dragon he sends out of
his mouth a flood of Errors and Heresies after the Truth, after the Church,
laboring to swallow up all by this flood; and certainly we are in a great deal
of danger at this day in this respect, there is a flood and deluge of such
things, of all sorts almost of old errors that ever were, and many of them
extreme dangerous, and men are serviceable to the Dragon in this thing more
than Let Novelists mark.
they are aware of, Oh! that we could but see the subtilty of Satan in this, in
the continual increasing of lies, for these four or five years there has been
such an increase as it could never have been thought; Certainly if some of our
forefathers that were holy and gracious should rise out of their graves, and
come to see and hear such things as may be seen and heard in our days, they
would stand amazed at it, and they would wonder how it were possible that ever
England should be filled with such horrible opinions, and ways as they have
been in these latter times, so that now there lies the hope of the Devil, by
increase of such lies, to eat out Godliness, and Religion thereby, and this
indeed seems to be the most hopeful design, that the Devil has in these latter
times, men's hearts Whence it comes that there is such an increase o false
doctrine in England.
are carnal, loose, and sensual, and therefore they are prepared to receive
these lies; and hence they multiply apace, because they are prepared to receive
them, but yet let none multiply them more than they are, by putting among those
lies some truths, By shutting in truths in the midst of them, to make them
appear likewise to be lies, and Note.
to be taken as honest men are when they are gotten by any accident in the
company of lude people, they are apprehended An apt similo
upon suspicion, merely because they are in their company; and it is a way of
the Devil to multiply and increase these falsehoods and lies by shuffling in
some truths among them, and because he could not have them suspected otherways
they must be taken upon suspicion because they are there among them; let not
men gather these lye^ together to the end that they may oppose some truths
thereby, but as the Prophet speaks, What is the chaff to the wheat? If men will
speak of lies let them enveigh against them, and only against them, and make it
appear that that is the work of their spirits, merely to oppose them, and not
under such a pretense to make other things that yet they cannot make appear to
be false, to make them appear to be odious and monstrous, merely by shufling
them together among such horrible and damnable lies. That Is for false Doctrine.

And then secondly, Thy increase lies and desolation, that 2 Lies against the
Prophets.
is, lies against the Prophets of God, against the Saints, and against the
Ways of God. And certainly there was never the like multiplying as there is at
this day in this sense too, men carry their multiplying glasses along with them
up and down; at first, a lie, it is like a stone in the water; you know a stone
first cast in makes a little circle, and then that another, and that another,
and every Simile.
one greater than another: And so it is with many lies, at first they appear
not so great, but that makes another, and that another, and that another, and
so they grow greater, and greater, and that exceedingly; there is Several ways
of increasing lies. 1
many ways of multiplying and increasing lies.

First, by carrying about reports, and so make one lie to become many.

And then a Second way is, by misreporting of reports, 2
that is, by putting reports into another dress, according to what men
themselves apprehend, and that which is a truth when it comes to be examined
nakedly, yet they will, being put into another dress, and such and such things
laid together in another way than they were at first, they will seem to be very
false. This is a way of multiplying lies.

Thirdly, by adding to reports, every man according 3
to his spirit, draws consequences, and when he has drawn them, he makes them
to be part of the report, and so makes it to be the Original, as if it were the
Original, whenas it is but the Comment, and so lies comes to be multiplied.

Fourthly, by inventing new ones they come to increase 4
and multiply, because such and such falsehoods will not do the feat, more shall
then be added to them.

Fifthly, they increase and multiply, by maintaining 5
lies by lies, as if men be engaged once in a business, they must defend
themselves; If once they have misreported a thing, there is no help for it, but
now it must be defended one way or other, somewhat must be done to defend it;
as it is many times so in your servants, a Servant Servants
has done a thing amiss, well, this Servant seeks to cover it by a lie, and
when once he has told one, he must tell a great many more to defend that one;
and thus it is with men.

And truly my Brethren, seeing that this Scripture does so by providence come
in our way, let me speak thus much to you from it. It is one of the strangest
things that ever was in the world, that there should be such strange reports of
things that are matters of fact, (See the Apology of the dissenting Brethren:
And the Assembly's Answer to it.)
yea, that one Godly man, or company of men should say one thing, and others,
that we think Godly men, should say quite contrary, and both in matters of
fact; I say, it is that which would make men stand amazed as much as ever any
thing that fell out in any age, to consider of it; for there is no sin that is
more against the ingenuity of a gracious heart, than a deliberate lie, to speak
against a man's knowledge, and against a man's conscience, this sin is against the
ingenuity of a gracious heart as much as any sin; and yet even such as we think
to be godly, and gracious, even reporting so quite cross, what shall we say to
this?

Austin has such an expression of his, to a friend that Austin.
writ to him about the telling of an officious lie: he answers him again, No;
he must not tell a lie, no, not to save the whole world. Now what a difference
is there in the hearts of men in these days? Truly, I do not know a greater
temptation to Atheism at this day than this is, for what will men think?
There Is such Religious men speak thus, and others that we account as Religious
as they speak quite contrary; Is there any Religion in the world? We see so
much contradicting one against another, surely one side must be false. It Is
that that I am A horrible temptation to Atheism.
verily persuaded is the cause of much Atheism amongst us, and if God be not
pleased to prevent one way or other, it will open a wide door to Atheism in the
Nation; But therefore those that would fain get this stumbling. block to be
removed, and do not rejoice at it as some do, some there are that rejoices at
these things, there is nothing more pleasing to them when they meet together, We
should mourn for this. Condderations to prevent suggestions of Atheism from the
contrary reports of godly parties. 1.
whereas they should be matter for our humiliation, we should mourn for them,
to see how God is dishonored this way, and what abundance of hurt is like to
come to souls by this means? But now therefore, a little to quiet our hearts,
so as we may not be endanger to turn Atheists by it, let us consider from
whence this comes, that so many lies should be increased and multiplied.

For First, Consider, though one says this thing is so, and the other faith
it is quite contrary, yea, but it may be that both sides do report according to
their own apprehensions of things, and apprehending things in a different way,
having diverse principles, both of them may think they are in the Truth, and yet
one may contradict the other, because they may speak according to their
apprehensions on both sides, for it is very much according to the principles of
ones spirit in any thing, especially if a business has many things depending
on it, and there are many circumstances to be laid together, then according to
men's apprehensions and their principles, ^hey will lay things together, so as
may best suit their principles; and others will say things together, so as may
best suit their principles, and so both of them may think they are in the
Truth, and contradict one another, and yet neither of them speak against their
consciences: this (possibly I say) may even be among good men.

And then sometimes the reason of contradiction, it is, 2
because men do not speak from their own knowledge, but they are ready to speak
from others, and are so confident in others; whomsoever men love, when they see
men to be of their side and way, they are very confident in their rports, and
so speak it, not from being Eyewitnesses themselves, and so they may come to
contradict one another, and not go against their own consciences: Reports are
cross one to another; and this is the evil indeed of giving credit to reports,
and of running away too suddenly with them; But though it be an evil in men,
yet it comes not from this, of speaking against their consciences.

And then a Third cause it may come from this, That when men report, they do
not report all; Reports are 3
cross one to another, yea, but did you hear all, or do you report all? It Is a
great matter when a man will take one piece of a thing and make a report of it,
and not all; another man may come and report the quite contrary, whereas if all
were brought together there might appear some agreement, and perhaps they would
be both of the same mind if the whole series of the thing were laid before them;
bring things to the Original and then you see how they agree; as now, sometimes
in Scripture, there are diverse readings, yea, but now by the bringing diverse
Simile, in Scripture.
Translations to the Original, we come to see what an agreement there is: And
so it is with reports, bring them to the Original, and so you may come to help
your selves and see what agreement may be made.

And then further, Reports (may be) are cross, but the 4.
crosness of things may be in men's memories, rather than in the things
themselves, I say merely in the memory, and people do not in all things that
they speak, say, why I remember thus, or I remember this is not expressed, but
sometimes the very nature of the thing carries it so.

My Brethren, therefore take heed of spreading reports Use. 1.
to the dishonor of Religion. And,

Secondly; If you hear any false things that you think 2.
surely this must be a lie, rather go to the party, or get some that are
acquainted with them to go to them to see whether they can satisfy you in the
thing; there is many men that stand and wonder at such a report, whereas if
they, or any friend for them, would but search out the thing, they might have
such a plain history of the things related to them, as should fully satisfy
them, as they should say, there would be no such matter at all, so that their
apprehensione would be changed presently. But so much concerning increasing of
lies in regard of reports.

But then there is a Third thing here; That is, Increasing lies in regard of
Practice, still following after 3. Lies in practice.
new vanities, if they find not satisfaction in one they are not moved thereby
to seek the true God that they may have satisfaction, but seek to have
satisfaction in other things: Oh! let us consider thus; I find no satisfaction
in this, yea, but is it not because I forsake the Lord God, Why men find not
satisfaction in their ways.
in whom there is all satisfaction? let me repair to God, and in him I shall
find satisfaction. No, but they take another course; I have not satisfaction in
this thing, then I Will seek to have satisfaction in another thing, and so they
go from one false way to another, and increase lies in this sense; I will have
new devises to shift off Truth; the consciences of men will not be put off with
old shifts, they have satisfied their consciences a while with one shift, yea,
but conscience will not be put off long with that, but they must have another,
and when conscience Invention to satisfy conscience, may prove judgment.
comes to apprehend the weakness of that, then it must have another; Oh; take
heed of being inventive for the satisfying of conscience. It follows; They have
increased lies and desolation.

Men when they embrace their own vain conceits, and hopes, and false ways;
they think they have gotten a Expos.
great catch; but the truth is they embrace their own ruin: Mark how they are
put together, Increase lies, and desolation is the fruit of lies; and secondly,
desolation is increased by lies; the more sin the more desolation, you will
perish the more dreadfully, in Prove. 19. 8. A false witness (says the text)
shall not be unpunished, and be that speaks lies shall perish. He that walks
uprightly he walks surely. Prove. 12. 19. The lip of Truth shall be established
for ever, but a lying tongue is but for a moment; it may bluster a while and
keep ado, and deceive many, yea, but it is but for a moment. It follows; And
they do make a Covenant with the Assyrians; and Oil is carried into Egypt.

That is, That they might have power to crush their Expos.
Brethren of Judah, they think to strengthen themselves and so seek to make a
Covenant with the Assyrians; you have found this charged upon them many times
here in this Prophecy of Hosea, 13. 7. 11. and in Hosea, 10. you have this sin
of making a Covenant with wicked men, and it is repeated again, and again, to
show the hainousness of this sin, in forsaking God, to join with ungodly men.

And to teach us this lesson, That when people are guilty Obs.
of a sin, the Prophets of God should beat upon it again, and again. I shall
not need to speak any further of this, but only so.

And Oil is carried into Egypt] That is, They carry Oil Expos.
for gifts, and merchandise, the Land of Canaan abounded much in Oil; but there
was little or no Oil in the Land of Egypt, and therefore it was a great
merchandise to carry Oil from the Land of Cannan into Egypt; in Ezekiel. 27. 17.
Judah, and the Land of Israel were thy Merchants, they traded in thy Market,
Wheat of Minnich, and Pannag, and Honey, and Oil, and Balm. But this was (as it
were) the staple Commodity.

Now my Brethren, Egypt you know is a type of Antichrist, Egypt. Canaan.
and Canaan a type of the Church; Egypt has no Oil, there is no Oil grows
there, no, there is Gall and Wormwood, there is no Oil; but Oil is in the Land of
Canaan. My Brethren, What are we but almost like Egypt this day? We would be
loath to return into Egypt to our former bondage, but we even turn our selves to
be as Egypt, we have little Oil among us; What, is God bringing us to Canaan?
how comes it to pass there is no more Oil then? Oh! the Oil that is among us
(if there be any) it is rather the Oil of Scorpions, than any thing else! men's
Spirits, and men's Pens, and men's Tongues are even full of this Oil, as if the
Ink that were made in these days, were made of the Oil of Scorpions. Israel
(the ten Tribes) would send Oil to Egypt, to gain the favor of Egypt, that
they might have their wills over their brethren, they would be at a great deal
of cost, and part with their Oil: Oh! my brethren, shall it be so with us? to
apply it spiritually, that we might have our wills over our brethren, shall we
part with our Oil? Why do Note.
not we say as the Figtree, Shall we leave our sweetness to come and reign over
you? So, shall we leave our Oil? that is, The suppleness, the gentleness, the
tenderness of our spirits, shall we lose these, that we may prevail over our
Brethren? Oh! how many were of supple tender spirits, and loving one toward
another, yet out of a desire to prevail against their Brethren, they have
parted with their Oil, even with the tenderness and suppleness of their
spirits: Remember, Egypt has no Oil, but Oil is in Canaan, it grows there.

VER. 2.
The Lord also has a Controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according
to his ways, according to his doings will he recompense him.

THis Verse I shall presently pass over. But the first part is very observable.

Calvin says of it, It Is a wonderful thing; Did not Mir^m est etc. Calv. in
loc,
God say, That Judah rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints; and now
says, He has a Controversy with Judah?

I find some therefore would reconcile it thus, and say, Expos. 1
The Lord has a Controversy FOR Judah; (but that is a little strained)

But the Lord has a Controversy WITH Judah. 2. God comends, and contends with
his Church at once. Reas. 1,


And there may be Four Reasons why after God had said, That Judah rules with
God, and is faithful with the Saints, that he says, He has a Controversy
with Judah.

The First Reason is this, To show, that God does not so look at the good of
his People, but he sees the evil in them too. You know those passages in the 2d
of Revelations, where God commends such and such Churches for doing thus and
thus; but yet notwithsthnding, I have a few things against thee, I do not so
observe your good, but I observe your evil too. My Brethren, some there are,
that if there Men's error in judging others. 1. 2.
be any evil in men, they can see no good in them, this is wicked. But others
there are that if there be any good in them, can see no evil; this is too much
indulgence too, it is two extremities in both.

Secondly, Yet God has a controversy with Judah; Judah has no cause to bless
her self in her ways that are 2.
good, because she retained the true Worship of God: Men are very apt to bless
themselves in some ways that are not good, because they did choose some other
ways that are good; I mean thus, That such men as embrace Men excuse their
evil by their good.
the true Worship of God, are right there, they will have pure Ordinances, and
the way of God right according to the Word, and because of that though there be
some looseness and negligence in their ways otherways, yet Reformed worshipers.
they put off conscience with this, and think they are the true Worshipers of
God, and have the Ordinances of God in the purity and power of them, and so
think to swallow down all, much looseness, much carnality, much pride, much
sensualness, much hypocrisy, and yet because they are in the way of the true
Worship of God they seek to satisfy conscience with this. Oh! take heed of
this, God may have a Controversy against you.

Thirdly, The Lord has a Controversy with Judah, he does express himself
thus, that Israel might neither think 3
God or the Prophet partial. The ten Tribes might say, Does God threaten us? Is
not Judah as bad as we? are there not evils among Judah as well as us? are we
only the sinful people? No (says the Prophet) I acknowledge there is much evil
in Judah, and therefore the Lord has a Controversy against Judah too, and
Judah is not like to escape, and let not this satisfy you, that because others
are bad, therefore you may escape; no, they are bad, and God has a
Controversy against them. And this may be an useful Note to us, men are very
ready to put off the evils that they are guilty of with this, I am not worse
than others, I do such a thing amiss, and others do such a thing amiss as well
as I, and so they think to escape that way. Oh! thou weak man, thou vain man,
why will thou deceive thy soul with this? Do thou think that another man's
evil may be an excuse to thy evil? Thou art a vain man and know not the way
of God.

The Fourth Note is this: Therefore does God say, he 4
has a Controversy against Judah here, to show them, how much more must the
ten Tribes expect the displeasure of God; If Judah who retains the true Worship
of God, yet for some other evils God has a Controversy against them, then
what will become of Israel, who have those evils, and reject the true Worship
of God too? As if the Prophet should say, your condition is far worse,
therefore does the Lord say, he has a Controversy against Judah, that he
might aggravate the evils of Israel: like that of Peter, If Judgment begin at
the House of God, where shall the wicked and the sinner appear? If so be that
the Church which have the Ordinances in the purity of them, yet God is
displeased with them for their sin, how much more will he be displeased with
them who are corrupt in the Worship of God? Therefore men should not bless
themselves with such discourse as this: Why, others have evils as well as we,
yea, but if God will punish them for their evils that have sewer, and a great
deal more good than thou, how much more will he punish thee? Oh! if those that
are the dear Saints of God, that worship him in truth and sincerity, and they
have evils among them, but yet they shall not escape scot-free, Oh! then, what
will become of thee who art a wicked and vile wretch and have no good at all?
If a Moses that had done God so much service, yet for one sin of passion (for
so it was) was shut out of the Land of Cannan, (it was but one time that he
spoke unadvisedly with his lips, that God shut him out, and bid him speak no
more to him of that matter) what will become of thee that have a passionate
froward spirit, and thou that never have, nor wilt do God A Note for passionat
men
the service that such a Servant of his has done, what will become of t(...)?
Oh! how ^ayest thou look to be shut out. This use you must make of the sins of
others, and Gods dealings with them. And says he, I will punish Jacob
according to his ways etc.

There is Two Questions necessary for the opening of this.

First, Why the ten Tribes are called by the name of Jacob, we never read that
they are called by the name of Quest.
Isaac, and of Abraham.

Now for the Answer to that, it is given thus; which is a very satisfying
Answer, That therefore the People Answ.
of God are called in Scripture by the name of Jacob, and by the name of Israel
his other name, rather than by the name of Abraham and Isaac, because they
(though godly) and were the Father and Grandfather, yet in Abraham's family
there was wicked as well as good; likewise from Isaac's loins there came Esau
as well as Jacob; but now from Jacobs loins there came none but were of Gods
Church, all Jacobs Sons they are the twelve Patriarchs, and therefore they are
called by the name of Jacob, rather than Abraham or Isaac; and therefore when
he speaks of the People of God, he calls them the seed of Jacob, I said not to
the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain. Quest.


But then Secondly, Why is Jacob mentioned in this place? Answ.


Because the Prophet intends presently in the words that follow, to bring the
example of Jacob to them before he was Israel, to aggravate their sin for the
work of humiliation, and therefore here he names Jacob to take away that vain
plea of their hearts, whereas they would say, Why were not we the posterity of
Jacob, Have not we Jacob to be our Father? Well (says he) I Will punish Jacob,
and I Will show you by and by that you have no such cause to boast your selves,
that you have Jacob to be your Father, and so I take it, and most Interpreters,
that by Jacob he means the ten Tribes. Now for the other part of the text I
shall speak nothing concerning that, because in Chap. 4. Ver. 9. we had the
very same words there. It follows;

VER. 3.
He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength had power
with God, etc.

THis Prophet enveighing against the sins of these ten Tribes, and threatening
Judgments in these words; He takes away the plea that he saw was in their
hearts against what he had said, We are the children of Jacob, and why do you
thus charge us, and threaten us in the Name of God? was not Jacob our Father?
As in Christ's time they pleaded that Abraham was their Father.

Now in these words read unto you, the Prophet takes away this plea, and the
scope of them comes to this, as Scope of the Text.
if he had said, you may bless your selves in that Jacob was your Father, but
it will do you little good, for you are a degenerate offspring from him; It Is
true, God was very gracious to Jacob, and Jacob was very deer to God, it is
otherwise with you, Jacob worshipped God after another manner than you do; The
Prophet therefore sets before this people here in the words read, Gods mercy to
Jacob, and Jacobs graciousness in his behavior toward God, that he might
upbraid those children of Jacob, who walked so unworthy of such a gracious
Father as Jacob was, that is the scope.

Now how this is set forth we shall speak to presently, only for the scope of
the Prophet in these three Verses read unto you we take notice only of this one
instruction.

That it is a great upbraiding of children that are wicked, to Note.
hear of the graciousness of their parents, and should be a matter of much
humiliation to wicked children to hear of the relation that their parents had
to God, and what worshipers of God their parents were: children that have had
gracious parents should look upon it as a shame to them when at any time the
graciousness of their parents is but mentioned before them. I remember I have
read of a King of Poland, that was wont to carry the picture of his Father in a
plate of Gold about his neck, that he had honorable esteem of, and when he was
to do any matter of great importance, he would take this picture and kiss it,
and use these words, God grant that I may do nothing now remisly, that I may do
nothing now unworthy of my Father; because his Father was so good a man. Oh!
you that have had gracious Ancestors, think often of them, and when you are
tempted to sin, think this, Is not this unworthy of my Ancestors? would they
have done thus? Children should so walk as the virtues of their Fathers should
not die in them, but they should hold them forth. As Ambrose in an Oration of
his upon Ambrose. Theodotius.
the Commendations of Theodotius, says he, Though Theodotius be gone, yet
surely so long as his Son lives, Theodotius will live among us. He meant thus,
that the virtues of that virtuous Emperor would certainly live in his Son that
was so hopeful. Oh! it is an excellent thing when the virtues of gracious
parents do live in their Children; and it is a very evil thing when the Parents
are dead, yea, and their virtues are dead in respect of their children, there is
nothing of them appears in them; they love to inherit their Lands and Estates,
but it was a great deal better to inherit their virtues, and their godliness.
But the people of Israel did not inherit the godliness of Jacob, and did not so
much take to heart the goodness of God toward their Father Jacob, that the
Prophet does here now lay open before them, and to that end he makes use of
three Histories. There is three famous Histories in the two first verses that I
have read to you that the Prophet here makes use of, and there is much of the
mind of God in them, I shall open much Three Historys to explain the Text.
Scripture in the first two verses, for they refer unto three Histories that we
have in the book of Genesis.

The First History of Jacobs taking his brother by the 1.
heel you shall find in Genesis 25. 26. He took his brother by the heel.

And then the Second History you shall find in Genesis 2.
32.

And the Third History, partly in the 28, and partly 3.
in the 35. of Genesis

The first is, He took his brother by the heel. You must Expos. 1.
refer to that Scripture in Genesis to know the mind of God in this, there you
shall find that in the womb of Rebekah there was a striving between Jacob and
Esau, this was before they were born, and at their birth Jacob put his hand out
and takes his brother by the heel, from whence he had his name Jacob; that
signifies a heel, and from thence (...) a (...) supplantavit. (...) a (...)
operatus est.
a Supplanter. And Esau he has his name of Acting or Doing, he was made a man,
that is, because he was hairy when he was born, he was as it were a man
already, from whence he had his name Esau, he is (as it were) a man made in the
womb: Says Habet nomen a faciendo, hic ille vir qui praeclare omnia faciet, ut
^ulgd dicitur fac totu^ mirabilit profecto Historia. Luth.
Luther, here is the man that will do all things famously; when Esau was born,
and they saw him so hairy, they thought he was the man that would do very great
and famous things in the world, and from thence he had his name Esau: Now Jacob
in his birth he takes this Esau that every one thought when he was born would
have been a famous man, and done famous things, he takes him by the heel: says
Luther upon the place, a most wonderful History, this taking his brother by the
heel.

But what is the meaning of this, (you will say?) why does the Prophet instance
in this? to what purpose is Reasons why the Scripture sets down Jacobs taking
his brother by the heel.
this to the ten Tribes, that Jacob took his brother by the heel? what good
would this do to the People, that Hosea was prophesying to? he tells them that
their Father Jacob take his brother by the heel? what did he aim at? Was this
story to be a means to humble the people for their sins? how could it do it?
Therefore we must know that the scope and meaning of this great work of God, in
taking his brother by the heel, it was this:

First, It showed, That though Esau was the first born, and so in an orderly
course the birthright should have descended upon him, and upon his posterity,
for so it did, the blessing did use to go along with the firstborn, and with
their posterity; in which the firstborn was a type of Christ, who is called,
The first begotten of all creatures: and the blessing upon the first born was a
type of the blessing that we have by Christ: Now though this in an orderly way
belonged to Esau, as being the firstborn, yet Jacob's taking of him by the
heel, was a certain token from God that Jacob should supplant him, and that he
should get the birthright from him, and so the blessing from him; and in that
Jacob should thus get the blessing, though he were the younger, and this sign
was given of it when he was in the womb; this did show the free election of
God, that it was through Gods mere free Grace that Jacob had the blessing
rather than Esau, and so that the posterity of Jacob were in a better condition
than the posterity of Esau: It was only the free Grace of God, not from any
excellency in Jacob, any worthiness in him more than in Esau, for God showed a
sign of it that he intended good when they were in the womb, before Jacob could
do any thing that was good.

Though Esau was the Elder, stronger, hairy, active, stout man, and Jacob a
plain man, yet Jacob is chosen, Esau is rejected; and God shows the sign of
this, by his taking his brother by the heel. Now this concerned the people very
much, they understanding this to be the scope of it.

As if he should say, What, you are the posterity of Jacob, and not of Esau,
and you glory in this; Well, how comes it to pass there is so great a privilege
to the posterity of Jacob rather than to the posterity of Esau? how comes this?
Is it not from the free Grace of God in choosing one rather than the other, and
that in the very womb? as in Mal. 1. 2. I have loved you, says the Lord; yet
ye say, Wherein have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother, says the
Lord? yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau. In this I manifested my free love,
even unto this people, that though Esau was Jacob's brother, and eldest
brother, yet I loved Jacob, and hated Esau. So in Romans 9. 11. The children
being not yet born, neither having done good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand; not of works, but of him that calls. It
was said, The elder shall serve the younger; as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated. Now this was to show Gods free grace, that it was
in the womb.

If any should say, But God foresaw that Jacob would be Quest.
a better man than Esau.

I answer: If it were of foreseen works, there were no Answ.
Argument in this to prove Gods free election, but the Apostle makes it to be
an Argument to prove Gods free election of Jacob rather than Esau, because he
chose them in the womb.

Luther upon the 25. Chap. of Genesis has an excellent Luther in Genesis 25.
discourse upon this subject, concerning Gods rejecting the pride, pomp and
vanity of the world, and choosing the things that are mean and contemptible in
the eyes of the world; and it was an emblem of it, in that God would rather
choose Jacob the plain man, than Esau the hunter, and the hairy man: I say, it
was an emblem of this, That the Lord intends to reject the brave things in the
world, the galantry, glory and pomp of the world, and will rather choose the mean
and contemptible things of the world: Who can persuade (says Luther upon the
place) the Pope, and Charles the fifth, the French King, and the like, that they
being great in the world, yet are contemptible in the eyes of God, and God has
rather chosen despised and contemptible things than them? And that was the
scope of the Prophet to humble this people, that they should consider of the
free grace of God toward Jacob.

And we should make use of this, We are to consider the Obs. 1.
free Grace of God how it has wrought in choosing our for fathers, and what
good we do enjoy by such a choice, we are to acknowledge it to be a fruit of
free Grace too; Others were before God as well as our forefathers; as now, when
God brought the Gospel first to England, other Nations were before God as well
as them, It was mere free Grace that pitched upon them rather than others, and
we enjoy the blessing of it to this day, let us not sin against this free Grace
of God showed to our Ancestors.

And more particularly, You that now enjoy great blessings from Gods mercies to
your Ancestors either outward or inward, Obs. 2.
you must consider the free Grace of God; as now, such of you as are rich,
great in the world; whence is it that your Ancestors were richer than others,
and were not beggars as well as others? Was it not free Grace, free Grace in
The free grace of God to our Ancestors.
in the kind of it? it was the free goodness of God; Others that had their
Ancestors to be beggars they were before God in the same lump with your
Ancestors, and that God should rather pitch upon your Ancestors to be honorable
in the earth and rich, and you enjoy the benefit of it in this world, look to
the free goodness of God that has made such a difference between your
Ancestors and others; it may be some of you, though you be honorable, and rich,
yet your elder Brother might be rejected, and sometimes Families rises from the
younger Brother rather than the elder; It was so here, Jacob that was the younger
he afterward came to have the blessing, and Esau rejected. And it may be that
the posterity of the elder Brother proves wicked; it was so here, Religion in
the Family of Jacob and not in Esau; look back to this, and see what cause you
have to bless God, and how you are engaged to the free Grace of God toward you
in regard of your Ancestors; as here the Prophet would have this people look
back to the free Grace of God to their Father Jacob; and that is the first thing
the Prophet aimed at.

But in the Second place,

Jacob took his Brother by the heel. That is, as if he should Expos. 2.
say, your Father Jacob he was greedy of the blessing, greedy of the
birthright, there was a secret in stinct of God upon the spirit of Jacob when
he was in the very womb, to be greedy of the blessing of the birthright, and
therefore he would do what he could to get it from his Brother, as if the
Prophet should say, Oh! but you that are his posterity you are carnal, you do
not regard the privilege of the birthright, you do not regard the blessing that
comes by it, being carnal you care not which way that goes, so be it you may
but live and have your ease and contentment to the flesh; Oh! you are not like
your Father Jacob that was so greedy to have this blessing.

We are to make use of this for our instruction thus, Use of Instruction.
some of you that have had your parents very forward in their youth, betimes
some of your Parents were gracious and godly, were greedy of the things of God,
now you should make use of that for the humbling of your souls, Oh! how
negligent have I been? how careless is my spirit, and slight and vain? yea,
though I be come to years, do little regard that which my Parents were greedy
upon when they were very young. That Is a second thing.

And then yet further, Jacobs taking his brother by the Expos. 3.
heel, in the third place, it was a type of the prevailing of the Church, of
the people of God against the wicked at last; God made Jacob a famous and
notable type in this work; That certainly the Saints though they may seem to be
low and mean for the present, yet they shall get advantage over the men of the
world. The men of the world are set out by Esau, they are ruffling abroad in
the world, and of fiery hot spirits as Esau was, and they have great things in
the world for a time, and the Saints are under them, as Jacob was under Esau;
but certainly the Saints shall prevail against all the Edomites, all the Esaus
(as I may so speak) there is a time that they shall supplant them, and get the
power over them, this was typified in this work of God upon Jacob in the womb,
in taking his brother by the heel, the godly shall prevail at length against
all the wicked and ungodly in the world: You should consider it, as if the
Prophet should say to them; you are seeking to provide for your selves in the
sinful way you are in, Oh! if you did but consider, that the faithful, though
they be persecuted for a time, what low condition soever they are, yet they
shall get the power over all the great ones in the world, it would be otherwise
with you than now it is. So we find in Scripture that though indeed the way of
the Saints be such as they are kept low for a long time, yet the Scripture
tells us, that at length they shall have the dominion, in Dan. 7. 18. The
Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom, and in the 21. verse, I beheld,
and the same horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them, (but
how long?) Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the
Saints of the most High, and the time came that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom. And verse 17. The Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the
most High, There is a time that it shall be given to them. And Psalm. 49. 14.
The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. This was typified in
this notable work of God in Jacob's taking Esau by the heel to supplant him.

Fourthly, Here we may see the providence of God, 4.
how it extends toward infants, even in the very womb; the very striving of
children in the womb is not without providence; there was a mighty providence
of God in this, to set out the greatest things of God that are revealed in the
Scripture. Now though there be such extraordinary and great things set forth by
the ordinary stirrings of infants in the womb, yet certainly there is no
stirring of the child in the womb but it is with some providence of God, and
God he has his eye upon, and his hand in the working even of the very child in
the womb.

And yet further, Luther observes the secret ways of 5.
God in working upon infants, and though they have not the use of Reason, yet
says he, there may be mighty workings of God even upon their spirits in a
secret way that we are not able to understand: And upon that occasion he falls
a crying out upon such as do deny baptism to them, upon that very ground,
because they are not capable of any work of God upon them, and the denying of
it upon that ground, he calls it a very odious Odiosum and impium dogma
Anabaptistarum, qui ideo pueris Baptismum negant, quia sensu ac mentacareant,
nec intelligant quae cum eu aguntur. Luth. in loc. 6.
opinion, to think that because of that, they should not have it, for says he,
as it is with children, they have their nourishment in the womb in another
manner than when they are born, and so the works of God upon their spirits may
be such as when they are in the womb, and when they are little ones before they
come to the use of Reason, that may be far different to what the work of God is
upon them when they come afterward to have the use of Reason.

And then the last thing that is to be noted from hence, is this, That men who
prove notable in their lives, have many times notable presages of their notable
exploits in their very birth of what they should do after; as it was a notable
exploit that Jacob should do in supplanting his Brother: By some notable
providence God shows many times what men shall do that he chooses to be eminent
in the world; as Moses, by what was done upon his birth there was a presage of
his strange and wonderful kind of deliverance when he was both, and being
brought into Pharaoh's Court: and so John Baptist a Presage of what should be
afterward; and so other stories tell us of men that have been famous for good
or evil, there has been presages at their birth. I remember it is said of Nero
that did such monstrous things, that when he was born, he was born with his
heels forward: and it is said of Dominicus that great persecuter of the Saints,
that when his Mother was with child, she dreamed that she had in her womb, a
Wolf with a firebrand in his mouth, and he even proved to be so, for he was
one of the first that stirred up Persecution against the SAINTS by FIRE; and
your Papists they turn it quite otherwise; I remember one of the Papists
interpreting this providence of God, that the Mother of Dominicus (who was the
father of the Dominicans) should have such a dream; it was to S. Dominic. Vt
splendore sanctitatis and doctrinae homines toto orb inflammaret.
signify says he, That by the Splendour of his holiness, and Doctrine he
should inflame the whole world, and that was signified (say they) by the
firebrand in his mouth, whereas experience taught otherwise. Now I note this
only to show the vanity of men's spirits in interpreting ways of providence
merely according to their own humors. And thus much for that notable story of
Jacobs taking his brother by the heel. Now follows the next, and that is, -- He
had strength with God. Text.


Now this story refers to Genesis 32. you shall find if you Expos. Genesis 32. 31.
observed.
cast your eyes upon the Chapter before the 31. that God having bid Jacob
return into the Land of his Fathers, and to his kindred, he promised him that
he would be with him in his journey; yet mark, though God had made him go this
journey, and had promised that he would be with him in the journey, yet Jacob for
all that does meet with as hard things in the journey as almost a man can read,
or hear of, that ever man did hear of, or meet with We may be sorely afflicted
in doing that which God commands us. See Judge. 20. 18. and 1 Samuel 4. 1, 2. 10,
11.
in a journey or business that God set him about; he had an express command of
God to go, and a promise of God that he would be with him in the journey; it
would ask some time to show the many hard things that Jacob met withal in the
journey, but among other of the hard things that he met with, this was a very
sad one, that being to go by the Land of Seer, the Country of Edom where his
brother Esau lived, he sent messengers before him, not being altogether without
some fear, that the old grudg that was in the heart of his brother still
remained, and that his brother might now have an opportunity for to satisfy
his desire upon him, and according as he feared he found it, for having sent
messengers to his brother, they reurn again to him, and bring him word that his
brother was coming against him with four hundred men in a hostile way, so
manifesting by the manner of his coming that he did intend mischief against
Jacob, in Genesis 32. 6. and now upon this the heart of Jacob was Genesis 32. 6.
much distressed, so the text says, That Jacob was greatly afraid and
distressed, vehemently afraid, and great straits was upon his spirit; now being
in so great straights, Jacob seeks to provide for himself, he did not presently
conclude and say, we are utterly undone, but he would see what could be done,
so though he knew the sury of his brother, yet if it were possible but to save
some part of his company he would do it, and so he divides them in the way of
prudence as might be the best way that he conceived for the safety of any of
them, but though he dealt in a way of prudence for safety, yet, That he trusted
not to, but seeks unto the Lord, he would go to prayer in so great a straight
and extremity that he was in, for so in verse 24 he had been at prayer, and
there he was found alone, which cannot be interpreted to no purpose Verse. 24.
but that he might be waiting upon God to know his mind, and to seek God. And
when he was alone there appeared to him in the form of a man that came out
against him as an enemy, and as though he would destroy him, not only Esau his
brother came out to destroy him, but there comes out one wrestling against him
as though he intended to destroy him likewise, and this man that did appear as
a man, the truth is, was no other than God himself, it was Jesus Christ, and so
he is called an Angel; That it was Christ appearing in the form of a man there,
taking humane shape, it is clear from verse 5. for he is called Jehovah, and the
Lord of Host, and you shall find in Genesis 32. that Jacob called the name of the
Genesis 32. 36. explained
place Peniel, for says he, I have seen God face to face, and my life is
preserved, so that Jacob knew before he had done, he knew it was God, God comes
and appears against him as an enemy even at that time that this holy man Jacob
was in so great straights as he was, and yet Jacob though God did thus appear
against him, he did not sink in his heart, but stirred up all the strength that
he had, and wrastles even with God himself thus appearing like an enemy and
prevailed, and had power at length, though one would have thought that there
had been enough to have sunk Jacob's spirit, the distress that he was in at
that time, his brother coming with four hundred men ready to destroy him, he
left alone, one comes and wrastles with him, yet he had power with God. This is
a famous and a notable story as any we have in the old Testament.

And for the First, that which is implied here, He had Expos. 1
power with the Angel, that is, with God, when he came and wrastled with him in
such a time of so great extremity.

Oh! I beseech you observe this in the first place, This Use. 1.
is Gods way with his Saints, sometimes with his best and dearest Saints, that
when they are in the greatest dangers, and in the greatest afflictions and
troubles, God even then comes and seems to be an enemy to them at that time;
for the time that God came and wrastled with him, and seemed to be as an enemy
to him, it was in the time of the greatest extremity that one would think it is
possible for a man to be in, you cannot apprehend greater distresses, or
greater cause than there was for the distres, of Jacob at this time; A poor man
with a few women and children and cattle, and having his brother that owed him
a grudg, and had sought his death, to come with four hundred men in an hostile
way, and he left alone, and at this time God appears like an enemy to him, this
was sad, a very heavy condition indeed. As God did with Jacob, so with Christ
himself; when Christ was betrayed, God never appeared in outward appearance
against Christ as at that time when his Disciples left him, just in the night
when he was to be betrayed then he was in an Agony, and sweat drops of water
and blood, yea, and when he was in the hands of his enemies, and lift up to the
Cross, and made a decision to all the world, yet then he cries, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Forsaken at that time in so great a distress; Jacob
in this was even a type of Gods forsaking Christ in times of such great
distress. And so we find in Job, when he was in so great distresses, yet the
terrors of the Almighty were upon him. And Heman, with diverse others that we
might name: It Is a point of very great concernment to us; Oh Use. 2.
Encouragement to the Saints.
be not discouraged, be not discouraged you that are the people of God, if at
any time you be brought into his condition, for Jacob was a type of all the
people of God in this case, and therefore this story is of very great
concernment, Gods ways toward him were a resemblance of what they are like to
be to others afterward, and to the end of the world, namely this; That the
most eminent, precious Saints of God must not think to be excused even from
this condition, but when they are brought into the greatest outward afflictions
that possibly can be imagined, that God even at that time should appear against
them like an enemy, Oh! this is the saddest condition that can be, to any one
that has any acquaintance with God. You shall have many poor Servants of God
in affliction will say, As for these afflictions they are heavy indeed upon me,
my Estate gone, or Husband gone, or Wife gone, my Friends leave me in this
condition, yea, and it may be the hand of God is upon me in sickness, and so
one trouble after another; Oh! but though these are heavy, had I but the light
of the face of God upon me it would be nothing to me, had I but those comforts
that once I had in the assurance of Gods love, it would not be much to me; but
when all these outward comforts are gone, and I never saw God appearing like an
enemy to me so as at this time, Does God deal thus with any of his people? Am I
not a Reprobate? For God does use when his People are in affliction, then to
appear with the light of his face to comfort and encourage them; but he has
not done so to me, even at this time I find God more terrible to my soul than
ever yet I found him, and therefore surely I am but a castaway: I make no
question but some of you may know the meaning of such temptations as these are
in the time of your afflictions, or if you have not known the meaning of them
hitherto, you may come to know the meaning of them hereafter; and you that have
known, or hereafter if you shall know what these things mean, Oh! treasure up
this Scripture, it will be worth a world to you, For the Devil will mightily
strengthen himself with this, What, are not you a castaway? surely God has
rejected you, he would never appear against you in your afflictions if he had
any love to you.

Or you may answer the temptation thus:

Yes, yes, I have read in the Book of God, and heard 2.
that even thus God dealt with my father Jacob that was so precious.

Yea, but was not he in some way of sin? Quest.


No, he was in the way that God bad him go on in, Answ.
and yet even then when he was in so great a distress, God wrastled with him,
never wrastled more with him than then, and seemed to come against him like an
enemy, and such a time as that was, Oh! treasure up this that your hearts may
not sink in despair, in the greatest afflictions, and spiritual dissertions
that are both together.

Only this by the way, -- He had power with God. Text.


It appears that when God came thus against him to Expos. 2.
wrestle with him, God intended no hurt to him, it was but to stir up his
strength, and to prepare him for great deliverance, and for choice mercies, God
at this time did intend to Jacob as great a mercy as ever he gave to any of
the children of men in this world, and that was this, That he should have
strength to prevail with God, and as a Prince to prevail with God, and that he
should in this be a type of all his people hereafter that they should prevail
with God, that he should have his name changed and be called Israel, because he
was a Prince prevailing with God, and in this he should be honorable to the end
of the world, and be set up as a type for the comfort of all the Saints to the
end of the world; I say, it was as great a mercy as ever any mere child of man
had in this world, at this time when Jacob was in the greatest depth of
affliction almost as you can conceive a man to be in.

Therefore oh remember this that it is the way of God God sometimes brings the
deepest afflictions when he intends the greatest mercy.
when he does intend the greatest mercy to any of his people, sometimes to
bring them into the depth of affliction, and therefore do not conclude that
never any was so afflicted as I have been, why Jacob might have said so, and
yet at that time God had never greater thoughts of mercy than he had to him
then, and therefore remember this again, when such kind of temptations work,
never any was so afflicted as I have been, grant it, yet it may be there is
mercy intended for you at this time, that never yet was granted to any of the
children of men before, it is possible it may be so, it was so with Jacob, and
therefore let not your faith flag.

He had power with God; in this great distress that he was in he does not lie
down as a man discouraged, but Text. Expos. 3.
he (...)rs up what strength he had, and he falls a wrestling, a wrestling with
this man, even with God thus appearing against him as an enemy: Oh! thus should
the seed of Jacob do, you that are the seed of Jacob, for so specially your
praying Christians in time of distress are called by the seed of Jacob, [I said
not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.] They are not called the seed of
Abraham, but of Jacob, because Jacob was so eminent in praying in so great
extremity, the seed of Jacob should do so, every little opposition that comes
upon a sluggish heart, a heart that has low and mean principles, sinks him
presently, I say, take a man or woman that has but low and mean principles,
every little opposition presently damps his spirit and makes him yield and
bows him down, and they are ready to say al is gone if they are but opposed a
little; Oh! art thou of the seed of Jacob? the seed of Jacob should never think
their condition to be so sad, but there may be recovery; Is it a great
affliction that is upon me? am I in great distress? let me so much the more
stir up my strength. As I remember it was said of Alexander, that when he was
in a great danger, says he, Now there is a danger fit for the mind of an
Alexander. So, does God bring into great straights? now there is a straight fit
for a gracious heart, for one that is partaker of the Divine Nature to
encounter with; stir up therefore what strength thou have, do not say, I shall
never be table to overcome this difficulty, do not say so, for you are not in
greater straights than Jacob was at this time, and yet mark, Jacob had power,
and stirs up his power. It may be you have that strength that will do more than
you are aware of, the grace of God is mighty in the hearts of his Saints: Have
you never been enabled to do more than ever you thought you should have been
enabled to have done? he stirs up his strength, he does not lie down sullen and
discouraged; as it is usual for Christians to do if God does but afflict them,
and specially if he draws but the light of his face a little from them,
presently they lie down discouraged, and will not be comforted: Oh! thou do
not show thy self to be of the seed of Jacob, thou have not the spirit of thy
Father Jacob in thee. By his strength he prevailed with God.

Strength: What strength, you will say? Text. Quest. Answ.


He had very great bodily strength, he wrastled partly with bodily strength, as
in Genesis 29. 8. 10. you shall find that Jacob was a very strong man of his body,
for the Stone of the Well that the Shepherds was fain to meet together to roll
away, Jacob took it and roul'd it away presently; but certainly he had strength
beyond his ordinary bodily strength at this time, God raised a bodily strength
beyond what ever he had, and it is like beyond what ever man had before; God
raised Sampsons bodily strength to be very great, and the power of God was seen
in that, and may be seen much in the elevating of nature in a creature, whereas
the Scripture says, The body that is sown in weakness, shall rise in power. I
remember 1 Cor. 15. 43
Luther says, That men's bodies shall be raised to that Luther.
strength that they shall be able to coss Mountains as a man tosseth a Ball.
And Anselme has such an expression Anselm.
tending that way, That the Saints shall be so strong in the world to come,
that if they will they can shake the earth at their pleasure. Surely much
bodily strength was here to wrestle with an Angel; you know the power of an
Angel, one, in one night could slay above fourscore thousand men, and yet here
Jacob himself wrastles with an Angel, that is the Son of God, the Second person
in Trinity, that is the Messenger, the Angel of the new Covenant, but
especially his spiritual strength was great, wrestling with his soul, the
wrestling of Faith that was in his soul at that time, that was very great, he
had power with his spirit when he did prevail.

Now from hence observe, That he did prevail with his strength. That when God
strives against his servants he Obs. 1.
gives them strength answerable to his striving. Here Jacob, was in great
extremity, and God comes and wrastles against him, but God gives him strength
proportionable to his wrestling; Oh! take this for thy comfort and
encouragement, Many times thou art ready to reason thus, Alas, I am not able to
lie under a little affliction, what shall I do if I meet with a greater
affliction? certainly then I should sink. Oh! be not discouraged with such
unbeleeving thoughts, for though thou be weak, and it is as much as ever
thou can do to stand under the burden that there is upon thee, now, it may be
there may be greater burdens, but then there may be greater strength; there was
answerable strength put into Jacob to wrestle with those difficulties he was
called unto: He will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength. And then,

With HIS strength] What, Jacob's strength! Mark, Text.
The strength that God puts into us, though it be Gods own, yet when we have
it, and work by it, God accounts it as ours, it is called Jacobs strength,
though the truth is, it was Gods strength, God himself wrestling with him gives
him strength, and yet he will account it Jacob's own strength.

Further, That Is another Note, It Is a great honor to manifest much strength in
prayer in wrestling with God; this Obs. 2.
was the honor of Jacob, O! with his strength he prevailed with God, a great
honor to put forth strength in wrestling with God even in prayer. We should not
come with weak and empty prayers, but we should put forth strength; if a
Christian has any strength in the world for any thing, he should have it in
prayer: According to the strength of the fire the bullet ascends; so according
to what strength we put forth in prayer it is that we prevail with; this
strength of Jacob was a type of the spiritual strength that God gives his
Saints when they have to deal with him: and we find in the new Testament,
there is mention of very great strength that the Saints have by the Grace of
God; in Ephesians. 3. 16. According Ephesians. 3. 10.
to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man. Mark what expressions are here, That they might be strengthened, be
strengthened with might, and with might by the Spirit of God, and in the
Explained.
Inner man; and all this according to the riches of his Glory: This is the
strength that a Christian may attain to, I say, a Christian may here in this
world attain to that strength, as it shall appear that there is Might added to
Strength, and the Spirit of God to enable him to that Might, and that in the
Inner man, and that according to the riches of Gods Glory; surely the strength
is great that is by the Spirit of God, but such strength as shall manifest the
Glory of the Spirit of God, yea, such strength as shall manifest the riches of
the Glory of the Spirit of God, this is the strength that is attainable for
Christians, even here in this world: This is that the Apostle prays for the
Ephesians. Oh! let us be ashamed of our weaknesses seeing there is such
strength to be had, Jesus Christ is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he has
strength, And of his fullness we may come to receive Grace for Grace, Oh! let us
not be satisfied with faint desires and wishes, when as Jesus Christ is
tendered to us as the Fountain of strength.

Now I appeal to you Christians, Do you walk so as Use.
that it does appear that you have such strength as does manifest such riches
of the glory of God in you? And there is another Scripture, Col. 1. 1^.
Strengthened (says the text there) with all might, Mark; Strengthened with
Col. 1. 11.
all might; with all might, according to his glorious power: Thus Christians
should seek for to be strengthened with enlightened.
all might, according to the glorious power of God: To what? Unto all patience,
and long suffering, with joyfulness.

Unto all patience] It may be you have strength to bear some afflictions, you
have some patience; But are you strengthened with all might? and are you
strengthened according to the glorious power of God, unto all patience? And it
may be for a time you seem to have some patience; But has Patience had her
perfect work in you? and is it to all long-suffering? Though the affliction
does continue a great while, Will you patiently hold out to long-suffering, and
that with joyfulness? This is the glory of a Christian, to have strength with
God, the glorious power of God strengthening of them to all might, to all
patience, with long-suffering, and with joyfulness; And with his strength he
had power with God, and he prevailed; he was as a Prince with God, and so,
that is the word according to the expression, in Genesis 32. 28. For as a Prince he
has power with God; whereas it is said in your books, Genesis 32. 28. Opened
That with his strength he had power with God, the words may be as well
translated, He was a Prince with God; and then (...) Princeps fuisti.
it is repeated, yea, he had power over the Angel, he was a Prince against the
Angel, and so prevailed.

Now the main thing in this expression, That he had power with God as a Prince,
and prevailed; The main thing that is held forth, is this,

That the way to prevail with men, it is, to prevail with God: Obs. 1.
This was an evidence to Jacob, that certainly he should prevail against his
brother Esau, Esau came against him to destroy him, and he was afraid, God gave
him a certain evidence that he should prevail, says he, Thou have prevailed
with me, and there is no fear of prevailing with all the men of the world, now
thou have prevailed with God. This indeed were a notable point, if one would
speak of this at large, and a very useful point in these times, That the way to
prevail with men, it is, to prevail with God: What Is all the powers of men?
they are all at the dispose of God; the work is done when thou have but
prevailed with God; thou heatest of great dangers that there are abroad in the
world, but do thou get alone in thy closet and fall a wrestling with God, and
be wrestling till thou feel thy faith wrestling with God, then thou may
come down and conclude the work is done; no men shall ever prevail against you
that have so much interest with God, these may live joyfully in the world,
never need fear the power and the rage of wicked men, they have that within
them that helps them to prevail with God, and certainly man cannot prevail
against them. Our rough brethren have come out against us, as here Esau this
rough brother of Jacob came out against him, and yet Jacob prevailing with God,
prevailed against him: And blessed be God, that when our rough brethren have
come enraged against us, there has been some amongst us have prevailed with
God, and by prevailing with God, have prevailed over them, and against them:
But though we are delivered from these rough brethren, yet we have rough ones
in another kind still, that are against us; Oh, but let us carry our selves
blamelesly, and inoffencively toward them, that yet behave themselves roughly
and furiously against us, and so seek to prevail with them that way, in a
constant carriage of innocence and blameless lives before them, to convince
them if it be possible of all their mistakes: But above all, let us seek to
prevail with God, and then God may turn their hearts, turn the hearts of our
roughest and furiousest brethren, whose mouths are so opened as they are, and
whose pens do go so as they do, let us prevail with God, that so at length they
may come and fall upon their necks as Esau did, and to give them the right hand
of fellowship; it is not impossible that such things may be done, surely one
would not have thought that they that were at such a distance as they were,
that they should have come so together, surely we have never provoked our
brethren so as Esau has done Jacob: let us not be troubled more than God would
have us, but seek God, and wrestle with God, it is in vain to stand wrestling
with them, giving ill word for ill word, and pen for pen, that is not the way,
but wrestle with God, and walk convincingly before them, and so you may turn
the hearts of our rough brethren, and that in a little time; surely it is not
more impossible to soder the spirits of brethren that seem not to be at so
great a distance and so imbittered one against another, it is not more
impossible to soder them, than it was here with God to soder the spirits of
Esau and Jacob, and to have such a comfortable meeting as there was at this
time.

In this prevailing of Jacob against Esau we have a type of the Churches
prevailing against all the ungodly; though the Enemies may be strong and
furious, certainly the people of God shall prevail. As before in Jacobs taking
Esau by the heel, there was a type that the people of God shall supplant all
the wicked; so in Jacob's prevailing at this time, here is a type that certainly
the Churches shall prevail let men do what they will, and be as bitter as they
will, the Jacobs shall prevail at length.

Mark yet further, With his power he prevailed even over the Angel.] If you
look into the Story you shall find that Expos.
he did prevail, but it was after he had wrastled a great while; Constancy in
wrestling with God will overcome at length, though we do not prevail at first,
as Jacob did not, but was wrestling all night, and day broke, and then he
prevailed: Oh! be not discouraged though you prevail not at first. Oh! I have
been seeking God thus long, and have not prevailed, but go on still, you know
not but that may be done in one hour that has not been done a long time before.

Mark further, Jacob after he was lame prevailed; Jacob Expos.
had been wrestling all night, and got nothing, then the hollow of his theigh
was touched and he was lame, now surely he will be overcome; shall he prevail
now? he that could not prevail when he was so long and strong he is not like to
prevail now, Oh! this is very useful and seasonable for us.

That the times for the Churches prevailing, it is the times when they are most
weak, when they are most unlikely to Obs.
prevail, when they are lame, why then is the time for them to prevail; We are
ready to think, Oh! if we could not get it when we had so much strength, is it
like to be done now we have so little strength? Now by this Jacob came to be
more humbled when his theigh was touched, so that he was lame: God uses to damp
means, and to bring even the sentence of death before he does intend to bring
the greatest mercies.

Further, Jacob though he had a strong Adversary against him, and he wrastled
long with him, and he was lame, yet continuing wrestling, he grew more resolute
toward the latter end than he was before; for you never read of Jacob so
peremptory before, I will not let thee go, until thou bless me; and that is one
thing that is very observable for the sad condition Jacob was in, the hollow of
his theigh was touched, and that likewise should have been added, That the Angel
would have been gone, God would have been gone and have left him in that
affliction, but then Jacob's spirit grew up more with a greater resolution than
he had before, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me: It seems now that
Jacob had more sight of him that he was God than he had before. This should be
our way in our dealings with God, that when God brings us in the lowest
condition, and God seems as if he would leave us, we should stir up our spirits
then, and be more resolute and strong than before, Oh! it is time now for the
heart to bestir its self, when God is ready to go away, do not say, God will be
gone, and therefore link down sullenly, but it is time for thee then to stir up
all that thou have, and to act faith more then, as if Jacob should say, I will
try yet one fall more, I will not yield the cause yet, certainly I must not
perish; as if Jacob should say, it is true, all things seem against me, as if I
should be destroyed, but it must not be says Jacob, Faith begins to stir, Has
not God bid me come here? have I not the Word of God for it? did not God say,
he would do me good in this journey? and though it is true, the providence of God
seems to work against me, but yet the Word of God works for me, and I will try
whether shall prevail, Gods Word, or Gods Providence: thus Jacob wrastles, I
will not let thee go, as if he should say, I have the Word for what I do, and
God has bound himself by Covenant, and so long, though Heaven and Earth meet
together, although I see my brother coming against me, and God departing from
me, and all threatening ruin, yet I will believe still that there is mercy for
me; This was Jacobs last turn (as I may so say) as the trying as it were the
last fall in this his wrestling, in opposing the Word that he had, with the
Work of God toward him: And this is a Note of very great use in all our
conditions, let us not lay so much weight upon any Work of God as upon the Word
of God, let us build upon the Word rather than fear the Works, for it has been
the usual way of God when he has given out a Word, that his Works have seemed
to go quite cross, as not only in our father Jacob, but even in our father
Abraham, What was the Word of God to Abraham? There was two promises by God
made to Abraham, one was this, Two Promises to Abraham. 1. 2.
That he would bring him into a Land that flowed with milk and honey. And a
second, That he would make his seed as the Stars in the Firmament. Well, here
was Gods Word, But how was Gods Work? The very next thing that you hear of him,
he was carried into Canaan, after he had left all his friends and was ready to
starve presently, now the word is, Thou shall be brought into a Land that flows
with milk and bony; and as soon as ever he comes into that Land he was ready to
starve. Here Is a Land indeed!

And then a second Promise of having his seed as the 2.
Stars of Heaven; Abraham was twenty five years after this before he had any
one child of the Promise, and he grew old, and also his wife: Well, he had at
length one, and God commands him to kill that one, to sacrifice that one; But
what a work is here? how quite contrary to the Word? Well he was saved; and
Isaac is forty years before he marries; here is sixty five years gone from the
promise, and there is but even one of his seed that must be as the Stars of
Heaven, at length Isaac marries and he was twenty years without a child, here is
eighty five years and but only one birth from him; yea, and after that the
story will make it out, that Jacob was above fourscore years before he married
and had any children, there is between eight and nine score years gone, and
here is but only Isaac and Jacob. How does the Work of God seem against his Word
in appearance? It Is the way of God, and therefore let us never trouble our
selves about Gods Works; he came indeed afterward with his Works and fulfilled
his Word to the uttermost, but for the present it seemed to be against it. Oh!
lay up this as a lesson, you will have use of it many, and many a time. It
follows. With his strength he prevailed. Text


Prevailing at last will recompense all our strivings; Jacob Obs.
was fully recompensed; here he speaks in a way of recompense of Jacob after
his striving, Oh! it was a hard wrestling, I, but he prevailed at length. And
so it will be with all the people of God, let them go on and wrestle, and
though things be hard for the present, when mercy comes it will pay for all: Oh!
thou will hereafter see no cause of repenting that ever thou did est continue
in this wrestling with God, Oh! thou will see cause to bless God: blessed be
God that kept up my heart all this while; Oh! God knows that many times it was
ready to sink, and if I had left off, what had become of me? I had lost the
mercy that now I find; but I continued through Gods mercy, and now he is come,
he is come at length; Prevailing recompenses all our labor and trouble
Prevailing recompenses al our labor in seeking.
in seeking.

Well, he prevailed, but what is this to this people of Israel? Thus; this was
to show, the base degenerateness of this people, as if he should say, Oh! of
what a brave spirit was your Father Jacob, but you, you are a base people, you
basely subject your selves to Heathens, to Idols; your father was of a brave
spirit indeed, and would not have subjected himself to any creature in the
world, yea, he would wrestle with God himself when he had his Word for it; Oh!
but it is otherwise with Jacob's posterity, you can crouch to every base thing,
you will crouch to the humors of men in the Worship of God, and do any thing to
save your skin says he, you are unworthy to be counted of the posterity of
Jacob: that is the meaning of the Prophet here: Jacob's posterity indeed they
should be prevailers upon the world, above temptations, it is unseemly for one
of the seed of Jacob to yield to the base lusts, and the humors of men; what,
shall we yield to a base lust when Jacob would not yield to the Almighty, but
prevailed with him? are we of the seed of Jacob now? Oh! we are of low, mean
spirits, led aside of every vanity, and overcome with every difficulty. But how
did he prevail? in what way did he put forth this his strength? It follows;

VER. 4.
He wept, and he made supplication.

THis weeping of Jacob is not recorded in the History of Genesis, nor in all
the Book of God, but only here; his supplication is recorded, but not his
weeping: therefore his weeping was had either from hand to hand, by way of
tradition, (it was known that when he wrastled so with the Angel he prevailed)
or otherwise by Revelation, but certain it was that he wept when he did
wrestle: There are many ridiculous conceits of the Jews, and some old Writers
about this, they say it was A Jewish fiction.
the Angel that fell a weeping, and prayed Jacob to let him alone, thus they
carry it; But to take it generally as our Divines do, that Jacob wept, and made
supplication, and so prevailed with God, Jacob's heart was pressed in the
condition that he was in, and so pressed, that it caused tears to bubble from
him, and no mervail though tears came from him, his heart could not but be
full, for when he came to think thus with himself, What, after I have served
such a hard service under Laban my Uncle, and God bad me come away from him,
which I took to be such a great mercy from God to deliver me, yet how soon was
I presently in danger of my life, even my Uncle Laban pursuing of me, and God
delivered me there; And must I now fall into the hand of my Brother? is the day
come for him now to have his rage upon me? I see little other likelihood, his
strength is great, and God himself appears against me, and I have been
wrestling a great while, and I can get nothing from God, but that it is likely
here I must die and perish, yea, and that God should leave me thus as he does,
that God should appear a greater enemy to me than my Brother Esau, and lame me:
Oh! now might not this be a sign that God intends to destroy me, yea, God would
be gone too when I am in such a strait as this is; Oh! this makes him weep. As
a poor child when it is in straits and is crying to the mother, the mother
beats it and strikes it, yea, the mother Simile.
will be gone and leave it in those straits; Can you blame the child though it
cry? So it was here, Jacob was in straits, and was seeking God, and God beats
him and makes him cry, and would be gone; Oh! this does press tears out of the
eyes of Jacob, Oh! what will become of me now? As if Jacob should have said,
Were it that I should perish alone it were not so much, but my Wives perish,
and how can mine eyes be able to see their destruction? yea, it may be they
will be ravished before mine eyes by these rude Soldiers: These kind of
workings in Jacob's spirit you cannot but conceive that it must draw tears; he
wept before the Angel, considering this his sore distressed condition.

And on the other side, there were thoughts would make him weep too, The
thoughts of his Misery, and the reasoning of his Faith, when he considered; I,
but surely I am in the way of God though I be in a great deal of danger, I have
the Promise of God, I have his Covenant with me, I have to deal with the Holy,
Blessed and Gracious God in all my ways, Who knows but that my extremity may
be Gods opportunity? The heart of my brother it is certainly in the hand of
God, and all Creatures are in Gods hands too: Now the actings of Faith would
make one to weep as well as of Fear and Trouble, and it were well if we could
weep on both sides: Sometimes you roll in your thoughts all the aggravations of
your afflictions, and they make you weep: Now can you roll in your thoughts the
aggravations of Gods Goodness and Mercy, and can that make you weep? The end
why God brought Jacob into this condition, to fall a weeping before the Angel,
it was, That he might humble him, and break his heart before he gives him
deliverance; for it was one of the greatest honors (as we intimated before)
that God did for Jacob, that ever he did to man, therefore God would bring him
very low before he would raise him so high, and make him fall a weeping as well
as praying before he should have the Mercy; Oh! this is Gods way, He will bring
men very low, to humble them before they shall have mercy, therefore when men's
hearts are high and lofty, stout and hard, they are not in a way of Mercy from
God; but when men's hearts begin to break, thaw and melt, and are tender, then
they are in a way of mercy, as here; So we find it often in Scripture that God
intending mercy, first breaks the heart and melts it by mourning and sorrowing;
as Josiah, you know that was his condition, his heart melted when he heard the
Law, and God sends presently a Promise of Mercy to him: and in Jeremiah, there
the Lord promises his People, That he will bring them with weeping, and with
supplications, that shall be the way.

One Note or two more: It becomes the most generous and magnanimous spirit, to
have his heart breaking, and to express Note.
his heart breaking with tears before God; It is an excellent thing to see a
man of a brave spirit, strong and full of courage in any service of God, and yet
when he comes to have to deal with God, to have a melting, tender and soft
spirit in his dealings with God. If you should see now a great Captain or
General that were brave and magnanimous when he was abroad in the field about
any difficult work, but when he comes before God in Prayer, there he can weep
like a child, there he can mourn and lament, and his heart break as soon as a
child; this is an excellent spirit now, spirits that can turn according to what
God calls them to, this way or that way, can be stout and hardy in a work that
requires stoutness, and can be soft tender and yielding in such a work that
requires such things: Thus was our father Jacob: Oh! to have tender hearted
Captains and Generals, to have courageous spirits, yet broken hearted spirits,
to mix the work of Grace thus it is most excellent, and it becomes the most
bravest spirit in the world, not only to fall down to prayer, but to weep
before the Lord; some men think it is too low a thing to fall a weeping in
prayer, as if it were a womanish and a childish thing; Oh! it is an argument
that thy heart is carnal and base to think, that it is for want of
understanding, I say, this is evil, and it comes from much corruption in the
heart for to think it either beneath a brave spirit, or beneath a prudent
spirit; I Will give you one example that weeping is not beneath a Weeping suitable
to an high spirit.
brave spirit, this is enough, and also that of David, no man did shed more
tears in the presence of God than David that brave Captain; but to put both
together, I Will set before you the example of Jesus Christ, in Heb. 5. 7. the
text says, That in the days of his flesh he offered up prayers and
supplications, (how?) with strong cries and tears: even Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, God blessed for ever, he that was equal with the Father, the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, he that had all strength and power, and had all the
treasures of wisdom hid in him, and the fullness of the God head dwelt bodily in
him, and yet when he had to deal with the Father, he offers up prayers, with
strong cries and tears. Does it become the Captain of our salvation in his
seeking of God to weep? know then, it is not unbecoming any man or woman: Are
you of the seed of Jacob? then when you would prevail with God labor to work
your hearts even so as you may express your affections, outwardly labor to do
it in prayer, it will help to break thy heart: As a broken heart will cause
outward expressions, so outward expressions will be a further cause to break
the heart. And work thy heart by all arguments thou can to come to that
tenderness and softness, that thou may be like the Captain of thy Salvation,
when thou art crying to God to cry even with tears before him, and when thy
heart is so broken with tears, then exercise thy faith upon the prayer of Jesus
Christ. Now it is through the Spirit of Jesus Christ that my heart does thus
break, but I do not rest upon these, God forbid that I should rest upon my
enlargements, upon my breakings; No, but I will rest upon the breakings of
Jesus Christ, who in the days of his flesh did send up mighty cries with tears
to God, and was heard, he prevailed. -- He made supplication. Text.


Supplieation (or prayer) it is the great prevailing Ordinance Obs.
with God; that is the Note. It has been the great Engine that has carried
things on in the world, Prayer, in Revel. 8. 4. The prayers of the Saints were
offered up, and Rev. 8. 4. Opened.
voices of Thunder, and Lightening, and Earthquakes followed when they were
offered. Prayers of the Saints can move Heaven and Earth, they can prevail with
the God of Heaven and Earth. The Praying Legion, was called the Thundering
Legion. And Luther says of prayers, they are our Guns, our Cannons, our
Prayers can prevail Bombardo nostrae.
more than Cannons; The Saints have always put their great strength upon
Prayer. It Is a very observable Scripture. Psalm. 109. 4. For my love, they are
my adversaries (but what then?) But I pray; it is in your books, But I give my
self to prayer, but the words, Give my self, you may observe printed in another
distinct Character, which is to note that those words are not in the Original,
but added by the Translators, and in that they dealt For the sens is more full
and clear by that addition.
faithfully; but if you read it as it is in the Hebrew it is, For my love,
they are my adversaries; but I pray: as if he should say, that is my refuge, I
account prayer to be the great help that I have, when they are my adversaries
and rail upon me, I will not rail upon them again; when they oppose me, I will
not oppose them again; but I pray, I Will pray to my God, and I make account I
have help enough there to resist my enemies that I have. Jacob prevailed over
the Angel by suppication. It Is a good sign of a gracious heart to lay the
weight of business upon pra(...) But I will not enter into this common place of
the excellency or power of Prayer and Supplication, but only this, It Is not
every prayer that will prevail so with God.

What prayer will then?

Such a prayer as Jacob's was, in Genesis 32. 9. there (...) Quest. Answ.
shall find how your Father Jacob prayed, and there (...) excellent
Ingredients; says the text, And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and
God of my Father Isaac, etc.

That Is the First Ingredient to Prayer, Faith in the Covenant of God, upon that
the strength of any prayr most depends; 1 Faith.
Indeed to have strong Expressions, and Affections in prayer are good; but
Strength of Faith in the Covenant of God is the greatest strength of prayer,
and it was with this strength that Jacob did prevail: Oh! God of my Father
Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac, as if he should say, Oh! thou God that
have entered into Covenant with my Father Abraham, and Isaac, O God, remember
thy COVENANT, O God, I rest upon (...) COVENANT, the COVENANT of Grace that
(...) have made with them, for so certainly that with (...) hans and Isaac was
the same, for it is said, That Circum(...) Romans 4.
sion was the sign and seal of the righteousness that he had (...) Faith. And
in Thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be bl(...) There was the Covenant of
Grace. Now O Lord (...) it is the Covenant of Grace that I rest upon in the
(...) straits. When you are in any strait, and go to Go(...) prayer, if you can
have recourse to the Covenant (...) Grace, and act your says upon Gods
Covenant with you, Oh! that will be a strong prayer. When there are but words
in prayer they vanish as the wind, but when there is much says in prayer, that
makes it to prevail; the prayer of faith, that is prevalent, says the Apostle
James, Jam. 5.
that is the first ingredient in his prayer, he made supplication and exercises
faith in the Covenant.

And then the second was, His appeal to God that he was 2. In Gods way
(...) the way that he had set him; He could appeal thus to God; which said
unto me, Return unto thy Country, and to thy Kindred. Why Lord, am I out of my
way? am I not in the way that thou have set me? I met with difficul(...) in my
way, but Lord, thou saidest to me, Return (...)to thy Country, thou bidest me
return; so that is an excellent ingredient in prayer, and ads much strength,
when the soul in prayer can come to God and say, O Lord, there is this and this
difficulty befallen me, but Lord, I am in the way that thou have set me, I am
doing thy work, I am not out of my way. For any man or woman to be out of their
way that God has set them in will mightily damp their hearts in prayer. And
it is a mighty encouragement to prayer, and carries it on with mighty strength
when the soul can appeal to God, Lord, whatsoever straits I meet withal, yet I
am in thy way.

Then the Third thing in prayer, It is the pleading of 3. Particular Promise.
^particular Promise, And I will deal well with thee.] God (...)de a Promise to
Jacob in particular that he would deal (...) with him in his journey that he
went. And the (...) faith we have to take hold upon particular promises that
concerns the particular business we pray about, (...) we pray about any
business, (though it is true, the (...) strength is in the great Promise, the
Covenant of (...)) But then it ads much strength likewise to have (...)f
particular Promises that concerns the very business we are about, and it is a
very good thing when we go about a business that has difficulty in it to
search the Word, and to see what Promises there are that does more particularly
concern the business we go about. 4. Sense of unworthiness.


The Fourth Ingredient it was, his Acknowledgment, and Sense of his own
unworthiness, and vileness, in ver. 10. I am not worthy of the least of thy
mercies and of all the truth which thou have shown unto thy Servant. When the
soul comes with humility before God in Prayer, and is truly sensible of its
unworthiness of any mercy, Lord, I am not worthy of the least crum of bread,
but rather worthy to be cast out from thy presence for ever, it is an easy
matter for men and women to have such words in their mouths, but to have this
indeed in their hearts in prayer, ads very much strength to prayer.

The Fifth Ingredient in his prayer it was, The acknowledgment 5.
Acknowledgment of mercies, and truth of promises.
of the mercy that he had received, and of the truth of God in fulfilling
Promises; and both ads much strength to prayer, to take notice of what God has
done for us, to take notice how God has fulfilled his Word in great measure for
us: when we are praying, we many times are sensible only of what we would have,
but not of what we receive; and the vehemency of our desires after what we
would have, does take away our apprehensions, and hinders our acknowledgment of
the mercies we have had already; but when thou come to prayer, whatsoever thy
condition be, though in never such great straits, yet acknowledge what thou have
already, be willing to praise God in the lowest condition that thou art in.

And then he does proceed further, and looks back to 6. Remembrance of former
meanness.
his former meanness that once he was in; For with my staff passed I over this
Jordan, and now I am become two band(...) that is a further expression of his
humility, and God. (...) there mercy.

And then the next thing is the great sense of what he 7. Deep sense of what is
prayed for.
prays for, Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my Brother, from the hand
of Esau, for I fear him lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the
children. Lord, I do not speak words that have expressions in them without
sense of my heart, for Lord, as I am crying to thee for help against my
Brother, I do apprehend my great extremity, Lord, I fear him lest he come and
smite me, with the mother and the children.

When we come to prayer, we must not have words, Use.
that are puft-up words, and have little in them, but there must be as much
sense of the thing that we pray for, as the words that we speak do seem to
import and carry with them; many times we have great words, and little sense,
and that makes our prayers to be so empty.

And then the next thing in his prayer it was, The strong 8. Strong Arguments.
arguments that he did use with God; though it is true, That what we can say to
God cannot move God, yet it may move our own hearts, and God would have us to
use strong arguments in prayer; And thou saidest (in ver. 12.) I will surely do
thee good, and make thy seed as the sand on the Sea which cannot be numbered for
multitude. As if he should say, Lord, how will thy promise be fulfilled? did
thou not say that my seed should be as the sand of the Sea? now if the mother
and children be cut off, what will become of thy Promise?

God is so indulgent as to suffer us to plead our cause with him. And these
pleading prayers are strong prayers, Use.
he wept and made supplication, so he prevailed with God. Now labor you, (if
you be of the seed of Jacob) to pray as your Father Jacob did. But so much
shall suffice for that Second History, about Jacob's prevailing with the Angel.

Now the Third History follows: He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with
us. Text.


The words in the Hebrew are, He [will] find us in Bethel, (...)
and there he spoke with us. As if it were an encouraging word of the Angel to
Jacob, that God would find him in Bethel; and indeed the Gramatical sense of
the words would carry such a sense, but rather, because the Learned know that
the word is often used for the Preter tense in the Hebrew, and it is more
according to the scope of the place, to read them as you have them in your
books, He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. That is, He found
Jacob in Bethel, and spoke to Jacob, and in speaking to Jacob, he spoke unto us
all.

Now for the opening of this History, and the showing Expos.
how it suits with the scope of the Prophet in this place. We read in
Scripture of two Meetings that God and Jacob had together at Bethel, and this
Text in Hosea does refer to them both, God finds him in Bethel two times and
spoke with Jacob, and spoke to us both those times.

The First time for fear of danger he fled from his brother, 1.
when his brother had mischievous thoughts against him, after he got the
blessing from him.

And the Second time (again) after his wrestling with 2.
the Angel God meets him in Bethel.

The First of these you have in Gen 28. 10. and the Second in Genesis 35. 1. and
so on. And it is necessary to refer to those two Scriptures for the
interpretation of this Scripture, you will not know what it means else.

1. He finds him in Bethel, Genesis 28. 10. yea indeed, for Jacob he lay asleep,
with a stone under his head, he saw a vision of Angels ascending, and
descending from Heaven and God speak excellent things unto him. But the Note is,

That God finds his People many times when they little think Obs.
of him: He comes unto his People in ways of mercy when they scarce dream of
it: Jacob was but in a dream at this time, and yet God came in very wonderful
ways of mercy toward him.

Oh! how often has God found us in this way? how Use.
often may many of you say, that the Lord has come unexpectedly to you in
ways of mercy? that you never made account of such mercies as you have met
withal. Oh! when unexpected mercies come, we should consider that God found us,
whereas our sins might have found us; but the mercies of God have found us out.

And the other time that God found Jacob, it was when 2
he was in great distress, after his daughter Dinah had been defloured, and his
sons Simeon and Levi had committed that great outrage against the Shechemites,
so great an outrage as to kill the City, and upon that Jacob and all his family
was in great danger of being destroyed, for the act was so foul, that it could
not but make all the people (as Jacob thought) to abhor him, and would be a
cause that they should all rise against him, and utterly to cut him off,
therefore in Genesis 34 30. Jacob tells his sons, that they had made him to stink
among the inhabitants of the Land, so that he was afraid they would gather
together and destroy him and his house; no question the distress that Jacob was
in, was very great, that his daughter should be defloured by the uncircumcised
ones, and that his two sons should commit such an outrage, and should endanger
him to be destroyed utterly by them; For, who would have thought but that all
the Inhabitants of the Land should have risen against him, and have cut him
off? Now the next thing that we hear of, God meets with him at Bethel, and
speaks very gracious things to him there, and he did not only speak to him, but
there he spoke with us.

That is, God meeting with Jacob in Bethel, that which he spoke to him there
concerned us as well as it concerned Jacob. An expression to the same purpose we
have in Psalm. 66. 6. He turned the Sea into dry land: they went through the
Flood on foot: there We did rejoice in him: For indeed the mercy of God toward
the Isralites at that time that did rejoice them, was a matter of Rejoicing for
us. Whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, it is as if God spoke to
us: That which God spoke to Abraham, [I am God Alsufficient; walk before me,
and be upright] he spoke that to us, he spoke that to thee and me. That that
God spoke to Joshua, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; Josh. 1. 5.
with Heb. 13. 5.
that the Apostle to the Hebrews applies to the Christians at that time: that
he spoke to us, he spoke it to thee and me; if we be BELIEVERS, that that God
spoke to the distressed and afflicted ones in Psalm. 102. He will regard the
prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer, that he spoke to us, for
in ver. 18. This shall be written for the Generations to come. And that which
God spoke to Jacob at these two several times in Bethel, it is written for the
Generations to come, it is written for us, Well then, what was it? What was the
special thing that God spoke to Jacob when he found him at Bethel? and what was
that What God spoke to Jacob and to us at Bethel.
to us? I Will show you many things, There are nine or ten notable things to be
observed by us, which God spoke unto us:

The first thing that he spoke to Jacob that concerns us as well as himself was
this, That the foundation of the comfort Obs. 1.
of the Saints it is in the Covenant of God. That he spoke to us there, Genesis
28. 13. when he appeared to Jacob, what said he to him? I am the God of
Abraham, thy Father, and the God of Isaac; Jacob was flying for his life then,
and this was to comfort him in his danger, I am the God of Abraham, thy Father,
the God of Isaac; then he spoke this to us, that the foundation of the comforts
of the Saints in the times of their distresses, it is the Covenant of Grace
that God has made with them, and their fathers before them.

The second thing was this, That the seed of Jacob are Obs. 2.
the inheritors of the Land of Canaan; for so he told him, The Land wherein
thou lie, I Will give to thee, and to thy seed. Now this concerns us, that the
seed of Jacob shall inherit the Land of Canaan, That was typified by it. There
are some that have a thought that yet there shall be an inheritance of the Land
of Canaan by the faithful seed of Jacob, but however, this certainly he spoke
to us, that all the seed of Jacob are the Inheritors of the Land of Canaan one
way or other, take it in the Litteral, or in the Typical Sense.

The Third thing was, God would have faith raised to believe Obs. 3.
in mercies promised, even when there is a great deal of unlikelihood of the
fulfilling of it; that is the Third thing he he spoke of to us there; he tells
Jacob there at that time when he was a poor, lone man, with his staff, and no
provision but a stone for his pillow, then he tells him of making good his
promise, it was as unlikely a time as could be, a poor, lone man that Jacob
was, went over with his staff at that time, and that he should have such a
Promise fulfilled, and his seed to be so great, and to inherit the hand of
Canaan, how unlikely was this? But God would have him to exercise his faith
upon the Promise at this time when there was such a great unlikelihood of it.

The Fourth thing is this, That the multiplying of the Obs. 4.
Church is a great blessing, for says he, thy seed shall be thus and thus, as
the sand of the Sea shore, I Will increase my Church abundantly from thy loins.

Fifthly, Promises deferred, though they are to be looked Obs. 5.
upon as certain as ever they were, Yet the Saints of God have need of renewing
of Promises, even those that have most faith. God renews the same Promise to
him that was made; before God had promised to Abraham to make his seed great,
but the truth is, that the Promise though it be as certain as before, yet it
had been a long time and there was little come of it.

And then the Sixth thing was this, That the blessing Obs. 6.
which comes to the world, it is by the Promised seed. He tells him that in his
seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; the great blessing of the
world is, by the Promised seed, by Jesus Christ.

And then the Seventh thing was, That we Gentiles were Obs. 7.
in Gods heart, to do good unto us for thousands of years since; Though at that
time we were as Dogs, yet it was in Gods heart to bless us. Oh! this is a
comfortable speech to us, it concerns us Gentiles in a more special manner, than
it did them that Hosea did prophecy to at this time.

And then the Flighth thing is, That the Presence of God and his Protection, is
the only Encouragement of the Saints in their ways. For in Verse. 15. says
God, Behold, I am with thee, and I will keep thee in all places whither thou
go; this he spoke to us; this the Saints should make high account of.

And then the Ninth thing is, That though Promises be not yet fulfilled, yet
God is still working toward their fulfilling; Obs. 9
for so he tells him, I will not leave thee until I have don all that I have
promised to thee, though you cannot see how my Administrations toward you do
any way work for the fulfilling of my Promise, yet know I will not leave you
until I have fulfilled my Promises.

And then the last thing is this which God spoke to us there, he tells us of the
constancy of his Mercy and faithfulness, Obs. 10.
that however things may go with us here for a while, yet the merry of God
continues, the line of Gods mercy is not cut asunder, but his faithfulness is
carried along till all the good that he has promised, or that Faith can
believe shall be granted to us, for so he tells Jacob there, I will not leave
thee till I have done that which I have spoke to thee of. All this he spoke
with us. That Is the first time of Gods meeting with Jacob in Bethel.

Now the Second time that he met with Jacob in Bethel, it is in Genesis 35. 10.
and there see what God spoke with The Second story implied in the Text.
us, there God changes his Name to Israel, there God confirms his Promise and
Covenant to him again as before, God there remembers his prevailing with him,
and his wrestling with him, and in that God tells us he remembers our servent
prayers, after they are gone, yet his heart is upon them, there he confirmed
his name, Israel; and confirmed his Promise; That Is that he spoke with us there
too.

That the Saints have need of the confirmation of mercies, especially Obs. 1.
the Covenant.

But then further, Gods presenteng himself to the soul as Obs. 2.
God Almighty, that is a great help to faith. I am God Almighty, says he there,
thou have had experience of my Almighty power in turning the heart of thy
Brother, and now thou art in a great danger. Because thou art few in number,
thou art afraid of the people of the Land, but I am God Almighty; There Is
little power in Thee, but there is great power in Me. The Consideration of Gods
Almighty power, is that that should help the Saints in the midest of all their
straights and afflictions.

We find in Scripture that God very seldom when he speaks of his Almighty
Power, speaks of his willingness to do them good, for that God would have his
people take for granted, that is employed in his Covenant that he made with them
at first.

And then lastly, When Jacob was afraid of being cut off because he was few in
number, now God presents himself as God Almighty, and he blesses him now with
fruitfulness, and tells him he will multiply him to a company of Nations, and
Kings shall come out of his loins; In this we have an excellent lesson that God
speaks to us.

That God delights to receive his people in their fears with suitable, Obs. 3.
and seasonable mercies. Jacob was never in greater fears than at those two
times, yet now the Lord comes at this time of his great straits, and tells him
now of multiplying of him to many Nations, and that Kings should come out of
his loins; at that time when he was afraid that the Nations should come and
destroy all that belonged to him, at that time God tells him that Kings should
come out of his loins: Oh! the Lord delights to revive his people in their
fears, and does come with suitable mercies to them.

Oh it should teach us to be tenderhearted toward the Use.
Saints that are in sears and troubles, and to labor to comfort our Brethren
with seasonable and suitable mercies, And especially after great conflicts,
that is observable; for Jacob had been wrestling with God not long before, and
after these great conflicts God comes with the manifestation of great mercies,
this God spoke to us there, That we should not be discouraged, though God bring
us into great conflicts; because after those times are the seasons for God to
speak the most comfortable, and the most encouraging things unto us. There God
spoke to us. So you see the Third Story thus opened unto you, and the
usefulness of it, I know scarce a Scripture fuller than these two verses.

And the Reason why the Prophat brings this Third Story to upbraid this people
is this; as if he should say thus;

First, Your Father Jacob, he worshipped the true God in Bethel; you worship the
Calf in Bethel, (For you know The scope of the Text.
that in Dan and Bethel the Calves were set up) as if the Prophet should say,
Are you the Children of Jacob? did Jacob worship an Idol in Bethel? No, God
found him in Bethel, and God spoke with him there; but you Worship a Calf in
Bethol.

Secondly, God made gracious promises to your father Jacob in Bethel, you
flight them, you regard them not, you go to shifting courses for your selves
and dare not rely upon Promises as your Father Jacob did.

Thirdly, You pollute the place that God had made his House, that place where
there were such gracious manifestations of God, you pollute it. It Is an
aggravation of sin to sin in those places where God has showed much mercy.

And then lastly, You are gone from the Covenant that your Father Jacob made
with God at Bethel, your Father Jacob (as God renewed his Covenant) enters into
Covenant himself with God at Bethel, and says, that the Lord should be his
God; But have not you forsaken that Covenant? you do not stand to the Covenant
that your Father Jacob did make at Bethel. It follows.

VER. 5.
Even the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his Memorial.

HE that appeared to your Father Jacob was no other Expos.
than the Lord of Hosts, Jehovah, and Jehovah is his memorial.

Your Father Jacob conversed with God, he had great power with the great God,
the Lord of Hosts, Jehovah. You forsake this God, you see no such excellency in
him, you rather turn to Idols. The Lord of Hosts.

But how does the Prophet make use of this Title of Quest.
God, The Lord of Hosts?

It is in reference unto those Hosts of God that appeared Answ.
to Jacob a little before he met with his Brother Esau, the Prophet is speaking
of the story of Jacob's meeting with Esau, and how he then wrastled with God,
upon which his name was changed, in Genesis 32. 1, 2. the text says, The Angels
of God met him. And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is Gods Host: This has
reference to that place. The Hosts of God appeared to Jacob just upon this time
of his wrestling, and the text says there, He called the name of the place
Mahanaim, that is, two Hosts, or two Camps. Says Hosea, The Lord of Hosts is
his name, as if he should say, It is the same Lord that was the Lord of Hosts
that appeared to Jacob your Father a little before his wrestling, it is the same
God, he remains the same God still, and your sin is against that God, and
return unto that God that is this Lord of Hosts.

Now for this Title, The Lord of Host.

That which you see this morning, may put you in mind a little of it, yet I
shall not speak much of it now, Because you that have been Auditors here, and
others too, may know, that even in this place I have preached upon that Title,
The Lord of Hosts, That glorious Name Lord of Hosts. [The glorious Name of the
Lord of Hosts: the Title of a Book of the Authors, being one of the first in
defense of the Wars on the Parliaments side]
of God, the Lord of Hosts, and likewise published it, I opened that Title some
years since, because God did appear to England in that Title, the Lord of Hosts
more fully than in former times. Therefore to the end that we in this Land
might learn now to sanctify that Name of God, The Lord of Hosts, I endeavored
to open it as I was able unto you, to show what glory of God was in that Name,
that we might sanctify it; and since that time the Lord has given us more
occasion to sanctify that Name of his than formerly, indeed this Title, Lord
of Hosts, as well as Jehovah is the Memorial of God, and should be to the
posterity that remains, we should tell the posterity after how the Lord has
manifested himself the Lord of Hosts among us; if ever God appeared in the
Glory of this Title in any Country and Nation, then he has done it here: It is
from the Lord of Hosts that our Armies have prevailed so as they have done; one
that has but half an eye (as we use to say) can see it. Had God wrought our
Victory by a company of Old, Brave, Gallant Soldiers, and by Mighty Armies,
then the Glory of God as the Lord of Hosts had been ecclipsed in some measure,
but when as such great things have been done, as scarce any story can tell us,
since Joshua's time, the great things that have been done as have been here in
this Kingdom within this twelve months, I say the most remarkable story it will
be, of what has been done, as ever we read of in any stories. How will the
Lord of Hosts be in his memorial if these Stories be set out to the life, An
impartial story of the late Wars would tend much to Gods glory.
luster, and verity of them! the children that are not yet born will learn to
magnify God by this Name of his, Lord of Hosts, that such things should be
done by an Army so contemptible in the eye of flesh and blood as this The
New-Model at first
our Army was, it is no other than the Lord of Hosts that has appeared for us.

And in that God has manifested himself by his own people so much; I will give
you one Scripture which I do not remember I made use of then, to show you what
the Hosts of God are besides the Angels, there is the Angels, and Sun, and Moon,
and Stars, and the wholeworks of Creation, there are two special Armies that
God has Gods Armies 1.
besides the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the works of Creation in general. There
are two Armies, The Saints, 2. 3
and the Angels, these I may call Mahanaim, the two Hosts of God, the Angels,
and the Saints. For that of the Angels I shall not need to give you Scripture.
But for the People of God, that they are called the Hosts in way of distinction
from all other of the Hosts of God: Gods Gods People are his Hosts in a special
own people (I say) God glories in as his Hosts in way of distinction from all
other people, this you have in Exodus 12. 41. where the people of Israel going
forth from Egypt, the text says, And it came to pass at the end of the four
hundred and thirty years, even the self same day it came to pass, that all the
Hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt. What were they but Gods
people? the Church is called here the Hosts of God. And so in Cant. 6. 4. the
Church of God is said to be terrible as an Army with Banners. And Song. 6. 4.
through Gods mercy the Lord has manifested what great things he can do by
such an Host, by an Army that Exemplified in England.
has had so many of his chosen ones among them, they have been the Hosts that
God, the Lord of Hosts has taken so much delight to be the Captain of, and to
go forth withal. But thus much for that Name, the Lord of Hosts, what use the
Prophet makes of that Name we shall speak to presently, how it is a Doctrinal
point that he builds his Exhortation upon, Therefore return unto the Lord.

The next name is, JEHOVAH: The Lord Jehovah Jehovah.
is his Memorial.

This name Jehovah is a name that God glories much in, for indeed it is the
name of Gods Being, it signifies the Being of God more fully than any name God
has; this, and that name of God, I am that I am, which comes from the same
root, and is in effect the same with this name Jehovah; I say, God glories in
this above all his Names: and therefore in Deuteronomy. 28. 18. That thou may fear
this glorious and fearful Name Jehovah, the Lord; in your books it is, The Lord
thy God, but in the Original, That thou might fear this glorious and fearful
name, Jehovah, thy God; God looks upon this name, as his Glorious Name, and his
Fearful Name, and would have people to take heed that they look to this, that
they fear this glorious and fearful Name, JEHOVAH, thy God: This Name the Jews
keep a mighty stir about, and think they find great Mysteries in it, they have
such superstition, and do so reverence this Name, that they will not so much as
pronounce it, they call it the Ineffable Name; and if it be written upon a
Paper, they think it is a very wicked thing to tread upon that Paper. But it is
very observable here how cross the superstition of men is to God, they in way
of reverence to God will not so much as mention this Name, because they say
it is a name that God so much glories in: And yet mark here, my Text says, this
name is Gods memorial, God would have this Name mentioned above any of his
Names, it is the Name by which he would be remembered to all generations. So in
Exodus 3. 15. there you shall find, that God speaking of this Name of his,
[Iehovah] it is that that he would be known by to all generations. Surely there
is much then in this Name.

First, This Name [JEHOVAH] it sets forth the Glory of God more than any name
in this, because it is Jehovah what it signifies.
a Name that above all Names shows, that God has a being from himself, in which
much of the glory of God is, this is proper to God: And indeed from this one
Principle, that God is from himself; we come to understand almost all things
that can be known of God by any light of Nature, by any Natural Understanding,
besides what you have by Divine Revelation, As the knowledge of God in Christ,
that is above it; But the knowledge of God as Adam knew him, and as the Creature
can know him by any Jehovah, Gods being of himself. what it infers. 1
Natural light, there is most of all known from this Principle, That God has
his being from himself.

First, From Himself follows, That he is the First Being of all things.

Secondly, From hence follows, That he is the Supreme 2.
Being, he is above all.

Thirdly, From hence follows, That he is an Eternal 3.
Being, he can have no beginning, because it is from Himself.

Fourthly, From hence follows, That he is an Infinite 4
Being, that there is no bounds at all of his Being; for what ever is bounded is
bounded by some thing that is without it; but God being from Himself, and
having no cause, can have nothing to limit and bound his Being.

Fifthly, From hence follows, That there is All Being 5
in God, whatever has any being, it must be either that that is the First, or
from the First, He is an absolute Being of Himself, having it from Himself, and
therefore Al Being is eminently contained in God Himself.

Sixthly, From hence follows, That whatsoever is in 6.
God, is God Himself, from this Name Jehovah, He is an Absolute Being, nothing
but Himself: This is the difference between God and any Creature: Whatsoever is
in the Creature, is not the being of the Creature. A man has Wisdom, now the
Wisdom of a man is one, and the Esteem of the man is another thing; but it is
not so with God, whatsoever you can say of God, is God, the Wisdom of God, is
God; the Mercy of God, is God; the Justice of God, is God Himself: and so all
the Attributes: we conceive of the Attributes as if they were distinct from the
Being; when we say, God is wise, as if God were one thing, and Wisdom were
another; but certainly if we would apprehend God as in Himself, we cannot
apprehend him so; As if his Wisdom were one thing, and God another; or his
Mercy one thing, and God another; so that the truth is, nothing can properly be
predicated of God, because when a thing is predicated there is a difference
between the Subject and the Predicate, but there is Nothing can be properly
predicated of God.
no such distinction in God; but whatsoever can be said of God, is God Himself,
and there is as much of the glory of God appears in this one thing, in this (I
say) that all that is in God is God Himself. The understanding God thus does
help us to see God in his glory as much as any way How to conceive aright of
God.
whatsoever, and few people apprehend this, but look upon God as a Creature,
and so they think God is some excellent thing that has so many Excellencies in
him; but to understand, that all that is said of God, is God Himself, and
therefore it is all but one being in God; it does appear diverse to us, Wisdom,
Mercy, Justice, Power, Life, Holiness, and Faithfulness appears many things to
us, but in God all is but one Excellency; As now, The beams of the Sun appear
diverse to us, they shine through a blue glass, and there is a blue reflection,
and a Simile.
green glass and then it is green, and a red glass and then it is red, but all
one beam: So the Infinite, First, Absolute Being of al things appearing in the
several workings of His, in the several Administrations of His, this way or
that way, seem to be several, but it is all but one being that is in himself:
and this is signified by the Name Jehovah.

And further; By the Name Jehovah, is signified to us, That all the being of
the Creature depends upon God, 7
is from God originally, and so depends upon God every The name Jehovah, what
it should remind us of.
moment, every time you hear the Name Jehovah you should be put in mind of
this, That as all creatures had what they had from God at first, so they do
absolutely depend upon God every moment for their being, and for all the good
they have.

And then lastly, In this Name is signified thus much, 8
That the Lord will give a being unto all his Promises, and to all his
Threatenings; And therefore when he did appear to Moses, to tell him that he
would fulfill the Promise made to his people, to bring them out of Egypt, then
he does tell him that indeed, though he did appear to Abraham by the name
Elshaddai, God-Alsufficient, yet he did not appear to him by the name Jehovah,
which is as much as if he should say, yea indeed, when I spoke to Abraham, I
made a Promise to him, that I would give him such a Land, and thus and thus,
but I did not give a being to the Promises; but now I come to make way to the
fulfilling of this Promise, now I appear to be Jehovah, thus Jehovah is Gods
memorial, that is, every time you read of the name Jehovah, (it might very
well be wished that the very word Jehovah had been kept in Iebovah to be kept
in the translation.
your English Translation, but almost always when you read the word Lord
Always when it is in capital letters as LORD, not when it is in other letters,
as Lord
it is Jehovah) every time therefore you read the name Jehovah, or hear that
name, then you should meditate this, and contemplate of God, it will help your
meditation of God very much, God Jehovah, the Lord he is a Being from himself,
the First-being that is the Supreme of all, an Infinite being, that has no
bounds at all, it is he that is such a God as is of himself, whatsoever is in
him it is his own Essence, it is his Being, an Eternal Being, and from whom all
creatures have Being, and do depend, and it is he that will give a Being to all
his Promises, so all his Threatenings, all this is contained in the Name Jehovah
which is the memorial of God. And thus for the opening of these Two Names.

Now then for the Observations from them. The first is this,

Though God be never so strong and terrible in himself, never Obs. 1.
so great and glorious, yet faith has strength to wrestle with this God, it is
brought in to this end, Jacob he prevailed with God. God, what God? The Lord of
Hosts, Jehovah, even this God that is the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of all
Armies, that has al power, that is so terrible in all the Armies in Heaven and
Earth, and is this Jehovah, this Infinite, Glorious, Supreme, Eternal
First-being of all things? and yet Jacob wrastles with this Lord of Hosts, God
Jehovah, and prevails with him.

So that hence Christians should learn, to raise up Use.
their spirits when they have to deal with God, if God has given them faith
they should not be daunted with Gods terror, or with Gods greatness; thou
sometimes look upon God as the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, the great
Lord of Hosts, the infinite Jehovah, the luster of his glory seems to amaze
thee; be not afraid, Oh thou believing soul, if thou be a seed of Jacob,
notwithstanding all the terribleness there is in God, and all the glory that
there is in God, the infinite distance that there is between him and us, which
his Name Jehovah sets out unto us, yet thou may wrestle with this God, even
with this God, and prevail with such a God as this is. Many poor Christians are
much daunted, and discouraged with the sight of the greatness of God; but this
text is a very great help to us that we should not be daunted and discouraged
with the apprehensions of Gods greatness; indeed it is for ungodly men, to whom
God is an Enemy, they are to be daunted with the apprehension of the greatness
of God; but to the seed of Jacob, even when Jacob prevailed it was with this
God, that is the Lord of Hosts, whose memorial is Jehovah.

The Second thing is this, That the greatness and glory of Obs. 2.
God in these Names of his is a great aggravation of sin: for to that end it is
likewise brought to aggravate the sin of this people in departing from this
God. Oh! the Lord is infinitely terrible, he is the Lord of Hosts, and he is
Jehovah, and yet you wretched creatures have departed from this God, you have
sinned against this God; Oh! it is a fearful aggravation of men's sin, that their
sin is against such a God that is the Lord of Hosts, whose Name is Jehovah;
there is nothing that can humble the soul of a sinner more than the sight of
the Lord in his glorious What humbles most effectually.
Attributes, when thou come to know what a God it is thou have to deal with,
this will make thee to see thy sin to be great; therefore the Prophet sets God
in his Glory before this people, that they should come to see their great sin,
and that there should be a stop given to the course of their hearts that were
running on in the ways of sin.

Thirdly, Which is very useful; Look what Glory and Obs. 3.
Excellency of any Title, or Name, or Work that God has ever appeared in to
our Forefathers, the same we may have God to appear in to us, if we forsake him
not: That Is the Third end why the Prophet here brings these Titles, The Lord of
Hosts, Jehovah; as if he should say, He was thus to your Father Jacob, the Lord
of Hosts, and he was Jehovah; and his memorial is still the Lord of Hosts, and
Jehovah, and therefore you might have this God to appear, the Lord of Hosts for
your good as well as he did to your Forefathers, and you might have God appear
to be Jehovah for you as well as he did to Jacob, if you forsake him not; Oh!
wretches, that you should forsake this God whom you might have to be the Lord
of Hosts, and Jehovah to you.

Oh! Let Us learn this, That when we read in Scripture, Use
or hear from our forefathers how God has appeared heretofore for his Saints,
for our Forefathers, let us make this use of it, God is the same God still, and
we may come to have as much good from this God as ever any had since the world
began, there is no shortning of his Power, there is no darkning of his Glory, but
whatsoever Power has wrought, whatsoever Glory of God has appeared in former
times, we may come to have it appear to us now, it is a mighty argument for
people to keep close to God and be faithful with him even because of this.

Fourthly, There Is no need of Images to keep Gods remembrance; the glorious
Titles of God and his Attributes, Obs. 4.
and the Manifestation of Himself in his Works, is the best Memorial of God;
that is our way, the way of man to make to himself Memorials. God has made
himself a Memorial. When you read in the Word this glorious Title of God,
Jehovah, it is a better Memorial of God than all the Images in the world are,
and we may better Sanctify Gods Name, and have our hearts better wrought upon
by such Titles of God, than by all kind of Images whatsoever.

The Fifth Note, When God manifests himself in his Glory, it is not only for the
present that men now might see his Glory, Obs. 5.
but it is that he may be remembered from Generation to Generation, from one to
another, from one time of our life to another, and so from one Age to another;
so here, the Lord of Hosts, Jehovah is his memorial, as if he should say, the
Lord manifests himself Jehovah thus and thus, and he would be remembered in
other Ages to be so; what God does to his people in one Age, he does not expect
only to have his Name sanctified for that present, but he would have it laid up
from Age to Age, and would be honored in all Generations from those great
manifestations of himself in some one Age.

My Brethren, Oh! that we had hearts to do this, Oh! that we could make this
God his Memorial, that we could lay up what God has manifested of himself in
Use.
this Age for the benefit of another Age; I hope God will one way or other
provide means for the recording of the famous things that God has done in this
Age, that it may be a Memorial to the posterity afterward; for certainly our
Age cannot give God the glory that is due unto his Name for what he has done,
we had need labor to continue it to posterity that the Ages to come may
remember what God has done to give glory to him, it is his Memorial.

And then the last Note is this, When we would have a Obs. 6.
holy Memorial of God, the meditation of the Name JEHOVAH is very useful for
us. You that say you cannot meditate, your meditations are barren; Would you
help your selves in meditation to have a holy Memorial of God, think much of
the Name Jehovah, remember what has been hinted to you from that Name, and
what is contained in it; And thus much for the Fifth Verse.

VER. 6.
Therefore turn thou to thy God; keep Mercy, and Judgment, and wait on thy God
continually.

THerefore] Here comes the Use now, all the other Cohaerance.
seemed to be the Doctrine, and this is the Use, therefore turn unto thy God,
so that this Therefore, it has reference unto all that the Prophet had said
concerning Jacob, and to these Titles of God, as if he should say thus.

1. You had such a gracious Father that did thus prevail with God, to whom God
did so appear, therefore turn to God. 2. It is the Lord of Hosts, therefore
turn to him. 3. Jehovah is his Memorial, therefore turn to him.
For the First, The reference it has to their father Jacob affords us this
Note, That the consideration of our gracious Obs. 1.
Predecessors, of our Forefathers that were godly, to whom God appeared in
Mercy, is a great argument to turn us to God. Oh! you that are Children, that
have had Parents that were wrastlers with God, Are you wicked now? Consider
what Parents you had, and turn you therefore unto God: In. 2 Timothy 1. 3. I thank
God (says St Paul) whom I serve with a pure conscience from my forefathers.
Oh! it is a great comfort unto a man or woman, if they can be able to say thus,
I thank God, whom I serve with a pure conscience, from my Forefathers: my
Forefathers served God, my Grandfather, or Grandmother, or Father, or Mother
they were godly; and I thank God, even from them that I serve God: God is my
God, and my Fathers God, Exodus 15. 2.

The Second is this, That the consideration of God, to be the LORD of Hosts, is
a mighty motive to cause us to turn to God: Obs. 2.
Will thou go on in ways of enmity against the Lord of Hosts, the Lord of
Hosts who has Angels and all Creatures to fight for him? Will thou, a poor
worm, stand out against this God? thou that go on in a way of wickedness,
know, thou fightest against the great LORD of Hosts. What were it for a drunken
fellow to come and think to oppose but such an Army as we have that goes out of
the City at this time? but for a poor wretched Simile.
worm to think to stand against the Infinite GOD, the Lord of Hosts, Oh! it is
infinite boldness, and presumption, and desperate madness in that man; therefore
turn to the Lord: All the while thou art going on in ways of wickedness, thou
art fighting against the Lord of Hosts.

And on the other side, If thou had but an heart to turn unto the Lord, Oh
how joyful would this Title be to thee, that that God which is thy God, is the
Lord of Hosts, is the Lord of all the Hosts in the World: We are not afraid now
to see Soldiers, and hear the beating of Drums, and shooting of Guns, when we
know that all are our Friends; but if we should have heard the beating Simile.
of Drums, and neigbing of Horses, and shooting of Guns of our Enemies, that
would have struck fear: So, one that has turned to God need not fear any Army,
any Creatures, Why? for all is commanded by God their Father, and Oh! the joy,
peace and security that a heart may have that is turned to God. I Will give you
one notable Scripture, in Act. 27. 23. says Paul, There stood by me this night
the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I Act. 27. 23. Explained.
serve, saying, Fear not, Paul. Mark, There stood before me the Angel of God.
Did not that terrify him? The Angel that is but one of the Members of the
Hosts of God, any one Angel has a great deal of terror in him sometimes, for
there is much of the glory of God in Angels, and we know that the appearing of
Angels has struck terror into many men: But now says Paul, The Angel said,
Fear not; If it be the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, then I need
not fear; yea, let God muster up all his Hosts, and appear to one that has
turned to him, if he can say thus, Whose I am, and whom I serve, these Hosts
will say, Fear not. Therefore turn unto the Lord, because he is the Lord of
Hosts.

Thirdly, Because God is JEHOVAH, therefore turn Obs. 3.
unto the Lord. There Is a great deal of force in this Name to cause sinners to
turn to him, because he is Jehovah, for this Name JEHOVAH has as much terror
in it to a guilty ungodly soul, as we read of in all the Book of What Terror
in the Name- Jehovah.
God, I say, put all together that we read in the Book of God, yet if we did
but thoroughly understand the Name Jehovah we should see as much terror in it to
a guilty conscience, and a sinful soul that goes on in the ways of wickedness,
as almost all that is mentioned of God that might be terrible. As thus,

JEHOVAH.] If he be Jehovah, he has power over every thing that has a being
to torment thee with it, for he has all being in Himself, al being is from
him, and the dispose of all, therefore whatsoever thing has any being in it,
this God has the power over it, to make use of it to torment thee withal. Do
but consider how some little creature, if it be in some part of a man's body,
what power it has to bring torment, a little gravel in the kidneys, or stone
in the bladder, that is but a poor weak creature in its self, but being in that
place, what tortor does it bring! now if a little gravel or stone has that
power to torment thee, then what power has all things in the Earth, and the
infinite God that has all essence, and all being, and can dispose of all
things as he pleases, to bring pain, misery, and torment to a sinner? It Is a
very humbling consideration to a sinner.

And on the other side, If there be any power in any And whrt Consolation.
thing that has a being, to bring any comfort to a man or woman, it is all in
God, for God has all in him eminently; As now, one Creature has power to
torment in one way, another in another way; and so one Creature has power to
comfort us one way, another another, but all this is eminently in God, the
gravel torments one way, the humor in the veins in the gout that torments
another way, and fire torments another way, and the Sword torments after
another manner, and burning fever torments in the body, fire without, and
burning fever within, the stinging of Serpents torments after another way; now
all power of all things is in God Eminently, the quintessence of all things is
in God, and therefore the power of God is able to bring all sorts of torments
at one time in one thing; As now, suppose several herbs that have several
virtues, one has a virtue in one kind, another in another, but if these herbs
were all distilled into one water, then a drop of that water has the same
virtue and efficacy that it A fit simile.
may be forty several herbs has; so now, all creatures that have their several
kind of efficacies and virtues distilled into one, If I may compare this
distillation unto God, he has all kind of power in himself, and is able to put
it forth in one instant, all the power and efficacy that there is in all
creatures in Heaven and Earth, either to torment, or to comfort us, If one herb
has one sweetness, and a second another, and the third another, the
distillation of them all together, how sweet will that be? Now all these being
in God eminently, Oh what comfort is there in God than to the soul! So that
look either way to the Name Jehovah, we may see an argument to humble us for
sin, the dreadfulness of the wrath of God appears in this, more than in any one
meditation The Excellency of the name Jehovah.
that I know of. Neither do I know any meditation that may stick upon the heart
to comfort and encourage the heart to turn to God and to rejoice in God so much
as this, That there is all being in God eminently, and all depending absolutely
upon him; therefore turn to God, because he is Jehovah. Thus you see the
connection of these two.

Further, When the excellency of the Saints, or glory of God Obs. 4.
is set before us, we should make it an argument to turn to the Lord: when both
together, the Exccellency of Jacob, and the Excellency of God, this is set as
an argument to turn to the Lord; Turn to me.

But they might say, Do not we turn to God? we do serve God.

That may be another Note, That whatsoever Services Obs. 5.
men do perform to God, yet if they be not in Gods way they do in the midest of
them all depart from God, and do not turn to him. They did worship God after a
fashion, but God did not account that worshipping of him, but departing from
him, therefore turn to God. But turn Thou to God. Text.


That is, Every one of you, do not stand objecting and Expos.
cavelling against what I say, but turn to God every one of you, turn Thou to
God. Thou art Israel, Thou art the posterity of that great prevailer with God,
therefore turn Thou to God, That Is the Note of Observation from hence; and if
you lay it to heart, you will find it of very great use, Every one should
consider what peculier arguments there are that concern him in particular to
turn to God; Therefore Turn thou to God, O Israel. There Is a great deal more
reason why thou should turn to God, than others.

Oh that every one of us here in this place would but Use.
in our meditations labor to recall all those particular arguments that concern
our selves, that might turn us to God, do not take it in the general, Turn to
God because he is your Creator, turn to God that you may be saved, this
concerns all; but consider what special arguments thou have, as thus; Consider
what special manifestations 1.
of God there has been to thee; Consider what special offers of Grace there
has been to thee; Consider 2.
what special workings of the holy Ghost there has been 3.
upon thy heart; Consider what special illuminations of Gods Spirit there has
been in thee; Consider of what 4. 5 6.
special dangers thou have been in; Consider what special Vows, and Covenants
thou have made to God, and yet have departed from him afterward; Consider what
special engagements thou have had; These are but the hints that men and women
may lay to heart all the arguments that may concern them especially to turn to
God. Turn Thou to God therefore. Do not thou look upon others, and think thus,
I do as others do, yea, but thou have more reason to turn to God than others.
There are more arguments to persuade thy heart than others, Turn Thou to God.
And this is a great mercy of God toward any man or woman, when as God shall
dare powerfully those special considerations and arguments A mercy, for God to
speak particularly to a soul.
that concern their souls to turn to God; a man or woman comes to hear the
Word, and hears the nature of Repentance, and the motives to Repentance, but
that generally concerns all, and this does not much stir the heart, but at
another time it pleases God to hint something out of the Word that concerns
them in particular, and Particulars affect most.
this gives a mighty turn to their hearts more than all the other; As if a man
be asleep, though there be a great noise, perhaps this does not awaken him, but
let one come and call him by his name, Thomas, or Richard, or John, and speak
particularly to him, and that will awaken him when a greater noise will not do
it: so though there be general arguments of turning to God, it does not so much
prevail with people, as when God speaks to men and women by name, and says,
Turn thou to God. There are these special arguments why thou should turn to
God rather than others. Many times you will say, If ever any were bound to God,
then I am, then turn thou to God because thou art more engaged than others.
Turn thou to THY God. Text.


That is, Though you have departed from him, yet Expos.
he has not wholly cast you off so but he may yet be thy God: From whence the
Note is,

That the sight of any Relation to God, or hope of Mercy from him, is a special
means to draw the heart to turn to him; Yet Obs.
he may be thy God, God has not left thee, O thou wretehed sinful soul, who
knows but that he may be thy God, and thy God to all eternity? Thou might
have been past such an Argument of hearing any possibility of God's being thy
God, and therefore turn to God, turn to thy God, -- And keep Mercy and Judgment.

Want of Mercy (in the Fourth Chapter of this Prophecy) was charged upon this
People, That there was no Expos.
Mercy in the Land: and so in diverse other places, want of Justice. Now, Turn
to thy God, and keep Mercy and Judgment.

The Note from the Connection is this, That in our turnings to God, we must look
to our special sins, and reform them. Obs. 1.
It Is not enough for men and women to turn to God, and leave some gross sins;
But is there any sin more special than another, that you have lived in before
your turning unto God? Reform in that sin above all. A man or woman can never
have any sure argument that their Repentance is true, though they have left
many sins, if they have not left their special sins; there is some special sin
that thou have lived in, what say thou to that?

Then Secondly, It is nothing for people to reform in Gods Worship, except they
reform also in the duties of the Second Table, Obs. 2.
that is wonderful. The duties of the Second Table, Mercy and Judgmeut, Turn to
thy God, and keep Mercy and Judgment. Many men and women that seem to be
forward in duties of Instituted Worship, which is very good; we are to honor
God, God is jealous in that business; but now, together with that, if we be not
conscionable in the duties of the Second Table, of Mercy and Judgment too, it is
nothing, all will vanish and come to nothing except thou live righteously and
mercifully with men also, as well as worship God; do not think to put off thy
conscience with the duties of Worship, except thou do keep Mercy and
Judgment, that is more General.

And then Particularly.

Keep Mercy, and then, Keep Judgment, be merciful unto thy Brethren, A heart
turning to God, if it be a true turning, it must needs be very merciful to men,
God expects Obs. 3.
that from all that do turn to him, that upon thy turning to God, thy bowels
should yern toward thy Brethren, and turn to them in Love, and in Mercy, and
Meekness, and Gentleness, and Forgiveness, for when thou turnest to God, is it
not the mercy of God that draws thy heart? If it be not that, thy turning is
not right; never any turned to God rightly but their hearts were taken with
Gods mercy: And can thy heart be taken with Gods mercy, and thou not merciful
to thy Brethren? Many Professors of Religion think little of this, but I find
the The Scripture most in this next to Faith.
Scripture makes as much of this as of any thing, but faith its self, faith in
the Covenant of Grace. These Three things ^he Scripture holds forth, and urges
very much upon men.

Faith, Mercy, and Unity; the two latter are thought What the Scripture presses
much
to be little and of no moment with men, but certainly the Lord Christ does lay
much upon mercy toward men, that all that are his Members should be of
merciful dispositions, and of uniting dispositions one toward another; Oh!
it is Mercy that the Scripture makes Religion to consist in, Jam. 1. 27. Pure
Religion, and undefiled, is, To visit the Fatherless and Widows: and in Jam.
2. 13. Mercy rejoices over Judgment, it is that which will help men and women
in the time of straits, and in times Jam. 2. 13.
of danger, that they have been merciful toward their brethren, for that I
take to be the meaning of that text, Mercy rejoices over Judgment; not that
Gods mercy is more than his Judgment, and that though a sinner has Interpreted.
deserved Judgment, yet Gods Mercy will prevail, and triumph over it; but I
take the meaning of that text to be, Mercy in man, and not Mercy in God, that is
thus; That when man has had a merciful heart toward others, toward his
brethren, that then if he should live to meet with affliction, live to a time
of Judgment, times of common calamity, common dangers, that mercy that he has
exercised toward his brethren in the time of his prosperity will cause his
soul to triumph in the midest of all dangers; In the time of affliction mercy
rejoices over Judgment; let Judgment come, let afflictions come in the world,
let there be never such hard times abroad in the world, yet I have a testimony
to my conscience, the Lord has given me a merciful heart toward my Brethren
that are in misery, and I that am but a poor creature that have but a drop of
mercy to that God that has, an infinite Ocean of Mercy, will not that God be
merciful to me much more? Keep Mercy therefore, you that turn to God, be of
merciful dispositions toward your brethren; Oh! this is wanting among many
that are Professors of Religion, they are of cruel and harsh dispositions,
Ridged Professors.
ridged, sour, and severe dispositions toward others, care not what becomes of
others; Oh! be merciful to your brethren, You that are turned to God, show it
in this, That you keep MERCY.

The next is, JVDGMENT.

Where there is a turning to God, there must be righteousness among men. Obs.


Judgment] That is, Righteous Judgment among men, thou can not turn to God
from thy Unrighteousness, and to a Righteous God, and yet still not be
Righteous toward men; Certainly if thou be turned to God, from thy
Unrighteousness toward a Righteous God, then thou will be turned likewise from
thy unrighteousnes toward men, and will be righteous toward them. Many texts
of Scripture I might have shown you, that commend this Grace of Righteousness,
and it is made the great Promise to the Glorious Church when that shall be, That
Righteousness shall prevail there, that the People shall be a Righteous People.

And Judgment: Not only Judgment in doing no man any wrong, and being righteous
in dealing; But thus Expos.
Judgment, Execute Justice against Sin, manifest thy hatred against Sin, by the
Execution of Judgment: This is the Note from thence,

That those who turn to God will manifest their hatred against sin, by the
Execution of Judgment, if they be in place of Power. Obs.
Though in thine own cause thou may forbear, yea, thou should be
merciful; but when Public Manifestation of hatred against Sin requires
Justice, then there is no place for Sparing; when God calls thee in any Public
Place, to manifest hatred against Sin, then (I say) thou may not think of
Sparing.

But you will say, Oh! I must pity, and show Mercy. Quest. Answ.


Well, If you would be merciful, be merciful in your own cause. Many men that
will plead for Indulgence to Malefactors, yet in their own business they have
no Indulgence to those that offend them. It beseems a Judge to Pretended Mercy.
be very pitiful when he is wronged himself, but it beseems him to be very
righteous and just when the Public calls him. Keep MERCY, and JVDGMENT.

Mercy is first, and Judgment afterward. The Scripture Obs.
makes a difference between our respect to Mercy and Judgment: that place in
Micah, The Lord has shown thee, O man, what he would have thee to do, LOVE
MERCY, and Mic. 6. 6.
DO JUSTICE: There should be a Preheminency in Mercy, Mercy must not only be
shown, but loved; and Justice must be done. And then, Keep MERCY and JVDGMENT.

The mixture of Mercy and Judgment is very comely; The Obs.
Scripture does mix them very often, Psalm. 101. 1. I will sing of Mercy and
Judgment: and Prove. 21. 21. He that follows after Righteousness and Mercy,
finds Life, Righteousness, and Honor. Psalm. 112. 4. The upright man he is
full of Compassion, and Righteousness. Jer. 9. 24. The Lord there does seem to
glory in this, in his Righteousness as well as Mercy, says the Lord, Let no man
glory in the flesh, but let him glory in this, That he knows Me, that I am
the LORD, which exercise loving kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the
Earth. Let him glory in this, That he knows that I am such a God, this is my
glory, That I am both Righteous and Merciful.

Now for the several Rules, when Mercy should be Quest.
Shown, and when Judgment should be Executed, that would be the Use here, How
men should be directed to mix both these together.

Mercy, when men offend by Infirmity, when I see it is Answ. (...). When we are
to show Mercy.
but a weakness, it is not through wilfulness, Mercy then should be shown.

Oh that we would consider of this, our brethren that sometime differ from us
in Judgment, in practice, consider, 1.
Do they appear in any of their carriages any ways, Difference in judgment.
to be wilful in their way? can you take it upon your consciences, that it is
through obstinacy, and through any wicked principles that they have, that they
go against conscience? does it not appear in all their other ways that they
walk humbly and conscionably, that if they be in the wrong, yet it is through
mere weakness that they cannot see the Truth, that thou think thou do
see? Now thou should be merciful toward them, and carry not thy self in a
ridged, severe, bitter, and harsh way toward them, but in a Merciful way,
Mercy when the offense is by infirmity.

And then when the offender is already sensible of his offense, then Mercy. 2.


Or, when there may be as much good done in a fair, gentle, merciful carriage,
as in a harsh, ridged carriage. 3


And then especially at that time when any man or woman begins to feel passion
arise in their hearts and a 4.
spirit of revenge to stir in them, above all times, then is the time for
mercy; examine thine heart, thou have to deal with thy brother, now see whether
there does not begin to arise passion and revenge in thy spirit toward him,
now is the time for Mercy, it is not the fit time for Judgment, it is not a fit
time to give Judgment, nor for thee to execute Judgment, but now is the time
for Mercy.

And then there is the time for judgment, When thou art called to manifest
hatred against sin, when the public good requires Answ. 2 When we are to
execute Judgment.
it; when you cannot be merciful to one, but you must be cruel to another: As
in many things wherein men would be merciful, the truth is, the Mercy they show
to some is cruelty to others, and when thou have the least interest in a
business, then there is the most like to be the time for Judgment. Well,

Keep Mercy and Judgment:

Keep it, not only do some acts of Mercy and Judgment, Text.
but keep it.

Many men in some good moods (observe it) Oh how Obs.
pitiful are they! how merciful are they! but come to them at another time, and
Oh! how ridged are they then! Oh! how sour are they! how bitter, how cruel! how
harsh are they! We have found it so by experience, you can say, such a man, Oh!
what sweet converse had we together, and what a sweet tempered man he was, how
loving, how meek, how gentle, how pitiful! But come to him now, how harsh, and
how rugged in his expressions, and extreme bitter, mightily turned as if he
were not the man; keep Mercy, keep it. Does God at any time melt thy heart, and
make thee apprehensive of thy need of mercy? does thy heart begin to bleed
toward thy Brethen? Oh! keep it, keep this temper; the Lord keep this in the
thoughts and purposes of thy heart for ever, Oh take heed of change of heart.
It should be the care of Christians, not only to do that that is good, but to
keep their hearts in such a constant frame. Oh that some of you would but call
to mind the dales of old, Was there not a time that your hearts did melt
toward your brethren, and had sweet converse and communion with them, what is
become of those spirits now? Oh! turn to that gracious, sweet, temper again,
and if ever God bring you to that temper again, keep it; Consider what is it
that has changed my heart, what has brought me to it; now if God does Note.
discover how thou have lost that sweetness of thy heart, Oh! labor to repent
and turn to God, and resolve, if ever God bring me to that temper again (as
sometimes through his mercy I have felt) I hope through his Grace that I shall
keep my self in that temper; Oh how happy were it with us if when God brings
our hearts into a good temper if we had but hearts to keep them in that temper,
keep Mercy. And keep Judgment too.

In some acts you shall find men very just, and take them in other acts and
there they will be false enough. But now, It should be our care, to be as it is
said of God in Jer. 50. 6, 7. God is said there to be the habitation of
Justice, so it should be in the Courts of Justice, there should be the
habitation of Justice. Perhaps sometimes, in some one Cause a man may have
Justice in a Court: Courts of Justice.
yea, but if it be not so in all Causes, at all times, there is not the keeping
of Justice; Justice should be always at home: sometimes you may come to a
Court and not find Justice at home, but it is gone abroad, but it should be
always the habitation of Judgment. And so it should be in Families, and in
particular Persons; It may be at some times thou were just in thy ways, yea,
but then thou hadest not a temptation, the tempration came not Families.
for unjust dealing: There are some men that by a temptation are brought to
such unjust dealing, that if a man should have said some diverse years ago, that
thou would have done such things, you would have been ready to think, Am I a
dog, that I should do such things? but now, when a man is once engaged in any
unjust way, then he must go on: and therefore keep Judgment. It follows; Keep
Judgment, and wait on thy God continually.

That Is thus, Do not satisfy your selves in duties of Mercy Text
Expos.
and Judgment only, but worship God; For by waiting on God is meant the
exercise of spiritual Graces, wherein the Worship of God consists, wherein we
come to make God to be our God: As it is not enough for men to think they
worship God, and yet make no conscience of the Second Table; so neither is it
enough for men to make conscience of the Second Table, and not to worship God.
It may be there is some of you that are very just, yea, but what worship of God
is there in your Families, and in your own hearts? Do your souls worship God,
and sanctify the Name of God in all your ways? Therefore this is added, Turn
to the Lord thy God, and keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on thy God
continually. Wait on God.

The bases, or foundation of waiting, is Faith, Believe How we are to wait on
God. 1.
there is good in God, help, supply here, and that in God alone; however things
seem to be contrary, let things go how they will, I believe there is help in
God alone, and not in those former base ways that I have taken before, that my
corrupt heart has led me into, here is help, and not in the other way.

Secondly, Waiting on God, is, To attend God in the use of what means God has
appointed for the attaining 2.
of such a thing that I expect from him.

Thirdly, A looking out for Mercy; I believe here is 3.
Mercy and no where else, I attend on God for it in the use of these means, and
I look out for mercy.

Fourthly, I quietly submit in the mean time, though 4
God stays long; that is to wait, so as not to be discontent, not to have my
heart sink, though God stays long.

Fifthly, I keep in the way of seeking of God all the 5.
while: That soul that does this, may be said to wait on God.

A turning heart to God is a heart that is a waiting Obs.
heart, the heart that turns truly to God is taken off from all Creature
contentments, so as to rest in them, and looks up to God for all help, and for
all supply. And this waiting is of very great use to those that are turning to
God, Consider of it, Is any of you about the work of turning to God? has God
begun to make a turn to any of your hearts? Know, that when you are Use for new
Converts
turning to God, you are very like to meet with a great many things that may
discourage you, many suggestions of the Devil and your own hearts; Why should
not I go back again? what good have I gotten by reading, and praying? I get
nothing by it, and all will come to nothing at last, Temptations are like to
come thick and threefold upon the heart of a sinner turning to God: I am
confident I am speaking in this to the hearts of all that knows what it is to
turn unto God, there was a time that thou were departing from God, and then
thou wentest on quietly, but ever since the time that God has begun to turn
thy heart, Oh! the thick, and three fold temptations of the Devil that come to
thee! Now this is a very seasonable exhortation, turn to God and wait upon him,
be not discouraged not withstanding all difficulties, fears, temptations, and
discouragements, from Men, and Devils, and thine own heart, yet wait upon God
and keep in his way.

Oh! it had been happy that this exhortation had been set home upon the spirits
of many that the Lord was Apply. to some backfliders.
beginning to give a turn to their hearts, not long since the Lord was
beginning to turn thy heart to himself, and thou mettest with some things that
discouraged thee which has turned thee quite off again, Oh! had but this
exhortation come seasonably then, Turn to the Lord, and wait upon him, Oh! it
had been happy for thee. The Lord make it seasonable now to thee, Oh! remember
this text, Turn to God, and wait upon him.

Wait.] Oh! there is reason that thou should wait upon God, Oh! thou say
if I had comfort, and if I were sure I should be saved at last, though I have
discouragements from men, yet, if I had but comfort from God, then I could be
content; yea, but wait, wait for comfort, wait for peace, wait for assurance,
God is a great God, and is worthy to be waited on: Why we should wait. 1


Men that are above others will take state upon them, and they will be waited
on; God is great, and therefore wait upon him.

And we are vile creatures and unworthy, and therefore 2. Simile.
let us wait. Beggars if they should rap and rap, and you come and see it to be
a beggar, your heart rises upon him, if he beg he must wait if you be busy. We
are Beggars, and therefore it is fit for us to wait.

And Thirdly, God has waited on us a long time, 3.
how long did God wait upon thee, it may be thou were twenty years old before
thou did begin to turn to God, perhaps thou were thirty or forty years old
and God was waiting upon thee to be gracious all that time, God was waiting for
opportunity to do thee good, and therefore wait thou upon God.

And Fourthly, What we wait for, it is worth our 4.
waiting. If a man did believe there were nothing but scraps to be had at last,
then he would not wait so long; but if he did hope there was some great thing
to be gotten, then he would wait: Beggars if they come to some Simile.
mean house, they knock at the door and stay a little, and if they give them
nothing, away they will go; but if they come to great Houses, or Coaches, they
will wait though it be long, and run a great way after them. So, that which we
wait for, it is worth thousands of worlds, What we wait for.
we wait for the pardon of Sin, and wait for the assurance of Gods Love, we
wait for the shedding abroad of the holy Ghost in our hearts, we wait for rich
Treasure, and know that there is enough to be had in God; your waiting will pay
for all.

Know also, It Is a great part of Gods Worship to wait 5.
upon him, it is not the Worship of God, only to Pray, and hear the Word, and
receive Sacraments; but when you are waiting, you are worshipping of God.

Further, God is all this while preparing mercy for 6.
you. Suppose you come to have a Scrivener write something for you, Well, the
thing is not yet done, yea, but Simile.
he is writing as fast as he can: know, O thou soul who art turning to God, all
the while thou art waiting, God is working, God is setting all his Attributes
on work for thy good, while thou art waiting, and therefore wait on thy God.

And know, God is infinitely wise, and he knows when it is best for us to have
the mercy, he knows the times and 7.
seasons, wait upon God, for the Lord is a God of Judgment. Alas! we are hasty,
we cannot judge when the time is fittest, but God is a God of Judgment, and
therefore wait upon him: should we have a mercy just when we would, our mercy
would undo us, and therefore let us wait.

Oh my Brethren, we have as much encouragement here in this Land to wait upon
God as ever any people had; we would fain have had the Wars ended, and we
England.
began to murmur and repine because it was not done, Oh! but we will not wait,
therefore we will not turn; and those that turn to God least, will wait least
upon him; and those that turn to God most, will wait most upon him; Do not you
see that God has wrought abundance of good for us by deferring what we would
Note.
have? had we had no opposition at the beginning of the Parliament, and suppose
the King and Parliament had agreed, and said, You shall have your desires, What
would we have desired, we would have desired some few things, as taking away
Ship-mony, Tonnage, and Poundage, Monopolies, etc. and to have a Triennial
Parliament, and the like. Now what abundance has God wrought by deferring what
we would have had? Oh it is good for people to wait upon God, Oh let us look
back to our murmurings and repinings all this while. It Is true, we have
suffered something, yea, but has not God wrought good out of our sufferings?
and suppose there should be fears of new storms arising. Oh let us not say we
will wait no longer; Oh I take heed of foolish resolutions of your own: God is
wisest, leave God to do his own work, keep the way of God and go on in your
duty, and then let God work his own ends, either by War, or Peace, any way as
he pleases, wait upon God; and mark, Wait upon God Continually.

Wait] It Is fit for us to wait. Yea, but we have waited Expos.
a long time. Well, but yet know that you are at the right door: Suppose a man
be knocking at a door, and he has knocked a great while and no body comes, he
begins to think it is not the the right door, but some body Simile.
tells him that it is the right door, and then he stays: so we may assure our
hears thus much, we are at the right door certainly, and let us not think to
go away, and we shall find somebody within, God will appear at length, What,
shall we lose all for want of waiting a little while longer? Thus it is with
many wretched Apostats, that The folly of Apostats.
have taken a great deal of pains in seeking after God a great while, and for
want of waiting a little longer they have lost all: Oh! let there be this
resolution in your hearts, If I die and perish, yet I Will die and perish waiting
upon God. Certainly that soul that has this resolution will never come to
despair, yea, there is no such way for the hastening of Mercy, as for a soul to
lie flat at the feet of God, let God do what he will with me, if I perish, I Will
perish waiting upon him, though he kills me, I Will trust in him, and stay upon
him: You have waited, how long I pray? Oh! you have been waiting and seeking of
God it may be this half year, or twelve months, What Is that I pray? O thou
wretched soul! thou have deserved eternal flames, and will thou grudg at God
for waiting a few years? If God would keep thee waiting As he has done diverse
all thy days, and at the last manifest Himself unto thee, thou had cause to
bless God for ever, and therefore do not grudge though thou have been waiting a
while, and it may be though Thy time is come, yet Gods time is not come, the
time that you call long, God does not call it so; One day with God is as a
thousand years, it is no time with God, and therefore do not complain of the
length of thy time.

And your betters have waited longer; Read but the 88. Psalm, and there you
will find your better waited all 8.
his time; The Lord was pleased to work Grace upon him when he was young, his
heart was turned to God then; and you may find in the text, that from his youth
up the terrors of God was upon him. Wait upon God continually.

And you cannot better your self: Whither will thou go, poor soul? Now you are
seeking God, you have not 9
what you would have, Whither will you go? Can you mend your self any way? if
you cannot, then wait upon God continually.

It may be before God began to turn thy heart, thou thoughtst Mercy was easy
to be obtained, thou thought 10.
then it was nothing to believe, thou wondrest that people spoke so much of the
hardness of believing, thou thought it easy; Well, the Lord is now working
upon thy heart, and the Lord would humble thee for those slight thoughts thou
had of Faith, the Lord will have thee to know, That believing in his Grace it
requires a mighty work of God, even the same power that raised Jesus Christ
from the dead. Be humbled for thy slight thoughts about the work of Faith, and
know, that this (it may be) is the thing that God intends in keeping thee so
low so Note
long, That thou may come to see that Faith requires the mighty Power of God
to work it, that so thou may give glory to God when ever thy heart shall be
raised by the work of Faith to believe in him, and to be enabled to triumph in
him, and say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited on him, and this is the God
of my salvation: And therefore you that are turning to God, wait upon him
continually.

But besides, The Use of Exhortation, he has a Use 2.
of Reprehension, and that is in the 7. and 8. Verses. Notwith standing all
this, as if the Prophet should say, Oh! your hearts are set upon your
Covetousness, upon the pelf of this world, these vanities that are here below.
You are not (says he) as your Father Jacob; I exhort you thus to turn unto the
Lord, and to keep Merey and Judgment, but it is otherwise with you.

VER. 7.
He is a Merchant; the balances of deceit are in his hand; he loves to
oppress.

THis Scripture, though it seems to be somewhat a harsh one, and hard to read,
yet it may be a good providence The Text seasonable.
of God that did bring it to hand at such a time as this is.

That Is the scope of the Prophet: We may exhort long The scope.
enough says he, yet so long as their hearts are covetous, and set upon their
way of getting gain, they will never regard what I say, they will not turn to
God, they will not hear of turning to God, but will turn a deaf ear rather.
This indeed is the guize of men that have great dealings in the world, and
their hearts are set upon their Great dealers
riches, let there be the most glorious Truths set before them that ever were,
yet they are as nothing to them: we read in Luke 16. of Christ himself
preaching before a company of men, and some of them being very covetous, mark
what the Text says, verse. 14. The Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all
these things, and they derided him, they blew their noses at him, so the word
(...).
signifies, they scorned him. Christ he spoke of Excellent and Divine
Mysteries, and there were some of his Auditors that had dealings in the world,
and great estates, and they scorned at whatsoever he spoke; Tell us of such
things as these are! tell us of ways of gain, how we may come to enrich our
selves: This seemed to be the disposition of some of the Auditors of Hosea at
this time, therefore says he, He is a Merchant.

The word that is here translated a Merchant, it signifies a Cananite, and may
be translated, if you would (...) Expos. 1
translate it according to the very letter of the word, He is a Cananite, for
the same word that signifies a Cananite signifies a Merchant in the Hebrew
tongue. You have the like in other places of Scripture, Job, 41. 6. Shall they
part him among the Merchants, among the Cananites, so is the word in the
Hebrew: and in Prove. 31. 24. She delivers Girdles to the Merchants, the word
is to the Cananites. Now the reason why that a Merchant, and a Cananite has
the same name in Scripture, it is, because the Country of Canaan was much given
to Merchandise, and indeed much to deceit. As the Mathematicions were called
Caldeans from the Country because the Country was so Cananite, why signify a
Merchant. Chaldaeans, why taken for an Astrologer. Arabian, why a Thief.
full of Mathematicions; so Arabia, Robbers and Thieves, were called by the
name of Arabians because that it was so full of them; and so because Canaan had
so many Merchants therefore it has the denomination, A Cananite, and a
Merchant.

But here the holy Ghost calls them not Israelites, mark, God he does not say,
you are an Israelite, but a Cananite, Expos. 2.
and that is by way of upbraiding of them, because they had degenerated so much
from Israel, (that was spoken of before) so he would not call them Israelite,
but calls them Cananite. Observe that, Men by their sin may lose the honor of
their Progenitors.

And further, Though it is true, that the calling of a Merchant Obs. 1. Obs. 2.
is not only Lawful, but a very honorable employment, yet the abuse of it may
make it very contemptible, if it be abused and corrup ed it may grow to be very
contemptible; for so here, the holy Ghost does cast such a word upon them, to
show, how through their corruption they had made a calling that was honorable,
to become contemptible, and, they had brought contempt upon their own persons:
for though Merchants that are subtle may in the pride of their hearts rejoice
in their subtilty and cunning, and think that they can circumvent others by
their deceit, and get money that way in going beyond them; they may glory in
this as if it were a great excellency in them, but the holy Ghost casts
contempt upon those, he is a Merchant, a Cananite, and the balances of deceit
are in his hand.

The balances of Deceit are in his hand] The Lord abhorred their balances of
deceit, yea, and professed that they are an abomination to him, if you read
Levit. 19. 35, Levit. 19. (...) 36. Illustrated.
36. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in Metyard, in Weight, or in
Measure. Just Balances, just Weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall ye
have: I am the Lord, I am Jehovah. This lies upon it, if you will acknowledge me
to be the Lord, to be Jehovah, be just in your dealing, have no unjust
balances, let there be no injustice in your trading. And in Deuteronomy. 25. 13. and
so on to the 16. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great, and a
small; thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small: But
thou shall have a perfect and a just weight, a perfect and a just measure shall
thou have, etc. For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously
(mark) are an abomination to the Lord thy God. There Is much laid upon it, you
think you may take liberty in such things, no says the text, all that do such
things they are an abomination to the Lord thy God, it is not only a thing that
God forbids, but a thing that God abominates to be deceiptful in trading. Do
thou profess any interest in The Point urged.
God? have thou any hope that God should be merciful to thy soul, to do thee
any good? do thou think that God is thy God? know this is an abomination
then to thy God, to that God that thou professest to have any interest in; nay,
in Prove. 11. 1. there is likewise a Scripture to the same purpose, A false
balance is an abomination to the Lord; but a just weight is his delight. God
takes pleasure in that. Now says the Prophet here, The balances of Deceit
are in his hand, as if he should say, let him have riches any way, he does not
mind turning to God, but he regards the balances of deceit.

We are to understand this for all kind of deceit in trading, 1 The Text opened.
though only balances are here mentioned, yet here is a synechdoche; one
special thing is mentioned in a business to set out all of that nature, not
only Deceitful Balances, but Measures, and Tale, and Lights, and Mixtures,
when they shall mix water and other things with any Commodity to make it
heavier, or mix ill ware with good ware, deceiptful glosses, and appearances,
to make wares that are ill to seem to be good by many Arts that Tradesmen have
to put a gloss upon their wares; deceiptful words, to tell them what they cost,
and what the goodness of it is, to make many protestations, yea, and deceiptful
Oaths, all such things are here condemned; and deceiptful Books, and deceiptful
Reckonings; So that by Balances of deceit, are always of Merchants, of
Tradesmen, whether by Balances, Weights, Measures, Tale, Lights, Words,
Protestations, Oaths, Appearances, Glosses, Mixtures, Books, and Reckonings,
all kind of deceiptfulness is here condemned, He is a Cananite. Yet those have
their due honor, that are righteous in their dealing; but such as make
profession of Merchandise, and are not righteous in their dealings, they cannot
think much that the Scripture should call them in the way of upbraiding, a
Cananite.

Or if he does but join with others in deceit, that com^ in here: As if there
be any men, and the way they take 2.
he knows it is to cozen others, yet to get gain he will be content to join with
them to partake a part of their gain: these things, and perhaps your own
consciences would tell you of abundant more that you know of, of the mysteries
of iniquity that there is in trading: As we read of those in the Revelation,
that were under the power of Antichrist, they might not buy nor sell, except
they had the Mark of the Beast upon them. And the truth is, among The Mark of
the Beast.
a great part, if not most of our Buyers and Sellers there is the Mark of the
Beast upon them, deceiptfulness and falsness among them, and because this is
thought to be so light a matter, therefore the Scripture lays the more weight
upon it. And so much as the time will give me leave, I shall labor to lay some
weight upon this, Of deceiptfulness in ways of Trading.

The balances of deceit are in his hand. That is (says a 3. Innuitur
continuum ac perpetuum studium. Meisn. in loc.
Learned Interpreter upon the place) By this that they are in his hand, is
intimated a continual and perpetual study and endeavor to deceive, he has it
at hand, and it is in his hand continually. In the forenamed place, Deuteronomy. 25.
13. and so on, There men are forbidden to have Deuteronomy. 25. 13. observed.
a false weight in their bag; you must not keep a false weight in your house,
much less in your hand.

Or it may be he alludes to those that have a slight of 2.
hand, to make the balances turn one way, or the other way, so as their
Customers shall not perceive it. -- And he loves to oppress. Text.


What oppression is there in Trading? If I buy a commodity and sell it again,
what oppression can there be? Oppression in Trading.
There may be oppression in Trading, As thus:

1. Oppression in Monopolizing of Commodities, that 1. Monopolizing Commodities.
poor men that have been brought up to such a Trade, and that have no other
livelihood at all but that, that a few men get into their own hand, and make
such use of it themselves that poor men are not able to live by them, this is
oppression; Certainly this monopolizing in Trading is a great oppression, the
Lord has in great measure delivered us, but not wholly delivered us from that,
there is a great cry in many parts of the Land still of that.

And then Secondly, Oppression in Trading; when as 2.
men take the advantages of men's weaknesses that they deal withal in their
Trading: but especially when they take advantages of men's necessiries, that is,
If I know that such a man must sell his Commodity, now for men to take
advantage of his necessity and therefore beat it down, so as even almost to
undo a man because he is necessitated for the selling of it. I verily believe
you know the meaning of such things as these are.

Or now, Those that work upon the necessity in buying, as sometimes when men
bring over Commodities, and must bring over such Commodities, you will let them
lie to the last period, that so you may have them at any rate, and so when you
come to know that men must needs have a Commodity of you, then to raise the
price so as they cannot live upon it, this is even to drink their very blood,
this is Oppression.

They love to oppress: (that is) The poor of their wages. Expos.


There are many poor men that are servants to you that are Merchants, and
Tradesmen, they live upon their 1.
labor, and they must come and fetch Commodities of Oppression of
under-trades-men.
you, that they must live by; now you knowing their necessity that they must
have your work, therefore you beat down their wages, and not give unto them
according as they may maintain their families: you will say, I do not wrong
them, If he does not, another will, I but that will not serve the turn.

Or otherwise, They love to oppress: Tradesmen oppress 2.
their debtors, when they have gotten poor men into their debts then they will
make them that they shall buy Debtors
of them, and of none other, and so will put off any of their braided ware to
them, and put it off at a deer rate. You will say, We sell it them, yea, but
you force them to buy of you; for if they should go from you, then you fall
upon them, and put them into prison, or evil entreat them some other way. This
is to love to oppress, to take the advantages of men's necessities when they are
grown poor. Certainly these things are grievous to the Spirit of God, and are
abominable in the eyes of God, these are rebuked here, and that you may see
that there is a great deal of evil in these Balances of deceit, and oppression
in trading, do but consider these particulars.

First, Observe how this is brought in, in my text, as 1. The evil of deceit
in trading.
opposite to turning to God; Turn to God, then presently, He is a Merchant, the
balances of deceit are in his hand; he loves to oppress. Those men that live
in any way of deceit or oppression to get gain to themselves by those ways,
these are men that yet have not turned to God; thou have not turned to Jehovah,
thy heart is not turned to him, thy heart is turned to the earth, the earth is
thy portion, thou art to look for the things of the earth to be thy portion, it
is not God that thou have chosen, nor turned unto him.

Then Secondly, Thou do certainly not know what 2.
sin does mean, that dare venture the least sin for the greatest gain; had
God ever enlightened and awakened thy conscience to see what sin does mean,
thou would rather lose all thy estate, and be clothed with rags all thy
days, than willingly to commit the least sin, to get the greatest estate. It
was a speech of Austin, That there must not be so much as an officious lie,
that is, a lie when a man intends no hurt, but good, yet this must not be told,
says he, no not for the saving of the souls of all the world: surely then a
lie must not be told to get twelve pence in a bargain, or five shillings, or
fifty shillings, or five pounds, it must not be told to save the souls of all
the world; Now to tell a lie to deceive others as well as thy self, surely, God
has not yet laid the weight of sin upon your souls, the day is yet to come
that you shall know (perhaps to all eternity) what the weight and burdon of sin
means.

And then in the Third place. Certainly you do not 3
trust in God, you may speak of trusting in God, but it is apparent by this,
That you have jealous thoughts of God, that you do not believe that God takes
care of you; and here is not only sin, but it shows your misery, you are in such
a condition, that your own consciences condemn you, and tell you that God takes
no care of you, for did you believe that God had care of you, care over my
body, my estate, my soul, then I Will leave it to God, I Will cast my care upon
God, I Will go on in Gods way, and leave all other things to God. But now, when a
man is low in the world and would fain rise higher, or would provide such a
portion for his children, and he falls to deceiving, and so thinks to get it
that way, this is the plain explicit English of it; For my part I dare not
trust God to take care for me, and that that I think God to do for me is not
enough, if I trust to Gods blessing, I may be a poor man, my children may be
poor, and I dare not trust to promises, nor protections, nor providence, but I
must take my own way; (the truth is, the language is as much as thus much) I
cannot get an estate by God, and therefore I Will see what I can do by the Devil.

And then Fourthly, All duties of Religion that thou performest 4.
are rejected by God; you who are conscientious to your selves of ways of
falseness in your trading, and it may be have gone on many days and years in
your ways, I say, all the duties of Religion that you perform are rejected by
God, you will deceive, and yet come to hear, and deceive again, and yet hear,
and so make the duties of Religion to be a color to your deceit. Who would
suspect such a man that is so forward in matters of Religion that he should be
so deceiptful? Oh! cursed is that wickedness above all wickedness, it is
aggravated by this, When thou make Religion to be a color of deceit, know,
that God casts all thy profession and duties as filth and dung back again in
your face. I Will give you this on Scripture in Ezekiel. 28. 18. Thou have (says
the text) defiled thy Sanctuaries (how?) by the multitude of thine iniquities,
by the iniquity of thy TRAFFIC: By the iniquity of thy Traffic thou have
defiled thy Sanctuaries. You go abroad and there you traffic, and deceive, and
put off false Commodities, and have false Reckonings, and the like: now you
come into the Sanctuary, Oh but you defile the Sanctuary by the greatness of
your iniquity; and among other greatness of your iniquities, the iniquity of
your Traffic is that that defiles the Ordinances of God unto you: In Micah, 6.
8. when those Hypocrites had said, What shall we do? shall we come with ten
thousand Rams, and Rivers of Oil? Says the Prophet, He has showed thee, O
man, what is good; And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justice,
etc. As if he should say, Though you come with all these things, it is all to no
purpose, whatsoever Offerings you offer to God, it is all nothing, except you do
Justice.

Fifthly, There is a curse mingled with every thing thou 5.
do enjoy. Though it may be some things are gotten honestly, yet (I say)
there is a curse mingled in all things thou do, it does venem and poison
every thing thou do. In Zach. 5. 3. there was a flying Roll of twenty Cubits,
and the breadth of it ten Cubics: then said he unto me, This is the curse that
goes over the whole earth, (for whom?) For every one that steals shall be cut
off etc. Every bit of meat thou eatest at thy Table thou may look upon it
as dipped in the curse of God, I have gotten this by deceit, thou would be
loath to have every bit of meat rouled up in dirt and so put into thy mouth,
but every bit of meat is rouled up in the Curse of God.

And then Sixthlie, surely thou that art guilty of 6.
this deceit in the way of trading thou can not pray, if thou come to
prayer, surely thy conscience is very blind, for when thou art conscious to
thy self of deceit, how can thou come into the presence of a righteous God?
Can thou say, Oh Righteous Father? dare thou come into the presence of such
a HOLY and RIGHTEOUS God that profess, to abominate thy ways, surely thy
conscience must be very blind, if thou do not understand the evil of thy
sin; It may be there was a time at first of thy trading that thy conscience did
trouble thee for a little time, thou had mis-giving thoughts, but thou have
worn them out, and so art ready to bless thy self that thou have gotten over
such a difficulty as that is: thy condition is far worse. Or if not, If thy
conscience be not seared with a hot Iron, then thou will be terrified. I verily
think that those that have any light left in them that they dare not go to
prayers; Oh! do thou so prize a little gain, as to take away the freedom of
thy spirit, and the holy boldness of thy heart in prayer! Oh how should thou
say to Gain, Get thee hence as a menstruous cloth.

Seventhly, Know, that if thou should come to make 7.
use of thy estate in any good work, God rejects it: Isa. 61. 8. For I the Lord
love Judgment. I hate robbery for burnt offerings; What will you come and get
by deceit an estate, and come and offer it to me, I abhor it says God. It Is a
speech of Chrysostom, Why do thou despise, and Chrysostom.
despite God in this, in bringing unclean things to him? it is a reproach to
God: a man that has gotten an estate by deceit, if he brings his estate to
any Service of God, he does reproach God.

Eighthly, know that God will avenge such things, it may be the poor man that
thou oppressest in thy trading 8.
he cannot right himself upon thee, because a bargain is a bargain (you will
say) yea, but God will come over with the bargain again; it may be you have
done with him in your bargain, but God has not done with you.

You will say to him, You saw what it was, and you bought the thing of me as it
was, and I have nothing to The excuses of deceiptful dealers.
say to you; but God has much to say to you in this, mark those two
Scriptures, Micah, 6. 11. the Lord having shown what he did require, that men
should be just in their ways, now says the text in ver. 11. Shall I account
them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceiptful weights?
for the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have
spoken lies, and their tongue is deceip full in their mouth; therefore also will
I make thee sick in smiting thee. Oh! when God comes to smite thee, he will
make thee sick to purpose: sickness to such men as have defiled consciences in
their trading is dreadful sickness indeed, as if God should say, You shall have
not De mali quaesitis non-gaudet tertius Haeres: -- Of goods ill got, the thud
Heir joyeth not.
great content in what you have, I will be avenged on you for what you do,
either you, or your heirs shall no enjoy it. But that place concerns Christians
very much, a place that it is impossible for you that are exercised in
Scripture, but you must needs take notice of it, 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go
beyond, and defraud his brother. In any matter, you must not go beyond your
brother; your brother is weak, you will say, Let the weaker look to it as well
as he can: No, you must not take advantage of his weakness, he is your brother,
you must not defraud him, no not in any matter, why? because that the Lord is
the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.

And know this day, the Lord forewarns you once A vehement applic. of the text.
more by the Ministry of his Word, and the Lord by his Word does testify
against you in this one thing, and if you go on in any way of deceit, you go
on against the very strength of the Word, and strength of Conscience this day,
and this Word that is preached this day to you shall certainly testify
against you another day.

Yea further, When you come to die, Oh! how terrible 9.
will death be to such men! when they shall leave the sweet of all their
estates, and carry nothing but the guilt, of all with them: In Job, 27. 8.
What hope shall an hypocrite have, though be has gained, when God takes away
his soul? Sometimes men they seek to deceive, and they are discovered, and so
they are rendered base and contemptible to all the world; yea, but sometimes
again, they may carry it so cunningly, as they shall never be discovered,
perhaps in this world, but they shall gain, as Ephraim says here, I am become
rich and have gotten substance, but what hope has this hypocrite though he
has gained? what profit shall it be though thou have gained the whole world and
shall lose thy own soul? See also James, 5. 3. The rust (of your Gold and
Silver) shall eat your flesh as it were fire.

Yea, Know further, That thou must restore, if thou 10.
have any estate now, or if thou ever come to have any estate, it must be
restored or thou can not expect to find mercy from God with all the sorrow,
cries, and prayers that can be, without restitution, there cannot be
expectation of pardon and forgiveness. The ancient Restitution.
speech that all Divines in all Ages of the Church have closed withal was,
There must be Restitution of that that is falsely gotten, if it be in thy power
to do it, thou must restore it or else thou can not have any hope of mercy,
those sweet morsels that you have swallowed, must be vomited up again; And
therefore you that are Apprentices take heed of pleasing your Masters, to be
deceiptful, for if you have a hand in it you must restore. I Will give you
Scripture and Reason for it. Why we pardon without Restitution.


The Reason is this, That it is impossible that any kind of repentance can be
accepted of God without restitution, the reason is; because, That if I have
power to restore, all the while I do not restore I do continue in the 1 Reason.
sin, I do not only wrong the man just the very hour I have deceived him, but
all the while I keep that which is his in my hand, this is the argument that
repentance can never be accepted of God that may stand or does stand with a
wilful continuance in the sin that a man seems to repent of, Do I repent of my
sin, and yet wilfully continue in the sin? I say, Wilful, for I have it in my
hand to restore: Oh but I shall undo my self; I but that is wilful still, Is it
better for thee to keep an estate, or to keep a sin? Now certainly any man that
has any light must needs acknowledge thus much, That if I truly repent me of
my sin, I must do what possibly I can to undo my sin; Can I say, I am heartily
sorry for a sin, when I do not what I can for to undo that sin again if I can?

And for the Scriptures for Restitution, there are diverse, 2. Scripture.
I Will give you two or three, Ezekiel. 33. 14, 15. And when I say unto the wicked,
Thou shall surely die: If he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and
right, if the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed, etc. he
shall surely live, he shall not die. He does not walk in the Statutes of life
except he give again that which he has robbed. And so in Numb. 5. 6, 7. there
you have the Law about restitution, when a man or woman shall commit any sin
that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty,
then they shall confess their sin which they have done, (is this al?) and he
shall recompense his trespass with the princial thereof, and ad unto it the
fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he has trespassed. He
must confess his sin, yea, but that is not enough, Numb. 5. 6, 7. an excellent
Scripture for Restitution.
but he must recompense the party. This is a most excellent Scripture; Mark,
it is said here, If a man shall trespass against the Lord, it is not only against
Man, but against the Lord, against the rule of Justice that the Illustrated. 1.
Lord has so set for the maintaining of order and humane Society in the
world: And then observe it further, if a man or woman commit a sin, that men
commit, and do a trespass: you will say, I do no other than all tradesmen do,
mark, says the text, If a man or woman commit 2.
any sin that men commit, as if the holy Ghost should say, I confess it is a
sin that is ordinary, but though it be ordinarily committed by men, though
there should be confession of that sin, yet if there be not restitution, it
will do you little good. I remember Latimer in one of his Sermons that he
preached before King Edward, speaking Mr. Latimer
of this very point of Restitution, he says that the first day that he
preached about it there comes one and gives him twenty pounds to restore; the
next time he preached there comes in another and brings thirty pounds, and
another time he preached and there comes another and gives him two hundred
pounds, ten shillings, and he has this homely expression, Restore what you
have gotten, else you will cough in Hell, and the Devils will laugh at you; His
expressio^ of non-restorers.
Certainly it is that, that will lie heavy upon conscience; Gravel in the
kidneys will not grate so upon you as a little guiltiness that is upon your
consciences. I my self knew one man that had wronged another but of five
shillings, and it seems he did not much regard it being but five shillings, yet
God awakening his conscience fifty years after he comes and could not be quiet
till he had restored that five shillings. And therefore know, that though it be
many years since you have gotten any thing by deceit and wrong, yet God will
(if he has a love to you) put you to restore it again. Oh! what foolish lusts
are the lusts of covetousness, as the Apostle says, Those that will be rich
they fall into many foolish lusts; this sin of covetousness, and deceiptfulness
it does bring men into foolish lusts, and makes men pierce themselves with
many sorrows; and Oh! that God would pierce them with some sorrow this day,
that they might never have one nights rest quiet, till at least they do resolve
in their hearts that they will set upon a way to make Restitution.

And even those of you that have made false agreements with your creditors, if
God awakens your consciences, I see not how you can satisfy your conscience
till you satisfy them, these things will not be peace another day.

Now the Lord convince those that hearing the Word of God are guilty, and know
that God will call for an account of this thing, and of this text that through
providence you have come to hear of this day.

VER. 8.
And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, etc.

IN the Verse before Ephraim is charged for being a Merchant, for having the
Balances of Deceit in his hand, and Loving to oppress; but yet Ephraim says,
I am become rich. Yet.

The Particle here is [nevertheless,] as if they should say, Ve(...)tamen.
Let the Prophet say what he will, let him enveigh against me as he pleases, I
know not what he means by his Deceit, and Oppression, I am sure I gain well by
it, Yet I am become rich, I am sure I prosper in this way, and that is enough
for me. I have found me out substance.

The Hebrew word that is here translated Substance, it labor, opes (...)
vanitas, etc.
signifies sometimes Iniquity, Labor, Violence, Rapine, Affliction, Riches, an
Idol, and Substance; all these things this word signifies: for indeed most of
them, if not all are usually joined together with Riches, where men are wicked
that do enjoy them. I have found substance. (...)


The Greeks they have a word, Rest, Refreshing to my soul. They account the
great refreshing and rest to their souls to be in the riches that they have
gotten, however they get them. I have found Substance.

Those things that the Prophet tells us of, they are but Expos.
Notions, Imaginations; but in what I have found there is Substance, to have an
Estate, and Riches, and Comings-in, there is Substance, I have found substance.

First from this observe, Wicked men will have something Obs. 1.
to say for themselves though their ways be never so foul. The Prophet charges
them of very foul things, the Balances of Deceit, and loving to oppress, and
other sins before were named. Yet Ephraim [saith] He has somewhat to say: It Is
a very hard thing to stop the mouths of wicked men, and especially Rich wicked
men; wicked men that prosper in their wicked ways, say what you will you cannot
stop their mouths: The work of Conversion is not so much as begun till the
mouths of sinners be stopped, till they be so convinced of their evil ways as
they have nothing to say for themselves.

Secondly, Men though very wicked and going on in very Obs. 2.
sinful courses, yet they may prosper for a while. Ephraim said, I am become
Rich.

It Is true, sometimes God meets with wicked men and curses them in their way,
that they have not their desire satisfied, but many times they have, they do
become rich, they get their hearts desires: Job, 21. Psalm. 73. with other
places sufficient for this.

Thirdly, Wicked men in their prosperity and riches, what Obs. 3.
they get, they attribute to themselves. I am become rich, and I have found
substance, I have got: They do not look up to God, indeed they dare not; those
that get by a sinful way, they dare not acknowledge God in it: and this is the
evil of getting any thing in a way of sin, that a man cannot come to God and
say, Lord, I bless thee that thou have given me this; no, his Conscience would
fly in his face* wicked men attribute all to themselves: This is a very wicked
and vile thing, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Beware, lest thou forget the Lord thy God,
speaking of their having Houses, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Interpreted
and Lands, Beware, lest thou forget the Lord thy God, and only look at thy
self, and atribute al to thy self, that is the meaning.

Then Fourthly, Carnal hearts they account outward things (Riches) to be the
only substantial things. I have found Obs. 4.
substance; they think there is no substance in other things; you speak of
Spiritual things, of Communion with God, of Faith in Jesus Christ, and of the
Promises, they are but poor dry things that have no substance in them; but tell
me of Gain, and Comings-in, there is some savor there, there is substance there;
For indeed there is nothing gives substance unto Spiritual things but Faith, in
Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen, and the substance of
things hoped for, Faith does give a substance to spiritual things, a Believer
looks upon spiritual things as the most substantial, and looks on these outward
things as imaginary; Carnal hearts think spiritual things imaginary, and an
outward estate substantial; it is quite contrary in those that are spiritual, in
the 8. of Proverbs, verse. 21. says Wisdom there, That I might cause them that
Prove. 8. 21. Noted.
love me to inherit (...)
substance, to inherit that, that is; as if there were nothing had a substance
but only that which comes in by Wisdom, by Grace. We call rich men, substantial
men, such a man (we say) is a substantial man, for indeed all the substance
that the world looks after, it is riches, they make account that is substance.

And then Fifthly, When carnal heats have got estates, Obs. 5.
they much glory in what they have got. I am become rich, and I inherit
sustance.

They make their boast in what they have got, they bless themselves in their
way; in Zephan. 1. verse. 9. it is spoken of the very servants of rich covetous
men, that seek to get an estate but to their Masters, in a way either of
violence, or of deceit, They leap upon the threshold (the text says) They
triumph, and leap, and skip in their Zeph. 1. 9. Opened
rejoicing that they have circumvenced others, that they have got such and such
things to their Masters; much more then will the Masters themselves leap and
rejoice in the having their hearts desires filled: They glory in it.

And then Sixthly, and that is especially to be observed here, That carnal
hearts that get estates in sinful ways, Obs. 6.
they seek to relieve their consciences that are full of guilt, with the
consideration of the outward comforts they do enjoy. The Prophet charges them
with their sin, charges the guilt of their sin upon them. But we are rich say
they, and we inherit substance. Wicked men will seek to relieve their
consciences, their guilty consciences, in the rejoicing in their riches, and
in their estates, and in what they have got; in Isa. 57. 10. you have a
Scripture somewhat suitable to this, Thou have found the life of thine hand,
therefore thou wast not grieved: It may be if a man goes on in an evil way and
does not prosper in it, if God crosses him in Isa. 57. 8. Interpreted.
it, then he begins to bethink himself, Is not this a finful way? does not God
oppose me in it? and then he begins to be grieved; But if he can find the life
of his hand go on, and he prosper and have what he desires, then he will not be
grieved, then his heart is hardened: Wicked men will set their riches and
estates against all their guiltiness, and think it will countervail it. I
beseech you consider this Note,

There is no more full and sure sign of a man of the world, of a worldly man
than this, That he can think to relieve his conscience in the guilt of the
least sin, by the A sure sign of a carnal heart.
enjoyment of all the things of the world that he can set the good of the
things of the world against the guilt of sin, that he can put any thing in the
world in the balance to down weigh the least guilt of any sins; here is a
worldly heart, here is a man of the world, a wretched heart, thou do bless
thy self in a great estate thou g(...)test, but has there been no guilt at all
that thou have contracted by that estate which thou have got, Thou can not
say but some guiltiness has been contracted, yea, but this contents thee,
there is so much gain comes by it, Oh! thou art a wretched man that can set
the gain in the world to the least guilt that thou have contracted, Oh! it has
been an ill bargain, riches got by guilt, thou have made (I say) an ill bargain
for thy self, thou know not God, know not with whom thou have to deal
that can set any gain by sin for to countervail the evil of that guilt that
thou have committed for the getting of that gain of thine.

And further, Wicked men labor to satisfy their consciences with the
prosperity they are in, and what they have got by their sin as they set it
against their guilt, so in the Seventh place, They persuade themselves that God
is Obs. 7.
not, (at least) so much displeased with them as many would bear them in hand.
Surely if my condition were so dangerous as you would persuade me to, I should
not prosper so much in my way as I do, I should not get riches so as I do; upon
this they begin to think that God is of their mind, as in Psalm. 50. 21. Thou
thoughtest I was like unto thy self: we find it by experience that when men are
under affliction, when Gods hand is upon men then they begin to think that God
does not like of their ways; but when they go on and prosper they are ready
to think that God approves of their ways, that they walk in. There Is a notable
story concerning the Mother of Lumbard, Gratian, and Comestor, [The first, the
Master of the Sentences (as they call them.) The Second, the compiler of a
great part of the Popes Law, the Decretal Epistles; the third, the Author of
the Scholastical History, the best man and book of the three.] All famous men,
and all The Mother of Gratian etc.
three of them were Bastards; Now the Mother of them being a Whore, when she
came to make her confession to the Priest, she could not acknowledge much evil
in it, and she professed she could not find her heart grieved or troubled much
about it; (when the Priest urged her penance and repentance for it) because
though it is true, that the thing was evil that she did, yet that she did
prosper so well, that they were three such eminent men of such great use as
those were. Thus it is ordinarily, men think that it may lessen the-greatness
of their sin if they get any thing by it, if they prosper in their sinful way,
there is no such cause of trouble and grief for it: The people they may laugh
at me (says a covetous man) but Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo ipse domi
simul ac numos contemplor in Arca.
I applaud my self at home, when I behold the money in the Chest, so long as I
see comings-in, let men talk what they will, I cannot believe that things are
so bad as they report, that God is so much against me, but I hope God loves me.
These are the reasonings of a carnal heart, and all because he prospers in his
sin. I remember it is reported of Dionisius that when he had committed
Sacriledg, and had a good voyage after it, says he, See Videtis quam bona
navigatio, ab ipsis dijs, sacriligis tribuatur. Val. Maximus, lib. 1. cap. 2.
what a good Navigation the Gods has granted me; you tell me of Sacriledg, but
I am sure I have had a good Voyage after it. Oh! these are Heathenish
reasonings, and yet I fear they are not altogether rooted out of such as
profess themselves Christians. You that have good Voiages abroad (observe it)
it may be if you meet with an ill Voyage, then you begin to recollect your
self, What sin have I been guilty of? but now, if you have a good Voyage,
though you have contracted much guiltiness upon your spirits while you were at
Land, yet prospering in your Voyage, you never think of any danger, but all is
well because you have a good Voyage. Oh no, a good Voyage is no sign that there
is not guiltiness: As sometimes I have told you, that a painted face is no sign
of a good complexion; it may be it is the Curse of God upon thee that does let
thee so to prosper, and if God had any love unto thee he would not let thee to
prosper so as he does, he would cross thee in thy ways that so thou might
bethink thy self, There Is another man perhaps that was as wicked as thou, and
yet the Lord had a love to him, and he crossed him in his ways, so that he has
begun to bethink himself, and not to be at rest till he gets the guilt of his
sin done away; but for thee, Gods heart it seems is not yet toward thee, he
has no love to thee; and if he lets thee go on and still prosper in a sinful
way, this is from the fruit of Reprobation; and certainly there cannot be
scarce a greater note of a Reprobate than for a man to prosper in a sinful way:
This A dangerous Note of Reprobation.
is that we should all pray to God to deliver us from, Lord, let us never
prosper in a sinful way, if thou feast our way be naught, that we contract
guiltiness upon our spirits in our way, Lord, let us not thrive and prosper; if
we do, a thousand to one but we are undone for ever. He said he was rich, and
he had found substance. Text.


So he put off all that the Prophte spoke. I remember in Luke, 12. when Christ
was preaching to the Pharisees, the text says, Those that were rich derided
him; rich covetous men they slight any thing that is said against them, for
they have where withal, they think to relieve their consciences against all
their guilt; Well, though thou may think to relieve thy conscience for the
present, it will not always be so, there is a time that conscience will speak,
and will not be put off with those conceits that now thou put it off
withal, The Saints they believe the The difference between a godly and a carnal
heart.
Ward against sense, and carnal hearts believe sense against the Word; here is
the difference between a Godly man, and a wicked; I say, one that is Godly, and
has Faith, he believes the Word against sense; let me go on in a way that I
know is Gods way, though I do not prosper, yet I have peace in it, I do not
repent me of it; but a wicked man, he will believe sense against the Word, let
the Word say, my way is never so dangerous, yet if I have experience by sense,
that I prosper in it, that shall suffice me, Yet I am rich, and have got
substance. -- In all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me, that were
sin. Text.


In all my labors] That is, In all that I get by my labors.

They shall not find in me that that is sin] That is, Let them Expos. 1.
search they shall not find in me that that is; No, as if they should say,
Labhor what you say, To oppress, cheat, and cozen, Who can prove it? let any
man prove it if he can, that I do cheat, or get any thing in a false way, let
any 2.
man dare to come and say it; Is there any Law that can take hold of me? They
shall not find iniquity in me; though there be some little matter, yet there is
not any 3.
great matter, not any thing that the Law of the Land can 4.
take hold of me; and if my way be such as no man can take advantage against me
by the Law, why should I be thus condemned and cried out of as I am. That Is the
meaning of these words, In all my labors.

From thence the First Note is this, That evil things many times have good
names. The truth is, That which is meant Obs. 1.
here, is that which they had got by Oppression and Deceit, and they call it
by the name of their Labors: so Covetousness is called by the name of
good-husbandry, and following their Callings, and the Art and Mystery of their
Callings; Many men think to put off their consciences with good words, It Is but
the Art of my Calling, and good-husbandry, and the like, in all my labors.
Further, observe;

It Is very hard to convince any covetous men of their iniquity, Obs. 2.
Rich, covetous men are much conceipred in themselves; in Prove. 28. 11. The
rich man is wise in his own conceit. You shall sometimes see a men that gets
riches, and as we say of some when we look upon their wit, we wonder at their
wealth; and others when we look upon their wealth, we wonder at their wit to
get an estate, they have wit only to get money, but for any thing else they are
ignorant, poor, weak men, especially in matters of Religion, as weak as
children, and yet they are wise in their own conceits, for they have got that
that they see all the world runs after: It Is very hard to convince covetous men
of their falsness, that they get any thing in a sinful way.

Again, There is no fin that is more hard to convince Covetousness hard to be
convinced.
a man of than the sin of Covetousness; and yet the Apostle speaks in 1 Cor. 5.
11. That it is a sin for which a man is to be cast out of the Church. When
almost did you ever hear of a covetous man convinced? What example can you
almost ever bring of one that has been covetous, and rich, and got his estate
in a false way, that shall come and give glory to God, and acknowledge his sin,
and cast up his sweet morsels again? Covetousness it is a beforting sin, it is
a blinding sin; Who shall find any iniquity in me? what do I do but that I may?

Then Thirdly, That covetous men, as it is hard to convince Obs. 3.
them, so they do not love to be charged with their sin: For so according to
some it is, Who dares charge me? It is a very dangerous thing to charge a rich
man of any evil, for he has his Purse by his side, and can tell how to revenge
himself upon you.

Yea, Fourthly, Men notoriously guilty, may yet in words Obs. 4.
at least profess what they are guilty of, to be an abominable thing. Who shall
find iniquity in me, that were sin? If I should be false that were a very
horrible and vile thing. Come to all tradesmen one after another, and tell them
of cheating, and cozening, and deceiving; they will scorn your words, it were a
wicked thing, one were unworthy to live: How often Trades men when they have a
mind to cheat, will profess, That if they should cozen and cheat, they were
unworthy to trade any more? Oh! what cauterized Consciences have many men that
give up themselves to gain, that make all their Godliness to consist in gain,
that make Mamon their God, that will go so directly against their consciences.
Luther renders it, God Absit ut deprehendar sceleratus in meis factus. Luth^^ l.
forbid that I should be found wicked in my actions. Oh! many that have much
guiliness upon them, will clap their hands upon their breasts, and when you
charge them, you have cheated and cozened us, Oh! God forbid that I should do
so; and yet their consciences will tell them that they have done so, and will
be ready to take their oaths, and swear, and use such curses that they never
did such a thing, or never had such a thing; and when their Books are false,
will swear that they are true.

Again, If wicked men cannot be accused by other men, then Obs. 5.
they care not. If they can carry it so closely that men shall not see it, then
they bless themselves, all is well and fair, if they have cunningly contrived
their wickedness that men cannot charge them, Who shall find iniquity in me,
that were sin? Well though you think your selves well enough because men cannot
accuse you and find out your sin, yet God can find it out, Deuteronomy. 32. 33. be
sure your iniquity will find you out, God has his time to find out iniquity,
that will be sin to you, and there is much between God and your consciences,
though men cannot charge you. Oh! but if so be, that God would but discover
unto the world, unto all your neighbors what he is able to charge you of, how
loathsome would many of you appear to your neighbors! how unfit would you be to
trade with men, or who would meddle with you! if (I say) God should open to the
world all that he is able to charge you of. Now certainly your condition is not
the better because it is kept so secretly that men cannot charge you, but
perhaps it would be better if they could, for it might bring you sooner to be
humbled for it; you think now because you have only to deal with God you can do
well enough with him: Do you think it such a matter to deal with the infinite,
holy, and glorious God! Indeed Servants would be troubled if their Masters
should know their deceit and cozening; but if a little child knew it they care
not for that; so men Simile.
think it is no matter for the knowledge of God, but they are loath that men
should know it, that will bring shame and disgrace unto them; Oh! carnal,
wicked, Athiestical heart that can not be satisfied if men know the evil, but
can be satisfied well enough though God knows it!

A Sixth Note is, A carnal heart lessens his sins that he Obs. 6.
commits.

Indeed the words may carry it, Who shall find iniquity in me? If they could
find it I would acknowledge it to be a great sin. But I rather take it thus; Who
shall find iniquity in me that were any great matter? Both these ways I find
Interpreters carry it. It is but a little overreaching, a little craft and
cunning, the matter is not great. Well, that which thou accountest little, the
Lord will account great another day, the over reaching thy brother, the
defrauding thy borther, though it be but a slight of hand, God will find it to
be a great matter one day, if God were but humbling thy heart, and doing good
to thy soul, Thou would rather aggravate thy sin, that is in* the way of a
true Convert, he labors rather to aggravate A true Convert
his sin, to bring all the circumstances he can to make his sin heavy upon his
soul: Oh! I find I cannot get my heart to break for my sin, I cannot apprehend
the evil of my sin as I would in the greatness of it, and therefore, Oh! that
God would help me to see the greatness of it; he studies all the circumstances
that he can to make his sin great in his own eyes: but now a heart that is not
wrought upon to a work of Repentance, all that he labors for, it is to lessen
his sin, and to have all the reasonings that he can in a way of deminution of
his sin; Oh! this is an ill sign.

It is a very ill sign, That a man stands it out as long as he Ill signs.
can. 2. When he can stand out no longer, than he falls a lessening; 1. 2.
It is no more than others do, and how should I maintain my family? and I hope
men may make the best of what they have? Oh! If the Lord once show thee the
evil of sin, all these reasonings will vanish before thee, and thou will fall
down and humble thy self before God as one worthy for ever to be cast out from
the presence of God: for in this that thou dare not trust in him, thou
seek to Hell to provide for thy self and family, rather than thou will
depend upon God.

And then the last Note is this, That if men can but escape the danger of Law,
that they cannot be sued, there is all that Obs. 7.
they care for. Who shall find iniquity in me, that were sin? That is, by the
Law: Oh how many are there that you may easily convince them that they have
been very false, you speak to their consciences, yea, but what is that? can you
take your advantage? Take your advantage if you can, say they: Now if it were
not for Atheism in men's hearts it would be the greatest advantage of all, that
a man is able to charge his conscience: What witness have you for such a thing?
I have your conscience, Oh they are glad of that, if they hear that you have no
other witness, then they think they can do well enough: Now that is an argument
of Atheism in men's hearts, that they think they are well enough whatsoever they
do, when Law cannot take hold on them. Well, there is a Court of Conscience to
sue thee in, and Justice will sue thee in that Court, and cast thee one day,
though man's Law cannot. It follows;

VER. 9.
And I that am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt, will yet make thee to
dwell in Tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.

THe dependence is this: You say you are grown rich by those sinful ways of
yours; I am grown rich, I Cohaerance.
have found substance: You think now you have no need of me, you have found
substance other ways, and I am forgotten by you; but you should remember that
I am the Lord your God, and that God that brought you out from the Land of
Egypt; there was a time when you had need of me, there was a time when you knew
not what to do without my help, when you were in great affliction, then I
delivered you with a mighty hand, you should remember those old mercies of
mine; Oh! but you are ungrateful, you do not think what I have done for you in
bringing you out of the Land of Egypt; If I be the same God still, why might
not you live upon me, and receive as much good from me, as others? You will go
and seek to shift for your selves by false ways, and forsake me, A^^ not I the
Lord? that God that brought you out of the Land of Egypt, Have not I by what I
have done for you shown plainly to you that you might as well provide for your
selves by me, as by any other God, by my ways as well as by any other ways that
you take? Can any God work for you so as I have done? Is there that good to be
got in those ways of sin as there is in mine? I am the Lord thy God from the
Land of Egypt; not only at that time, delivering of you, but ever since,
providing for you, graclously preserving of you, doing you good many ways,
from the time that I have been a God to you, and yet you do thus wretchedly
forsake me; In all your straits I have helped you, in all your necessities I
have supplied you, in all your difficulties I have relieved you, in all your
distresses I have delivered you, in all you burdens I have eased you, every
way of my providence has been gracious to you, from the very time of your
coming out of the Land of Egypt, how did I provide for you in the wilderness
after by Judges, raising you up Kings? And I am the Lord thy God from the Land
of Egypt. The Observation is,

First, When men prosper in a sinful way they forget what God has done for
them in former times. As if he should say, Obs. 1.
You do not remember that I am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt; Now you
are frolic and merry, and have your hearts desires; but remember there was a
time when you were low enough, and cried and made your moan to me in your
affliction, Oh! remember those days. Oh! how ordinary is it for us in our
prosperity to forget Gods mercies in delivering of us, from Affliction? We
have been low enough not long since, Applied to England.
but the Lord has in great measure delivered us from our Egypt, and presently
as soon as God has delivered us, every man begins to think of enriching
themselves and are plotting for estates, presently (I say) we have forgotten
our sad condition, the time of our mourning, our praying, Oh what disposition
is there in our hearts now contrary to what seemed to be a while ago? when we
were under sore and sad afflictions, New sins that we commit does as it were
occasion God to remember afresh his mercies that he has done for us.

The Second Note is this, When you walk unthankfully it does occasion the fresh
remembrance of Gods mercy to you; God Obs. 2.
looks upon such a people that walk so vilie, What, are these the people that I
have done such things for? it is as fresh in Gods memory* (to speak after the
manner of men) what he has done for us.

And if we could have what God has done for us afresh Use.
in our minds upon the commission of new sins, it would be a mighty means to
humble us.

And the next is, Old mercies are great engagements to duty, Obs. 3.
and great aggravations of our sin or neglect of duty: But we have had occasion
to speak of these things for merlie. It follows; And I will yet make thee to
dwell in Tabernacles.

By way of Interogation some read it thus, What shall I the Lord that brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt Expos. 1.
make thee to dwell in Tabernacles? Shall I yet continue my wonted love to you
as to make you to keep your Feast of Tabernacles still with joy as you were
wont to do yearly? shall I do thus says God?

Or as Calvin has it: (and it is a peculier interpretation 2. Calvin.
that he has, different from all) it is as if God should say thus, It is a
wonderful thing that you should be so forgetful of my great mercy, in bringing
of you out of Egypt, it is so out of your minds that I had need work over that
deliverance again; What, shall I cast you out of your houses, and bring you
into captivity again, and then deliver you again, and bring you into the
wilderness to dwell in Tabernacles again? shall I go over my work again? It is
so much gone out of your minds and hearts, as I had need to quicken up your
spirits to go all over it again; this is Calvin's Interpretation upon this
place; and he commonly hits as right as any: And this Interpretation may be of
very good use to us thus,

Let us consider our selves, that if all Gods merciful Applic. to England.
dealings toward us were to begin again, if we were to go through all those
straits, and fears, and sorrows that we have passed through, our hearts would
shake within us: as a Mariner that has past through dangerous Seas, Oh he
thinks if I were to pass over these again, it would be hard and grievous: Now
let us consider of this, if God should but put us into the same condition that
we were in seven years ago, and say, you shall pass through all those straights
that you have been in* and you shall come into the same condition that you have
been in, it would be very sad to us to think of, it would make our hearts quake
to think of it; I verily believe there is scarce any of you who have been any
way observant of the providence of God toward you, but would be very loath to
venture all again, would be loath that God should be to go over with you in all
those providence; and yet God is the same God still, and may do it, yea, but
flesh and blood would shake at it; now do not show your selves so unworthy of
Gods gracious dealings with you, as to put him to it to bring you into straits
again, to renew what he has done unto you. Thus he.

Many carry the words in a mere threatening way, and no otherwise. I did indeed
bring you from the Land of Egypt, but I Will bring you into Tabernacles again, as
if God should say, I Will cast you out of your brave stately Palaces, your City
and Country Houses, and you shall come into the wilderness again, and dwell in
Tents and Tabernacles. Thus many.

But rather I think the scope and meaning of the words, is a consolatory
Promise, whereby the holy Ghost invites 3. The Authors Exposition.
them here to-Repentance, as if God should say thus, Though you have indeed
deserved to be cast out of your dwellings, you have deserved to be brought into
Tents and Tabernacles in the Wilderness again, yet I remember my ancient
goodness toward you, and my Covenant with your Father Abraham, I am the same
God that brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and therefore return and repent,
and I Will be with you in as much mercy as ever I was, what ever the breaches
have been for time past, I Will be as gracious to you as ever I was; as you have
celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles with abundance of rejoicing, so I Will
continue this your prosperous estate, you shall from year to year have cause to
rejoice, have ^ause to rejoice in the Feast of Tabernacles: For this Feast of
Tabernacles it was the principal Feast of their rejoicing that they had, and
therefore all their Feasts were Feast of rejoicing, in Lament. 2. 7. They have
made a noise in the House of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn Feast. There
was Triumph and Joy in their solemn Feasts. But now this Feast of Tabernacles
was a special Feast of rejoicing, and that you have in Deuteronomy. 23. 40 Feast of
Tabernacles.
there they are commanded to rejoice in this Feast, for it was after the
gathering in of their Corn, and Wine, in Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14. there you shall see
further, and in the end of the 15, verse, Thou shall surely rejoice, it is not
only you may, but a Command, look to it that you do rejoice in this Feast of
Tabernacles, so that the Feast of Tabernacles was a very joyful Feast. Now
says God, I am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt, and I will yet make
thee rejoice, as in the Feast of Tabernacles. From hence we have these Notes.

First, God loves to give hopes of mercy to sinners upon their Obs. 1.
repentance; God loves to draw the hearts of wretched, vile sinners, by giving
them hopes of mercy upon their repentance; so you have it in 1 Samuel 12. 21,
22. there they confessed their sin, and their special sin, in asking a King above
all; but says Samuel, Though you have sinned, yet do not depart from the Lord,
Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, as in Ezra, 10. God sees
that if there be not hope, men will grow desperate in their wickedness; Jer. 2.
25. They said there was no hope, and therefore they would go on still. Oh! it is
good for sinners to see there may be hope.

And Gods Ministers when they have to deal with sinners, though very wicked,
yet to give them some line of Ministers duty.
hope to catch at; though they be even drowned in their Covetousness in the
world, and in their guiltiness, yet to cast a line of hope; there is nothing
revealed to the contrary but there may yet be possibility for thy sonl at
length to be saved. Oh! let men take heed of dispa(...)g, determining
conclusions against themselves.

It Is not the greatness of any sin that can be ground enough for a desperate
determining conclusion; for any man or woman Note.
to say, God will never show mercy, I say, there is no greatness of sin, there is
no circumstances to aggravate, that can be ground enough for thee to say, God
will never show mercy; it is a proud, sullen, desperate spirit of thine to make
such conclusions; thou may indeed, and thou ought to say, It were just
with God not to show mercy, the Lord might justly cast me out of his sight,
but to A sinners duty.
say, That he will not show mercy, it is more than thou, or any Angel in Heaven
can say, and therefore, O wretched sinful guilty Consciences, and especially you
that have been Apostats, that have forsaken God and his Truths, yet return,
return, O return thou Shulamite, thou may possibly Apostats.
find God as merciful to thee as ever he was, there is hope of mercy for thee
still, and if thou do perish eternally it will rather be for some sin to
come, than for any past; If God let thee live, if God let thee live to night, I
say, thou will rather perish for the sins committed this moment, Note in
special.
than for all the sins committed in all thy life time before.

But now for thy continuance in Impenitency, that is a new sin, for thy
continuing in rejecting the Grace of God, for thy continuing in thy unbeleef,
this indeed may cause God to bring over again all thy former sins, and reckon
for them. Oh! this Consideration might draw the hearts of the wretchedest
wicked sinner to God.

Is it so, that it is not for any sins that have been past that I am like to
perish, but if I perish, I shall perish for continuing rather in evil, than for
what evil I have committed, Oh! the Lord forbid then that I should continue,
let me this day make a stop in evil. The Lord would have hopes of mercy cast
to wicked and vile sinners.

And let us be merciful, as our Heavenly Father is merciful Use to persons
offended by others.
That is, Let servants and children that have offended you, let them see, that
upon their returning they shall find as much favor from you, as ever they did;
sometimes Governors when they are provoked, behave themselves so ridgedly
toward them that it makes them even desperate: God deals not so with you, do
not you deal so with your inferiors.

And as God shows himself not to be changed, but will be the same toward this
people as ever he was in goodness; and so it beseems us to be, that if we have
shown respect any way to other, either in speeches or otherwise, if they
appear to be what they were, it beseems us to be toward them as then, let them
but appear to be what they were when such respect were shown to them, and
according to the example of God it beseems us to show our selves to them again,
and again, to what we then did. I that am the Lord thy God from the Land of
Egypt, will yet make thee to dwell in Tabernacles.

That Is another Note, The Consideration of what God has Obs. 2.
done, should help our faith in believing what yet he will do; he that has
delivered us thus far, may he not deliver us further? I am the Lord that has
delivered you from Egypt; Oh! let us make use of what God has done for us to
help our faith in confidence of him for doing further; The truth is, God has
done so much for England, Applied to England.
as there is not more to be done than has been done, and if there be but as
much of the Power, Goodness, and Mercy of God toward us for the next five or
six yeers' as has been for these last six years, ecrtainly it will be as
glorious a Nation as ever was upon the face of the earth, it will be the
beginning of the new Jerusalem, if God should continue so as he has done. And
why may not the Lord that has brought us out of Egypt, bring us to rejoice as
in the feast of Tabernacles?

And so Spiritually; God who at first did enlighten Applied spiritually.
thy mind, and brought thee from Egyptian darkness, Certainly that God he is
able to do as great things for thee still, and to finish the work for thee. How
many are there that though they have found Gods mighty hand upon them in giving
a turn to their hearts, and bringing them out of the gall of bitterness, and
the bond of iniquity, and yet at any time when they feel but their corruptions
a little stirring, Oh they are ready to think that they shall perish one day
by the hand of those corruptions? When we were enemies, were we not reconciled
to him? God has struck the deadly wound to it, he has mortified thee, and the
truth is, (consider but of this) I say there is not more to be done to bring
thee to Heaven (thou that have the least degree of Grace) than God has
already done; by giving thee the least measure of grace he has made a greater
alteration in thy estate, from one that is in an estate of nature, than the
alteration will be from thy Conversion to the height of glory, that alteration
will not be so much, neither will it require such a great Power of God to make
thee a glorious Saint in Heaven, as it did require to make thee of one that was
a child of wrath to be a child of God, thou have the better half, and the most
eminent power of God is put forth already; for our change from Grace to Glory
will be but gradual, but our change from Nature to Grace, it is Total; and
therefore let thy faith be helped from what God has done, to believe what he
will do. -- I will yet make thee to dwell in Tabernacles. Text.


Diverse Learned men carry this, I will yet make thee to dwell in Tabernacles,
to be a Promise of their return from captivity, Albertus and others.
that they must again in the Land of Jewry keep the Feast of Tabernacles.

I confess were this a Promise to Judah I should think it to be the meaning of
it, but because it is to Israel who never returned, I shall follow those that
think it has reference to the times of the Gospel, and to all the true Israel
of God that should be converted to the faith, and I think it has reference to
that, because we find so often in this Prophecy of Hosea things that are so
far off to be interpreted to the times of the Gospel.

Therefore I will yet make them to dwell in Tabernacles, Thus to be understood
in this Spiritual Sense, That the Lord has his time, though he seemed to cast
off these ten Tribes, yet to bring the Jews and all the Israel of God, to bring
them into his Church, and to build several Tabernacles for them in his Church:
And there in several Churches as so many several Tabernacles there they shall
have the feast of sweet things, of fat things, of refined Wine upon the Lees,
as in Isa. 25. the Promises of the Gospel are set out by a feast of fat things;
so says God, I Will bring thee into several Churches, as several Tabernacles,
and there shall they keep a feast, and there shall their hearts rejoice and be
satisfied as with marrow, and fatness.

My Brethren, the Lord has delivered us in great measure from Egypt all the
difficulty now is about building Reformation in England.
of Tabernacles; for the present there is very little matter to make
Tabernacles of amongst us. I remember Mr Ainsworth in Exodus 25. 3. he tells of a
Tradition of Ainsworth.
the Jews, and cites Rabbi Menachem for it, that observed there was no Iron
stuff for the building of the Tabernacle: truly our hearts are most Iron, and
hard one toward another, and therefore notfit matter for Tabernacles, in 1
King. 6. 7. There was no Iron tool neither heard in the building of the Temple.
Oh! my brethren, Iron tools will not do the work for the building of Gods
Tabernacle, we must have other manner of tools than these, A Note for the
Congregational and Presbyterian Churches.
There Is no Tabernacles almost yet, wherein the Saints either of one judgment,
or of another, have much rejoicing. The Glory of God has not yet filled our
Tabernacles that we have built, what God intends toward this Generation,
whether ever to bring them into those Tabernacles that here he promises, I know
not, but surely that God that has brought us out of Egypt, he will bring
either us, or the posterity after us, he will bring a Generation of his people
to keep the feast of Tabernacles with rejoicing. It follows;

VER. 10.
I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions, etc.

THis is a further Declaration of Gods goodness to this people, and upbraiding
them for their wickedness, Expos.
they have had so much means; as if God should say, They have not wanted the
revealing of my Will, I have spoken by my Prophets, and multiplied visions:
Heb. 1. 1. seems to have reference to this, That God at sundry (...).
times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past to the Fathers, by the
Prophets; several sorts of ways God revealed himself in former times. I have
spoken by my Prophets.

There is not much difficulty in the words. The Notes briefly are these,

That it is God that speaks by his Prophets; Though Prophets are mean, and the
messengers of God mean, yet so Obs. 1.
long as they speak to you in his Name, the Authority of what they say it is
above any; They may be under their Auditors many ways, but the message they
bring it is above them; though they are weak, yet there is the power of God goes
along with what they speak, to make it good; and therefore you shall find when
Christ sent his Disciples to preach, Go (says he) and teach all Nations; but
first he says, All power is given to me in Heaven Matt. 28. 18, 19. observed.
and Earth, then the words that follow are, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations; as if he should say, All the power that is given to me shall go along
with your teaching; it is the Lord that speaks, the Lord Christ that speaks in
his Word by his Messengers; He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises
you, despises me.

The Word does little good til men come to apprehend Note.
this, That it is God that speaks by his Messengers, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. the Apostle
says, That they received the Word, not as the word of Men, but (as it is in
truth) the Word of God. That is observable of Samuel, God called to Samuel, and
Samuel thought it had been Eli that spoke, and all that time God would not
reveal his mind to him, til at length Samuel gives this answer, Lord, speak,
for thy servant hears. Mark, God would reveal his mind to Samuel then, and
not before: So it is here, You come to the Word, and you come to hear the gifts
of such men, and such a man has Why men profit no more by the Ministry.
excellent gifts, and abilities, and delivery, and such kind of things; God
reveals nothing to you, you go away and hear a sound, and there is all, and no
more is revealed to you than if you heard an Oration in a School; but when God
shall be pleased to dart this thought into your minds, I am now going to hear
that which is the Word of God Himself, the Word of that God that is my How to
profit better.
Judge, and that must be my Judge at the great day; now see whether God will not
make himself known to you, that so you shall say, Methinks I never heard Sermon
before in all my life, I have come and heard a Man preach, but I never heard
God preach before, It was not as the Word of God, but as the word of such a
man. God expects that men should tremble at his Word, and therefore look upon
it as his Word.

Secondly, It is a great mercy to a People, for God to grant Obs. 2.
his Prophets among them to reveal his mind to them. What would all the world
be but as a dungeon of darkness, were it not for the Prophets and Ministers of
God (...)ey are as the Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, the World
would rot and be unsavorie were it not for Matthew. 5. 13.
the Ministry of the Word in the World; and so we find that when God-would make
a special Promise to his People, he promises them, that they shall have their
Teachers, in Isa. 30. 20. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity,
and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers; Oh! here is a promise to
a gracious heart. But to another it is nothing, What, Shall the Ministry of the
Isa. 30. 20. Noted.
Word countervail the loss of my estate? God does not say, I Will take away from
you your afflictions, Oh no, but your eyes shall see your Teachers; perhaps
your eyes shall never see your Money, and Estates again, but your eyes shall
see your Teachers. And we know when Christ was ascended up on high, in his
Coronation Day; Kings in their Coronation days use to give great Gifts to show
their magnificence, then the Conduits will run Wine sometimes. Now when Christ
ascended up to be crowned on high, What was the great thing that he gave in the
world? He gave gifts to men, Some to be Prophets and Apostles, With Ephesians. 4. 8,
9, 10, 11.
and some Pastors and Teachers, that is the great gift of Jesus Christ upon his
Ascension into Heaven and taking the Crown of Glory, as if Christ should say:
Shall I give a magnificent gift to the world like a Prince, like the King of
Heaven? I Will give gifts to men, I Will give them The Ministry a magnificent gift.
Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, that is the great magnificent gift that
Jesus Christ has given to the world, Oh! that we could learn to prize it. I
remember I have read in Chrysostoms time, that the godly men when he was
silenced, they were so affected with it, that they had rather the Sun did
withdraw his beams and not shine in the world, than that the mouth of Jo.
Chrysostem Chrysostom how esteemd in his Ministry.
should be stopped; They did so prize the Word of God by his mouth. Oh that men
could learn to prize it more, at a higher rate. And you that are Citizens, show
your prizing of it in this one thing, Many of you here have your City, and your
Country Houses, But what little In choice of our habitations we should have
respect to a good Ministry.
care is there for men to seat themselves in places where they shall have
faithful Ministers of God to reveal the mind of God to them? If they come to
seat themselves any where, they scarce take it into consideration to give a
penny the more, because of a faithful Minister, or a penny the less if it has
none; Oh! this shows the extreme neglect of God, and of his Ordinances. How few
Country Villages about the City were supplied with faithful Preachers? It Is a
great blessing of God to the world to have faithful Prophets.

Thirdly, God will take account of what becomes of the Obs. 3.
Word, Labor and Pains of his Prophets; for so he speaks in a way of upbraiding
of them, God will take account of all the Spirits that his Ministers spend, of
every drop of their sweat, and of all their watchings in the night, I sent my
Prophets rising early, and going to bed late, God will take account of all, and
you shall know that there has been a Prophet among you, the Ministers shall be
brought out to say and testify: Lord, I was in such a place, and I revealed
thy mind thus and thus unto them in these and these ways, that they could not
but be convinced of, and yet still they continued thus and thus wicked.

Fourthly, It is a great mercy for God to declare his mind to Obs. 4.
men again and again; I have multiplied visions, says God: It were a mercy
for God but once to tell us of his mind, and if we will not come in at first,
for ever to cast us off; but I have multiplied visions, in Jer. 18. At what
instant I shall speak etc. God may justly expect that at what instant Christ is
preached, that people should come in, for indeed their Commission seems to run
very quick, Go, and teach all Nations: he that believes, shall be saved; he
that believes not, shall be damned. As if Christ should say, There shall be
quick work made with men; but yet the Lord is gracious to men, to multiply
visions one after another, to reveal his mind at one time, and at another time,
the Lord is long-suffering: though our hearts be not moved at one time, yet
still he would try, and he would have his Ministers to do so too, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
Instruct with meekness those that oppose themselves, if God per adventure will
give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. It was a great
aggravation of Solomon's sin, that he departed from God, after the Lord had
appeared to him twice, 1 King. 11. 9. Oh! God took this ill, I have appeared
twice to him, and yet he departed from me.

Oh! how may God upbraid us with this thing, that Use.
not twice, but twenty, yea, an hundred times God has appeared to us, we have
had even the Visions of the Almighty, some of you at least; May not your
Consciences tell you, that at such and such a time you have had the Visions of
the Almighty, and yet you have stood out against them, yea, and at another
time, and another time? Oh my brethren, the multiplying of Visions is a great
aggravation of our sin in standing out: It was the comfort of Paul at his
Conversion, in Act. 26. 19. says he, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to
the heavenly Vision. Oh how happy were it for you if upon the first vision
your hearts would come in! Oh that you could but say so! Though it is true, I
lived at such a time, in such a place in ignorance and darkness, I knew little
of God, but the first time I came to hear the Word, wherein the Mysteries of
the Gospel were revealed, I bless God my heart came off then; so the Aposile he
blesses God for the effect that the Word had upon the Thessalonians from the
first day, even until that time. I multiplied visions. And then it follows; I
used Similitudes.

Now for that I will not trouble you with diverse readings, or diverse
interpretations of those words, I used similitudes, Expos.
It is a very strange expression, (we have it not that I know of in the Book of
God, but here) to show Exponit Deuteronomy in verbo similitudinem sui hoc est, pingit
voluntatem suam Luth. in loc. Obs. 1.
the aggravations of men's sins that they hearkened not to the Word, though the
Word was brought to them in way of similitude.

You may see here, That the Lord takes account of the manner of men's preaching,
as well as the things they preach; and men may have their sins aggravated, not
only for standing out against the Word, but against the Word so and so
delivered. The main necessary Truths of God are made known to you all, yea, but
some of you, have them made known to you in a more sweet, woing, and Effectual
preaching.
winning way, and a more convincing way than others have, and God takes
account, not only of the things you hear, but of the manner of it.

And Secondly, The revealing the Word by similitudes is Obs. 2.
a very useful and profitable way; for it makes much for the settling of Truth,
and the making Truth go to a man's heart before he is aware, the Truth conveyed
in a way of similitude takes impression upon the memory; sometimes speak a
Truth, and express it in the way of a Simile, and many will go away and
remembering the Simile, so come to remember the Truth. I remember it is reported
of that Noble Marquis, Marquis Galeacias that had a great Estate, and was of
Kin to the Pope, and yet coming upon a time but to hear Peter Martyr preach,
and upon a mere Simile that he had, God stroke his heart, Pet. Martyr on John,
20. See the Life of Galeaci^n.
and it was the means of his Conversion, the Simile was thus: Peter Martyr was
preaching, and he had occasion to speak of this, Men may think very hardly of
God, and his People, but this is because they do not know him; as suppose a man
a great way off sees a company of excellent Musicians that are dancing, and
there they are playing, and there is exact art in what they do, but he thinks
they are a company of mad men, but (says he) when he comes to draw nearer and
nearer to them, and hears the melodious sound, and observes the art that they
use, then he is much taken and affected: And so it is with you, you are a great
way off, and look upon the Ways of God a great way off, and so you think men
mad, but could you but come to observe what excellency there is in them, it
would take your hearts, God blessed such a Similitude as this to that great man's
heart, so that though his Wife and Children lay sprauling at his feet, yet he
came to Geneva and there continued a godly man all his What Similitudes should
be used, and how.
days.

But now Similies should be brought from things known. 1.


And we must not urge Similies too far neither, we must 2.
take heed of a Luxuriant, wanton wit in urging of Similitudes.

And they must be very natural and plain, and proper, or else there will appear
rather men in them than God. 3.


And because of this expression here, learn you not to slight Obs. 3.
the Word when it comes by a Simile. You will say, This is but a Simile: but
though it be, yet God is speaking to thy heart in it.

And above al with which I must conclude, Take heed when Obs. 4.
you come to the Word, and it may be you come to the Word where you hear
excellent Similies, Take heed that you do not rest in the pleasantness of the
Simile. As many men, they come to the Word to have their fancies touched, and
pleased, ^ more than any thing else; do not play with Similies, look rather at
what you can see of God in a Simile, than of what wit of man you see in them.
And thus much for this Tenth Verse.

VER. 11.
Is there iniquity in Gilead? Surely they are vanity; they sacrifice Bullocks
in Gilgal, yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the fields.

WHat Gilead was you have formerly heard in the sixth Chapter, and eight Verse.
Gilead is a City Gilead.
of them that work iniquity; it was a City of the Priests, beyond Jordan,
where the Priests that were beyond the River lived. Sometimes it is taken for
the Mount Gilead where Jacob and Laban met and made a Covenant one with
another; here neither is excluded. But most I find refer it to the City of the
Priests. And what Gilgal was you had opened to you in the Ninth Chap. Fifteen
Verse. All their wickedness is in Gilgal. Now Gilgal.
Gilgal was the place where they were circumcised on this side Jordan, and
belonged to Judah; Gilead belonged to Israel, and Gilgal to Judah. Is there
iniquity in Gilead? Surely they are vanity, they sacrifice Bullocks in Gilgal.

They sacrifice Bullocks.] The Septuagint read it, The (...). bones (...)
princeps (...) [ququam hic c. (...) irregular. Vid. Buxtorf. in Lexic. Heb.]
Princes sacrifice.

And indeed the word that is for Bullocks is very near in the Hebr. to the word
that signifies Princes, the difference is only a Title on the right hand, or on
the left, and so there might easily be a mistake, but to read it as it is
here, They sacrifice Bullocks in Gilgal, great sacrifices, and they think to
put off God with their great sacrifices, sacrificing Bullocks but all in vain.

I may spare a great deal of time in speaking to the Places, having before
spoken to them:

Therefore now to see what the scope of the holy Ghost is here, Is there
iniqnity in Gilead?

Is there? an Interogation; it is, as if he should say:

First, Who dare say, there is iniquity in Gilead? Gilead, Expos.
what, the City of the Priests, iniquity there! who will charge Gilead of
iniquity, where the Priests are? what, are you wiser than all our Priests? Just
like to the plea that some heretofore have had, What, do not our Note.
Ministers do thus? is not this the opinion of our Ministers? shall we not
regard what our Ministers do? Is there iniquity in Gilead? is there iniquity
among them? do they not join in this way? This seems plainly to be even the
scope of this Charge, Is there iniquity in Gilead? a wonder that there should
be iniquity; what, it is the City of the Priest? is there iniquity there? what
in such a place where they use to meet, where they dwell! Surely they are
vanity, says the Prophet: Even these Priests of Gilead, even these that you
rest so much upon they are but vanity, you may give up your consciences and
your ways to them, because they come and persuade you that such a thing is to
be done, and you must do it, and so by giving up your consciences and ways to
them you may be led into much evil.

Surely they are vanity; Though they be your Priests, though they be learned
men, and should understand the way of God, yet they have their own interests
too, they drive their own designs, they keep not the Truth of God, but they
follow their own minds, Surely they are vanity; those ways that they persuade
you to, God allows not of, they will prove vanity, even wise, learned,
understanding Let the Learned note.
men, the Priests who seemed to be much for God, may yet be vanity.

Whatsoever is presented in the Worship of God, if not by Gods appointment,
it is mere vanity. Surely they are vanity, even Obs.
Gilead.

Again, This Gilead being on the other side of Jordan, it was taken by the
Assyrians, and those in Gilead were carried captive before the other Cities,
they were carried Expos. 2.
afterward, as it appears, if you read that story in 1 King. 15. 29. and also
1 King. 3. 26. those that were on the other side Jordan were carried captive
first, and Gilead among the rest; so that it is probable that this Prophecy of
this Prophet was after the taking of Gilead, after Gilead had been taken by the
enemy, before the rest of the Tribes were taken: And then the force of his
argument is this,

There is iniquity in Gilead: yea, and Gilead has smarted for her iniquity;
though they promised themselves peace, yet all proved but vanity, yea, they
smar^ed very dreadfully, for in Amos, 1. 3. it is said there, That Gilead was
thresht with Instruments. Now Amos was contemporary Amos contemporary with
Hosea.
with Hosea, and speaks of the wonderful miseries that had befallen the City
of Gilead; As if the Prophet should say, Do not you know there is iniquity in
Gilead? has not God declared it by his severe wrath upon Gilead? have not they
proved vanity? What then can Gilgal expect? they yet sacrifice Bullocks, they
are guilty of the same sin of false worship as Gilead was; God had appointed
but one place to worship in, but they had abundance of sacrifices, and had
their Altars as common as the very heaps of stones that was in the fields.

From whence you may Note,

First, That when Gods Judgments have been against any Obs. 1.
for sin, all sinners that are guilty in the same kind they have cause to fear,
and not promise safety to themselves though they be spared a while.

But further, The Principal Note is this, Gilead had Expos.
smarted thus and thus, yet Gilgal, that belonged to Judah, and the Prophet now
speaks to them, look to your selves, If Gilead has smarted thus, you are like
to smart as much and much more; for Gilead they did not own the Temple; the ten
Tribes (you know) had forsaken the Temple; and were in a more remote way from
God in their very profession; but Gilgal did belong to Judah, and so were in a
nearer way to God in their Profession, they professed a greater care of Gods
Worship; now says he, What, shall not Gilead escape, who was in a remoter way
of profession, and yet shall God be thus avenged of Gilead for false worship?
how shall Gilgal escape that professes a greater neerness to God in his
Worship, and yet for all that corrupt Gods Worship, and sacrifices Bullocks
upon the Altars, as heaps of stones in the furrows of the field? that is then
our Note from hence,

That such whose principles and professions are nearer to God Obs. 2
than others, if they be superstitious, if they mingle any thing of their own
in the Worship of God, God will be sorely avenged upon them: Those (I say)
whose principles and profession comes most near in the matters of worship.

We may look at this point as nearly concerning our Applic. to Reformers in
England.
selves thus, if a Superstitious, Prelatical Ministry, and People had the wrath
of God pursuing them, as it has been heavy upon them, then those who shall
profess to come near in the point of Reformation, whosoever they be, this side
or the other side, any way, whosoever professes to come nearer, if they mingle
their own inventions in Worship, God will be more sorely displeased with them,
the more piety and holiness, the more we profess to come close to the Word of
God, and yet withal mingle our own inventions, the more is God displeased;
Gilgal is rather more than Gilead.

Again, Their Altars (he says) are as heaps in the furrows of the field; as
common, and as ordinary, as husbandmen Expos. 1.
use to gather their stones that kept the Corn from growing, and every furlong
almost there was some heap of stones laid, and says he, Their Altars were as
common as those heaps of stones.

Or it may have reference to some Superstitious or Idolatrous way of theirs; In
the furrows of the field they Expos. 2.
had many Altars built to sacrifice, that they might seek God for the
fructifying of their field; such a kind of worshipping of God as afterward the
Heathens had, that is in the bounds of their fields, they there performed some
superstitious right and ceremony unto their gods for the Dij terminalis
blessing of their fields; and following their example, the Papists and those
that are superstitious: and heretofore in England you know it was ordinary when
men Procession-Weeks in England.
went up and down their Perambulation in the bounds of their field they would
set up Crosses, and Crucifixes, and would have Prayers read, and Psalms sung
there, which was not merely to show what was the bounds of their Parish, but to
invocate God for his blessing upon their fruits; and by making and setting up
Crosses in the bounds of their fields, they thought there came a blessing upon
their Corn that way, and therefore in that time of the year rather, they would
go to their Crosses and have their Prayers there that they might have their
Corn and Pastors more blessed: thus we see old ways in Superstition and
Idolatry even since that time, and among the Gentiles is kept, and the same
kind among the Papists, and lately was among our selves, they had their Altars
in the furrows of the field.

Or in a way of Threat, as some have it, Their Altars Expos. 3.
shall be broken down, and they shall be as heaps of stones in the furrows of
the field; according to that in Jer. 16. 18. Zion shall be a field plowed, and
Jerusalem as on heap; As God threatened them, so their Altars are here threatened
to be broken down, and to be as heaps in the field; God will regard their
Altars no more, (that they built brave, and with a great deal of cost) then
rubbish and heaps of stones in the field. And thus much for that Eleventh
Verse. It follows;

VER. 12.
And Jacob fled into the Country of Syria, and Israel served for a Wife, and
for a Wife he kept Sheep.

GOD by the Prophet here brings in Jacob further, he had spoken of him before
(you know) about his wrestling with God and prevailing, and still the Prophet
cannot get off from this, about Jacob, because he saw that the people of Israel
when they were charged with their Scope. 1.
sins, and threatened with the anger of God, they still had recourse to Jacob
their father, and thought because they were the seed of Jacob, therefore God
would not deal so severely with them; therefore still the Prophet seeks to take
them off from such a kind of Reasoning. And Jacob fled into the Country of
Syria.

As if he should say thus, You pride your selves in your Expos.
Father JACOB; yea, but consider in what a mean condition Jacob was, and if
there has come any privilege to you by being the seed of Jacob, it is the mere
free Grace of God, and not from any excellency there was in your Father Jacob.
He would take off the conceit of the excellency there was in their Father
Jacob, for whose worthiness they thought that God surely would not forsake his
posterity, though they were very wicked: as if he should say, Consider what a
poor condition your Fa* Jacob was in.

First, He was a poor exile, he was fain to fly for his Jacob's mean condition.
life, even from his fathers house; And then when he did fly, he fled to his
Uncle, and what was he there? a poor Servant, he lived in two hard
Apprentiships (as it were) he found his Uncle Laban to be a very hard Master to
him for seven years, and for seven years after that behaved himself roughly and
ridgedly with him, and changing his wages often, and carrying himself very
proudly and haughtely toward him; says he, Do not forget the meanness of
Jacob, he fled thus: And there he would have a Wife, and when he had a Wife, He
had no dowry, but be was fain to serve, for his condition was so low and mean.
That Is the first end why the Prophet brings in Jacob here again, to take them
off from too high a conceit of Jacob their Father, that they should not rest
themselves in him, nor pride themselves in his excellency.

Secondly, It is for this end, That he might show what Scope. 2.
their Father Jacob was, how unlike to him they who were of his posterity were,
for he was patient and humble under long and hard afflictions, as if he should
say, He was content to serve, and be in a low and mean condition, but you are
proud and haughty, you can bear nothing, but be high and brave, and must suit
your selves with other Nations; your Father JACOB was content to serve a long
time for a Wife, seven years, and seven years again, and went on in a humble
and patient way, and kept close to God all that while, it is not so with you who
are his posterity.

Thirdly, He brings in the example of Jacob, to show Scope, 3.
how wonderful the providence of God was toward him, in carrying him to his
Uncles house, and providing there for him, in protecting of him against his
Uncle Laban, is raising of his estate, for he went over with his staff in his
hand, but the Lord raised him to be two Bands; The providence of God was that
toward your father Jacob, as if the Prophet should say, You speak of your
Father Jacob, Oh that you would but consider of him, to be as he was, to be
patient, and humble under Gods hand, and wait upon Gods providence to work good
for you* no, but you will be providing and shifting for your selves, and you
dare not trust to God as your father Jacob did, and thus you see the scope why
the Prophet brings in Jacob.

But this will not suffice for the opening of this notable A further Exposit.
of the Text.
Scripture, we must have some reference to the story this Scripture is taken
out of. You shall find the story of Jacob's flying into Syria, in Genesis 28. 2.
and then there is a second story in Genesis 29. about the 15. For this verse has
two stories in it, the story of his flying into Syria, from the house of his
father Isaac to Labans house; and then the story of his serving for his Wives,
those two seven years.

Now for the First, you shall find matter of much instruction. Jacob's flight
into Syria.


The First story of his flying into Syria, it was for two ends; That was the
First to fly for his life, because Esau 1.
did threaten the life of Jacob, and by the counsel of his Mother he fled to
his Uncle Labans, until the wrath of Esau should be appeased.

Yea, but there was a Second Reason. God made advantage 2.
of that flight of his. As many times God is pleased to turn the flights of his
people to abundance of good unto them, they may fly because of the danger of
their Enemies, and they may think that if they can but have their lives for a
prey, if they can avoid the danger of the Enemy it will do well; yea, but God
may have a further end and intend abundance of good to them, that they shall
find more mercy in that place where they fly Note.
but to get a shelter for their lives, than ever they had in all their lives
before; many that have fled from persecution of ungodly men, they have found
greater mercy in the place they have fled unto, though they have fled from
their Fathers house, and from their own Country, yet they have found greater
mercies there than ever they did in all their lives, they can tell great
stories of the mercies of God unto them in the places of their flight. So it
was here with Jacob; that was one end of God that he should fly, that he might
provide a Wife for himself out of his Mothers kindred, for so he was charged,
you shall find in the story of Genesis 28. that he was charged there by his Father
to get a Wife of the Daughters of Laban. And now observe it in Genesis 28. 3. ver.
when as Jacob did thus fly into Syria, because Isaac did see that he was like
to endure How Isaac sent Jacob away. 1
a great deal of trouble and affliction in this his flight, Isaac does renew
the blessing upon him. And thus God does use to do when he sees his people to
be in such a way wherein they are like to suffer sore and hard afflictions, the
Lord prepares them by renewing his blessing upon them, by a fresh manifestation
of himself unto them, and the renewing of Gods blessing is enough to Note.
carry a man or woman through abundance of afflictions, for that did help much
to carry Jacob through all his afflictions.

Further, Observe in the Second place, when Isaac 2.
sent Jacob away, he sent him away in a very mean condition, without any such
provision as Abraham's servant was sent with when he went to seek a Wife for
Isaac, we read in Genesis 24. 10. where Abraham sent his servant to find out a
Wife for his son Isaac, Abraham sent him with a great deal of provision, with
ten Camels, and with Earings, and Bracelets, and the like; but Jacob is sent
away to seek for a Wife, and sent with a staff in his hand.

If it be said, That this is the reason why he was Why sent away so meanly.
sent so meanly, that it was for privacie, because he would not be discovered
in regard of the rage of Esau.

Though that might be a reason of his first going away 1.
in so mean a condition, yet that could not be the reason why Isaac should not
send after him afterward, for we never read that Isaac sent any servant after
him, but sent him away with his staff in his hand, having only the blessing of
God upon him; Therefore it is more probable this, That God did mean to train up
Jacob in a low 2. The chief reason.
condition, in an estate of affliction, to train him up to patience, and
humility, and in dependence upon God.

Well then, he goes to Laban, he flies to Syria: that is, to his Uncle Laban,
when he comes there he serves him, yea, he was a Servant to him for twenty
years together in a low condition, so you find it in Genesis 31. 38. he says
there, He had served him twenty years, and in all this time he found Laban,
though his kinsman, very rough to him; as many times young people coming to
their kindered find them very rough and hard toward them. Laban was very
churlish toward him: and very Kindred.
false to him, yet Jacob goes on and endures all the heat of the day, and the
cold of the night, and Isaac his Father was alive all this while, and yet we
never read that Isaac sent to him all this time, a thing much to be wondered
at, there was never any intercourse that I read of between his Father Isaac and
him all this while, but lives from his Father, though his Father, a rich man
and a great man, and yet he goes on in a humble, patient, and quiet way,
depending upon God to make an issue out of all his sufferings, and God did at
length make a very glorious issue out of all, though Laban used him hardly. Now
being Isaac's son and he had the blessing, one would have thought that Laban
should have been willing to have bestowed a daughter upon him, nay but he
serves for a Wife, and when he had served him, yet he was deceived with a Leah,
which was a very great injury to Jacob, Laban urged her upon him; and it is a
very great part of roughness, and ridgedness, and cruelty in Guardians, or
Parents, or any that have the Government Parents or Guardians may not force
Wives or Husbands upon Children.
of others, to force Wives upon them for their own private advantage, to force
Wives upon their Children or Kindred, those matches seldom come to good; though
God turned this to good, yet I say they do seldom come to good, these forced
matches, it is that which is the undoing of many men and women, young women to be
so used: but Jacob saw no remedy, Fulfill her week, Genesis 29. 27. Expounded
that is, the week of the Festivity of her Marriage, that is, confirm this
match first; he would have had that Wife that he had served for, nay says
Laban, confirm this Note. Marriage founded on consent.
match, for Laban knew that except he had willingly afterward gone in to her,
he had not been bound to her as a Husband, but Laban would have him make sure
and own her for his Wife, and then we will agree together, you shall seve
serven years more for Rachel, and you shall have her; but now these seven years
that he served for Rachel we must not understand so as if Laban did keep Rachel
from Jacob til he had served that other seven years, as if Jacob had not
married with Rachel before fourteen years was at an end, no, he did but fulfill
the week of Leah, and then Laban gave Rachel unto him, upon condition, yet that
he should afterward serve seven years likewise for Rachel, for so it is plain
that which was required of him; and as an evident demonstration that Rachel was
given to Jacob before the seven years were out, it appears plainly, if you
read the story you shall find that Leah had no children until Rachel was
married to Jacob, and yet all the twelve Tribes were born to him within the
compass of twenty years that he was with Laban; Now if the first born had been
after the fourteen years service, it could not possibly be, that all of them
should be born after, for we find in the story that Leah had four children one
after another, and then left off bearing, and then she gave Zilpah to Jacob,
who bare two sons, there was six of them; and after that Leah had another Son,
and a Daughter, and all this before Rachel had any children; so that it must
needs be understood that Rachel was given to Jacob as the first seven years,
yet he served two seven years for these two Wives.

Now the Lord was pleased to turn this to a great deal of good, though it was
hard service and bondage, yet these two Wives that Jacob served so long for,
they were made the two greatest instruments of good that ever had been in the
Church before, or ever since, but only the Virgin that brought forth Christ;
for by these two was the house of Israel built up, Twelve Tribes came of them,
and those that they gave unto Jacob; but the holy Ghost reckons the building up
by these two, and the blessing that was wont to be upon a married condition, it
was taken from these two, in a kind of proverbial way; in Ruth, 4. 11. the
Elders said to Boaz, The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house,
like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: so that
this was the common blessing in a married condition, the Lord make this woman
like Rachel, and like Leah that built the house of Israel.

Why like these two, rather than Sarah? Quest. Answ.


It is from hence, Because they built up the house of Israel, and all that came
from them were of the Church, Oh it is a great blessing in a married condition
to build What is the blessing in a married condition,
up the house of God, that is the blessing in a married condition; though thou
should serve hardly for a Wife, yet if God makes thy marriage so blessed to
thee, as thou come to build up the Church of God by thy marriage, that is a
blessed marriage; and those that are married, in their prayers, should pray to
God for such a blessing, and their friends should pray to God for such a
blessing, Oh Which they should pray for.
that the Lord would make this woman, and my Wife, so to be a builder up of the
house of Israel.

But for further Notes upon this. Jacob fled, and served Obs. 1.
for a Wife. From the scope of the Prophets bringing this in here, we may
(...)* That such as pride themselves in their Ancestors, should (...) back to
the mean condition of their Ancestors; some are very high in their conceits,
because they have such and such to be their Ancestors, it may be two or three
degrees off they were great, but look but half a dozen degrees off and they
were but mean Tradesmen, Let the Nobility and Gentry note.
or Yeomen in the Country; here the Prophet would take off their pride from
priding in their Ancestors; it is [Plato said all Kings came from Plow-men, and
all Plow-men from Kings]
a great vanity for any to pride themselves in their Ancestors, because some of
them are great and rich by some providence or other they think themselves out
beyond the common sort of mankind, they look upon others under them in a mean
contemptible way; Look unto the Rock from whence ye are hewn.

But Secondly, Patience and humility, and dependence upon Obs. 2.
God in times of long continued afflictions, does much commend the Grace of God
in any: I say, when any shall be patient and humble, and depending upon God, in
times of long affliction, this much co^mends the Grace of God in them.

Oh! let me commend this Note of Observation to any of you that have hard
Services: If I were to speak to a Applic. 1. To Servants that are in hard
service.
Congregation of Apprentises, that had hard Services, and rough Masters, and
cruel Mistrisses, and though it may be a ruin to them, do not fret and vex, do
not be desperate, do not fling off and say, Why should I bear such services? Do
not grow into any desperate moods, to go and seek your fortunes (as they use to
say) many young men have undone themselves through the roughness of their
Masters and Mistrisses to them in their Apprentiships, and though the evil will
be upon themselves, yet God will require this at their Masters and Mistrisses
hand; And this is a sign that there is no fear of God, that because they are in
hard services, that therefore they should go to take desperate courses; you see
it may be your Brother or Sister has an excellent service, they have liberty,
and better wages, and better provision than you have, yet seeing God in his
providence has disposed of you to such a hard service, look up to God, and
wait upon God to work good through this service, God may intend good unto you
in this service more than you are aware of, and as for any of you that are come
out of hard services, look 2. To those that are out.
back to the services that you have had, and consider, How did you behave your
selves in those hard services; Are you the seed of Jacob? if you be, though
your service have been hard, yet you should go on patiently, and humbly, and
depending upon God as Jacob. did: and God will remember this for good to you
afterward. Yea but now, did not you behave your selves proudly and stubbornly,
and so make your service so much the more hard, by provoking your Governors?
Oh! look back to these things, and consider how far you are from being of the
disposition of Jacob, that you pro^^ss to be your father. Many Apprentises in
their hard services have don that that they have cause to repent of afterward.
He served for a Wife.

First, the Note is, That Love will carry through long service. Obs. 1.
Love is ashamed to complain of difficulties. Oh! so it wouid be if we loved
God; do not complain of the service of God to be difficult.

The Second is this, That a good Wife is a great blessing of Obs. 2.
God, though she has no portion; though a man serve for her, yet it is a great
blessing of God, there is a more special mercy of God there than there is in
giving men an Estate: he served long, and long, even for a Wife

Luther upon the place, speaks much about the blessing Non tam longo tempore
servivit Jaacob ut haberet Socium vitae, cum qua perpetuo rixaretur, tanquam
scholam omniu^ virtutem Matrimonium cupide ingressus est. Luth. in (...).
in Marriage, and of a good Wife. Says he, Certainly Jacob did not serve so
long that he might have a Companion of his life, with whom there should be
nothing but railing, scolding and wrangling; no, but he looked upon an estate
of Marriage at the School of all Virtue, for so should a married estate indeed
be.

And then further, another Note that is very observable, He served these two
seven years. This may be one ground why Jacob served so long for a Wife, and a
special ground why, Because that he had a charge from his father. Isaac, to
take a Wife in La(...)'s family, and therefore Why Jacob served the other 7.
years for R(...)*
he would rather serve seven years, and seven years after that to have a Wife
from him, than to go to seek a Wife any other where, in obedience to the charge
of his Father.

Luther in his Comment upon this very Scripture, he does much urge that very
Note, That Children should be Obs. 3.
obedient to their Parents in their matches, and take heed of matching against
their Parents consent. If you profess your selves to be of the seed of Jacob
(for so the godly are set out in Scripture) be like unto your Father Jacob in
this, In being obedient to your parents in your matches; there is no greater
disobedience in the world, than the disobedience of a Child in the case of
marriage, in the A child's great disobedience.
flinging off of the yoke of subjection to your Parents in this kind. Luther
urges this exceeding much from hence. Civil Laws require the consent of Parents
in all Lawful 1.
marriages; and so the Authority of sacred Scripture declares to us that those
marriages have been ever happy 2.
that have been with the consent of their Parents: And again (says he)
experience does testify that those marriages 3.
have been for the most part unhappy that have been without consent of Parents;
certainly the blessing of God is not upon them; you may to satisfy your lusts,
think to please your selves for a week or two, but it is just with God that you
should live miserably all your days, that make no more conscience of
disobedience to your Parents in your matches. And any of you that are here
present, if you be guilty this way, know that the Lord rebukes you this day,
and you are taught to go alone, and humble your selves, and to bewail that sin
of yours, which is certainly a very great sin, and you had need both Husband
and Wife together, both fast and pray to get away the guilt of that sin, that
so you may have a blessing upon your married estate, and upon your posterity,
without which you cannot expect it; therefore did Jacob serve thus that he
might be obedient to his Father Isaac, which did charge him to go and take a
Wife in that place. And thus much for that Twelfth Verse. It follows;

VER. 13.
And by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt: and by a Prophet was he
preserved.

STILL the Prophet goes on in showing their meanness in their Ancestors, your
Father Jacob was thus Cohaerance
mean, a poor exile, he was fain to serve thus for his Wife: It Is true, Joseph
was a while in prosperity, but when Joseph was dead, all your Ancestors then
they were in Egypt as miserable bondslaves; they were there as bondslaves, and
how should they get out? there was no way in the world, Pharaoh a mighty King,
they had no friends abroad, nor no Armies to help themselves, only a Prophet,
God sent them a Prophet, Moses, and what was this Prophet? one that had been a
poor Shepherd for forty years together in the Wilderness, and when this
Prophet was to go into Egypt to be a deliverer of them, was it ever like that
he should be the man? in Exodus 4. 20. the text says, He took his Wife, and his
Sons and set them upon an Ass, we read but of one Beast that he Moses his low
condition.
had, and so he went into Egypt in a mean and low condition, and when he came
there he was not owned, and we never read that Moses did declare who he was,
and the children of Israel would not own him, and Pharaoh begun to busl^ and
would not let Israel go; how should this one Moses deliver them? nay, their
bondage did increase when Moses came unto them, Yet by a Prophet (the text
says) the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he preserved.
This was a mighty work of God to bring Israel out of Egypt by a Prophet, and to
preserve them in the Wilderness; and be the way there is on useful Note, you
read in Exodus 38. 26. There was six hundred thousand, and three thousand five
hundred and fifty males from twenty years old and upwards. And in Numb. 1. 46.
that was the second year after they went out from Egypt, and there you shall
find that there was just so many, besides Levi, after God had taken Levi for
himself to be his portion, thereby God would show that none should lose any Obs.
thing that they did for him. How often when men have been willing to give any
thing to God, God has made it up in one year? (but that by the way.)

This that I bring this for, it is, To show the great work of God, that by a
Prophet he brings such a number out of Egypt, and he preserves them in the
Wilderness, uses no means for their preservation, for the guiding of them which
way they should go, but a mean Prophet; for the providing water for them, for
the providing meat for them, for the providing of clothes for them, for the
defending of them against their Enemies, that they should not come and destroy
them; when they were in any danger, to help them; when they were stung by the
Serpents, to show them what they should do to heal them, and to keep them all
in peace that they should not mutiny one against another; To compose all their
differences, this Prophet had the great stroke in all these things, this was
the mighty work of God toward them.

He does not say, he brought them out of Egypt, but by a Prophet he brought
them out of Egypt, and by a Prophet Reason of the Text.
was he preserved.

This was first to show their very low and mean condition, 1.
that they had no succor nor help in the sight of humane reason, humane reason
could no way help them, they had none but a poor Prophet.

Secondly, It was to show this, That God in their deliverance 2.
would appear himself, and would work such a glorious work by his own hand.

Thirdly, It was to upbraid this people that Hosea did 3.
preach unto at this time, for the abuse of his Prophets, there was a time
(says he) a Prophet stood you in stead, now you care not for the Prophets,
they may speak what they will, but you care not for them; but there was a time
that a Prophet stood you in stead, how ever stout and proud you are now. I find
diverse Interpreters observe this, and among the Ancients especially Cyril of
Alexandria has it, showing how Instrumental a Prophet had been after good unto
them. Had not God blessed the Cyril.
endeavors of a Prophet for good unto your forefathers, where had you been at
this day?

First note, That the consideration of the shiftless estate of Obs. 1.
our Ancestors should humble us much: And if the consideration of our Ancestors
should humble us thus, how much more when we consider of our own shiftless
estate. Oh! lately, how shiftless were we! And the truth is, though Applied to
England.
there were Armies raised, yet God would not so much look at them, but rather
looked at his Prophets, and his Servants; the praying people were the main and
principal means that did help us in that condition, and this should humble us,
we should take heed of growing haughty and proud when we are delivered,
considering how shiftless we were but a little while ago; and therefore if now
we have gotten peace, and prosperity we think is coming in, take heed of pride
now, look back to that shiftless, poor condition that you were in a little
while ago.

Secondly, God shows here mercy to his people by a Prophet, that notes this,
That when God works great things Obs. 2.
for his Church, his way is to work it by very small means, little means God
uses when he intends the greatest mercies to his Church. Gods deliverance of
his people from Egypt it was a type of the deliverance of his Churches to the
end of the world from their bondage and afflictions, and God sends them a
Prophet, and he must deliver them. Though God did it, yet God puts it upon the
Prophet as the great Instrumental means for their help, God takes delight in
this, when he does good to his people, not to make use of such great means, as
when he does work his own ends other ways toward other people; when
Difference of God's working for his People, and for others.
God intends good toward other people he will do it in a more natural way, by
natural means; but when he comes to work good for his own, he will do it in a
more supernatural way: For mercies are so much the sweeter by how much the more
God is in them; so much the Reas. 1.
more as we see the finger of God in a mercy, so much the sweeter it is. And
above all things the Lord accounts 2.
himself glorified in his peoples depending upon him in the want of all means,
the Lord accounts this his Glory, that he may be an object of the rest of the
souls of his people, that when they are in any straights, in any afflictions,
that yet they can look upon God as an object for their rest, and can say, My
soul, return unto thy rest.

Oh consider of this you that are the Servants of God, Use.
when you are in straits and difficulties, remember this Note, That God
accounts it to be the great glory that he rejoices in, the special glory of his
Name that his Servants shall make him in their strai^s to be the rest of their
souls, and this is the reason why he has used to work so much good for his
people by such poor and weak means as he has done.

Thirdly, It is a great aggravation of men's sins, if they Obs. 3.
grow naught and wicked after God has in a more than ordinary manner appeared
for their good. If then they grow naught and wicked when God has appeared from
Heaven for their good, and wrought beyond all natural means, and set them upon
their legs again and delivered them, it much aggravates their sins.

Fourthly, which is a principal thing that I verily believe Obs. 4.
the holy Ghost aimed at in this place, and that is this, That the Unkindness
to, and Abuse of such as have reference, Let some note this now, as others had
cause to note it formerly.
though but in a way of succession unto such as God has used to be Instruments
of our deliverance, is a very great evil, (that is the Note) By a Prophet the
Lord brought them out of Egypt, and by a Prophet he preserved them* and what,
do you abuse them now, and are so much against them?

Diverse good things God has done for his People by Prophets, As by Moses here,
so afterward by Samuel, and Eliah, and Elisha; great things in the matters of
State Note.
God had done for this People by Prophets, and therefore he takes it very ill
that they should so abuse and slight the Prophets as they did. The aggravations
of this sin. 1. 2.


This shows, for people to do thus, 1. A base levite of spirit: 2. An
abominable ingratitude of spirit, and vile injustice, and God will avenge these
things. We have a notable Scripture in Judge. 8. 34, 35. and in Judge. 9. 16. In
the 8. Chapter of Judges, you read there, how God charges the People; And it
came to pass as soon as Gideon was dead, that the Children of Israel turned
again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baalberith their god; and the
Children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out
of the hands of their enemies on every side: neither showed they kindness to
the house of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness which he
had showed unto Israel. Gideon had been a famous Instrument of good to Israel,
that they received forty years prosperity by him, but as soon as he was gone,
the people went a whoring from God, and then they were unkind toward his
posterity; so you find in Chap. 9. Verse. 16. All the men of Shechem gathered
themselves together; and all the house of Millo, and went and made Abimelech
King. And one of Gideon's Sons goes and expostulates the matter with them, and
tells them the Parable of the Trees that did desire a King, but says Jotham to
them afterward in the 19. Verse. If ye have dealt truly and sincerely with
Jerubbaal, and with his house this day, then rejoice in Abimelech, and let him
also rejoice in you: but if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour
the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men
of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech. As if he should
have said, God will avenge this: What, did God make my Father an Instrument of
so great good to you, and do you so ill requite all his kindness and service
that he did for you? The Lord judge, and if it be so indeed as now I charge you,
let this be a manifestation of Gods displeasure, That fire come from Abimelech,
etc. As if he should say, Do not think that you can have peace and quiet in
such kind of ways as you are in, you think you have provided well for your
selves in setting up of Abimelech, and now you bless your selves; We shall have
peace, and go on and be quiet; Oh no, the displeasure of God will go on and
pursue you, and there will be a fire among your selves, and it is just with God
that it should be so, for this ingratitude of yours toward those that have bin
so instrumental for your good. The Scripture holds out this, that this is one
way for God to avenge himself upon a People that shall be ungrateful to such as
have been instrumental for good to them, that they shall have a perverse A
perverse spirit, the punishment of ingratitude.
spirit mingled among themselves, that when they think to provide for their own
ease and peace, they shall have a fire mingled among themselves, so as in the
conclusion to devour themselves. These people were very zealous for Gideon in
Judge. 8 22. when God had delivered them, they came to Gideon and said unto him,
Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: they made
great promises, Oh how were the people affected! Come, Rule over us, thou, and
thy son, and thy son's son, etc.

Oh! we were in a dangerous condition, and were like to have been in a
perpetual bondage under our enemies, but God has stirred up thee, and blessed
thee, and therefore thou, and thy son, and thy son's son shall rule over us:
they were mightily affectd with this mercy of God when it was fresh, but
presently after you shall find they were off, and forgot what an Instrument of
God Gideon had been unto them, and required the posterity of Gideon as ill as
if he had been one of their greatest enemies.

Oh my brethren, this is a sore and grievous evil, the Lord cannot endure
ingratitude. And thus much for the 13. Verse. It follows;

VER. 14.
Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly.

It Is true, (says God by the Prophet) I loved your Father Jacob, and I have
magnified my self toward Cohaerance.
his posterity in great and wonderful things which I have done for them. But
you have been a wretched people, and provoked me most bitterly: as if he should
say, I have a spirit of gentleness, sweetness and love, as indeed Expos. 1.
there is nothing else in God, if he be not provoked, If there be any anger, it
is from men's provoking him.

You have provoked me bitterly, [in bitterness:] You have provoked, you have
imbittered my Spirit against you, by your sins that are bitter; you make my
Spirit that is so sweet of it self, you have made it to be bitter.

The word signifies sometimes to Exalt and make high. (...) in Hithpael
Exaltari. [Graec. Ezekiel. 3. 14.] in Excelsis suis. Calv. etc.


And I find Tremelius, Vatablus, Calvin and others, translate it, High places.

You have provoked me with the High Places, so it is true; And indeed that was a
special sin, the sin of Idolatry that did provoke God most bitterly against
them, and he will come to one in the main, if we take it so.

But it is more full to translate it according to that Expos. 2.
that the word does signify more properly, You have provoked me in
bitternesses, you have been very bitter against my Saints that would go from
Samaria to worship at Jerusalem. The particular intimation of the Text.
I have shown in this story of the Prophet how bitter the ten Tribes were
against any that would separate from them and go worship at the Temple; you
have provoked me in that kind of bitterness, you have provoked me in that
bitter sin of abusing my Prophets, you have provoked me in that ingratitude of
yours toward those that I have made Instrumental for your good, you have
provoked me in finning against such great mercies, Oh! you have provoked me
bitterly, you have for saken the living God, the fountain of all good, and have
turned your selves to vanity, you have provoked me to anger most bitterly. From
whence the Notes are,

First, That God is not angry but when he is provoked, neither Obs. 1.
should we be; let us be as our Heavenly Father is: says God, You have
provoked me to anger.

And then Secondly, It is sin that provokes God, it puts Obs. 2.
God to stir up his anger, it puts it to trial, to see whether there be any
anger in God or no; in Heb. 3. 9. Your Fathers provoked me, they tried me, they
would put it to (...)
trial whether there was such anger in me yea, or no. Wicked men indeed do so,
they hear much of the anger of God against sin, and they put it to trial, they
will see whether it be so or no; they dare not say so in words, but their
actions do so: Oh! it is a dreadful evil to provoke God, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do ye
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are you stronger than he? Can you stand it out
with God? Is it not folly to provoke a man that is a Superior, that has power
over you, and can crush you? Oh wretched, bold heart that dare stand it out
to provoke the eyes of his Glory, to provoke the holy one of Israel* What, to
provoke him that can stamp you into Hell presently * to provoke him that has
the point of the Sword of Justice at your hearts! but yet this is the boldness
of ungodly men; a man that dares not provoke his Landlord, yet will dare to
provoke God.

My brethren, it is a great evil to provoke one another The aggravation of
provoking God.
to wrath, but a greater evil to provoke God to wrath: in Ephesians. 6. 4. Parents
are charged not so much as to provoke their Children to wrath; And will thou
provoke God then? If we will be provoking one another, let us be provoking to
love, and to good works: (as in Hebr. Wherein we may provoke.
10. 24.) unto a kind of Acrimony of love. If there be a kind of sharpness let
it be that which puts us on with an eagerness of spirit to love, and so provoke
one another as much at you will, provoke one another to love, and to good
works. In Gal. 5. 26. Be not desirous of Against provoking one another.
vain glory, provoking one another; Calling forth one another corruptions,
that is the meaning of it. Let there not be a desire of vain glory, provoking
one another, calling sorth (...)
one another corruptions. Oh! it is an evil thing that we do call forth the
corruptions of one another so. Was there ever times of provoking so as there
are now? every man provoking one another, and stirring up one another to envy,
wrath, and malice, Oh take heed of provoking one another; wonderful mischiefs
have come of provoking out another: What mischief do you think will come then
of provoking God to anger? Consider this, especially you that are of passionate
spirits, if a Wife, a Servant, a Child does any thing a mise, you are presently
all on fire, Oh that you would have this meditation, A Meditation for
passionate spirits.
What, shall I a poor worm be so soon provoked with a fellow creature if he
does displease me? O Lord, what a wretch am I then that dare provoke the
infinite God! What, can I think my anger to be so terrible to a Child, a
Neighbor, a Servant? Oh! how terrible is the anger and wrath of an infinite God
against a Creature when he is provoked! I cannot beat it whoever provokes me,
why should I think that the infinite God should bear with me when I provoke
him? Oh! that passionate men and women would have these considerations. But
further; They provoke me bitterly.

Bitterly.] I remember Gualter has a very good expression Gualter.
about this; and specially speaking of the way of Idolatry, provoking of God:
Just as if a Wife that had played the whore, and had used many dalliances with
the Whoremaster, and this Wife should come to manifest Simile.
respect to her own Husband in the same way of dallyance as she did with the
Whoremaster before, and he knew what love tricks and sports she had with him,
and she makes use of the same ways when she comes home to Note.
her Husband. Oh what a bitter provocation would this be! a Husband would not
bear that. Just so did this people do in the way of Idolatry; in Idolatry they
go a whoring to Idols, and they will tender up to God himself that kind of
worship that they give to their Idols: Oh this is a bitter provocation.

The Note from whence is this, That though sin of its own Obs.
nature does provoke God, yet there are some sins provoke him bitterly. In Heb.
3. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the day of provocation, in the time of
bitterness, so the word is; do (...).
not harden you hearts as in the provocation, as in the bitterness of my
spirit. Oh! some things does imbitter Gods Spirit; as Hardness of heart does
imbitter God Spirit, Provoking sins. 1. 2. 3
and False worship; yea, many times even those things wherein we think we do
God a great deal of service does imbitter Gods Spirit. Oh! there is many men
that think they serve God in doing that which provokes him bitterly: we know
what the Scripture speaks of men, that when they shall deal thus and thus with
the Saints they shall think that they do God good service. They may have a good
intention in what they do, and yet they shall provoke God bitterly: Oh let us
not rest in good intentions: I make no question but this people did say so to
the Prophet. Well, whatsoever their intentions were, yet God was provokt biterly
by what they did.

And as there are some sins that are as bitter clusters, (as the holy Ghost
speaks in Deuteronomy. 32.) so God will be as bitter against those that do provoke him
bitterly, in Deuteronomy. 32. 24. he threatens bitter destruction. Oh! for the
creature to forsake God is an evil and a bitter thing, in Jer. 2. 19. and it
will be bitterness in the end. As Abner said to Joab. in 2 Samuel 2. 26. Will it
not be bitterness in the end? Oh those dalliances of thine will be bitterness
in the end: those sins of thine that are the most pleasing to thee, as they are
bitter to God, so God will make them bitter to thee one day: in Prove. 5. 4. Her
end is bitter as Wormwood: though the beginning is as pleasant as Sugar to you,
yet the holy Ghost says that her end is as bitter as Wormwood. In Jer. 4. 18.
Thy way, and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; and this is thy
wickedness, because it is bitter. My Brethren, we are charged in Scripture to
take heed of being bitter one against another, the Husband (in Colos. 3. 19.)
is charged not to be bitter against his Wife. It is an evil thing when in a
family there is bitterness. Oh! but when the Spirit of the eternal God is
bitter against a people: You Wives who have such a bondage upon you, and you
find it evil to have such bitterness from your Husbands: Oh but then look up to
God, is Gods Spirit sweet to you? Oh! it is a blessing to have the Spirit of
God sweet. There is The Spirit of God bitter to some.
a Generation of men that has Gods Spirit bitter toward them, it is one way
whereby we provoke God bitterly, by being bitter one against another: in Ephesians.
4. 31. Let all bitterness, wrath, and evil speaking be put away: there is a
charge of God: As we would obey him in any thing, we are charged to put away
all bitterness, anger, and evil speaking, Oh what a spirit of bitterness
prevails among us! what bitter words and speeches are there among us! in Psalm.
64. 3. there the tongues of wicked men are said to be as Arrows, They shoot
their Arrows, even bitter words; If ever bitter words did fly like Arrows about
our ears, then they do at this day: I verily believe England now more guilty of
bitterness tean ever.
that England never understood what bitter words meant as lately it has known:
we read in Revel. 8. 11. it is said, That the third part of the waters became
wormwood, and men died of them, because they were bitter. My Brethren,
sometimes Rev. 8. 11. alluded to.
the third part of Sermons are Wormwood, are bitter: Oh! I would to God that
sometimes we could not say that the third part of prayer were not bitter;
bitterness in prayer, in writing, in speaking, in conferring one with another;
Do not you think that this provokes God bitterly? yea, even those men that were
wont to sweeten one another spirits, and there was a sweetness came upon one
another spirits in their prayers, and yet Aggravated.
now what do they do but imbitter one another spirits, so that they cannot
meet together now, but they come with bitter spirits, one imbittering the
other, as if there were nothing but Gall and Wormwood among us? Let me apply
that Scripture in Jam. 3 11. Does a Fountain send forth, at the same place,
sweet water, and bitter? What, those that were of such sweet natures and
dispositions, and by grace much more sweet, and now nothing but bitterness come
out of such Fountains! one would wonder to see men's natures so changed besides
the work of grace: Oh! shall out of the same Fountain come forth sweet water,
and bitter? It follows; Therefore shall be leave his blood upon him.

That is, he shall bring his sin upon his own head, Text.
Expos. Obs.
Those that will be wilful in sin, the blood be upon their own heads; that is
the meaning. Never stand excusing any more, you have warning enough, if you
will go on in your way, the blood be upon your own head, you will undo your
selves and there is no help:

Mark the phrase; He shall leave his blood upon him.

When God comes to bring the guilt of sin, and the punishment Obs.
of sin on a man's own head and there leaves it upon him, that is sad indeed. We
read in 2 Samuel 12. 13. there it is said, when Nathan came and rebuked David
for his sin, David confessed his sin, and says Nathan to him, The Lord has put
away thy sin; the word is translated by some thus, The Lord has made thy sin
to pass away; Oh that is a happiness T^^msire fecit (...)
indeed, when it may be said of God, he does make the sin and the guilt to pass
away from the sinner, that is a happiness. But on the other side, when God shall
leave the sin upon the sinner, leave the guilt of the sin upon him, as if God
should say, here is the guilt of sin upon the head of such a man, and let it
abide and lie, he shall leave his blood upon him, as in Ezekiel. 22. 20. the Lord
says, He will bring them into the fire, and leave them there; the Lord many
times brings his Saints into the fire of afflictions, Oh but he will not leave
them there: but when he brings the wicked into the fire, he leaves them there.
And his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.

His reproach] That Is thus, They do what lies in them to bring a reproach upon
me the living God, as if there Expos.
were not an Alsufficiency in me, but I Will make the reproach to turn upon their
own heads; yea, they reproach my Saints too, but I Will make this to return upon
their own heads, Oh take heed of doing any thing to bring a reproach upon God.

You will say, Can the Creature bring a reproach upon God? Quest.


I might show you diverse ways: I Will instance but in this Answ.
one thing.

Apostatizing from God, when professors of Religion that have been very forward
and seemed to rejoice in the Apostasy brings a reproach upon Gods ways.
ways of God and to rely upon God, and they shall forsake God to follow after
their vain lusts, I say, these do bring a reproach upon God himself, in Heb.
10. 29. they did (...),
despite to the Spirit of Grace, they wrong, and bring a reproach upon the
Spirit of Grace. And then Heb. 6. 6. They put the Son of God to an (...).
open shame (says the text) they make him a reproach before all. As when you
cart people up and down the City you hold them Simile.
out as a scorn; so they put the Son of God to open shame, they do (as it were)
hold forth the Son of God to open shame: so what thou professest, There is more
good to The language of the sin of an Apostat.
be had in a Whore than in Jesus Christ, and God, and the blessed Spirit,
that is the language of a Whoremaster.

Well, you that are Apostates and think to bring a reproach upon Religion and
upon the Saints, and they all suffer for you; from whence is it that the people
of God are reproached, but because of Apostates? Well, do you bring a reproach
upon God, upon his Name, upon Profession, upon his Saints? the Lord has ways
to turn the reproach upon your selves; and usually such men as these before
they die, God does put to open shame, he How God usually punishes them
leaves them to such vile courses as they come to be a shame, a byword, a
scorn, and cast out as dung and filth, not only to the Churches, but from such
as have any kind of civility or morality at all, Oh! take heed of bringing a
reproach upon God, and so by bringing reproaches upon his Saints; Oh! let the
Saints go on in a constant way of holiness and faithfulness, God will wipe away
their reproach, the Lord will return the reproach upon the heads of such as
seek to reproach them. And when there comes a reproach upon the wicked, it
shall be another manner of reproach than upon the Saints, it is called a
perpetual reproach; the reproach of The reproach of the wicked
the Saints is not a perpetual reproach, but when it is upon the ungodly, it
shall be a perpetual reproach, and in Jer. 41. 18. those two things are joined
together, a Curse, and a Reproach, Nehem. 4. 4. Hear O God, for we are
despised, and turn their reproach upon their own heads, says Nehemiah.
Sanballat, and Tobiah did reproach the Servants of God, that did seek in the
uprightness of their hearts to honor God; but Lord, return their reproach upon
themselves, says Nehemiah.

And truly this is the best way, when the Servants of God are reproached,
though they may by lawful means How tho Saints are to vindicate reproaches.
seek to vindicate their names, yet their chief way is, to pray, Lord, turn the
reproach upon the heads, or bosoms of our adversaries.

And then the last Note is this: -- And his reproach shall His LORD return unto
him.

His Lord] What is God the Lord of this people? his Expos.
Lord shall turn it, yes says he, it is as if the Prophet should say thus, you
reject God and will not be in subjection to him, you will not own him to be
your Lord; but he will be your Lord in spite of your heart, God will be God,
Obs.
and he will be Lord, let wicked men do what they can, and what they will he
will be their Lord; Christ has purchased to be Lord over the world, and he
will be Lord over all, over all Apostates, Hypocrites, wicked men, let them do
what they can against Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ will be Lord over them in
spite of their hearts.

Oh its a blessed thing to give up our selves willingly Use.
to the subjection of Jesus Christ. If we say we will not have thi^ man to rule
over us, Christ will say, but I will rule over you, the Lord has sworn by
Himself, and the word has proceeded out of his mouth in righteousness, that
every knee shall bow unto him, and every tongue confess his Name; be still
says God, and know that I am the Lord: So I say to the most troublesome and
tumultuous spirit, that would cast off the yoke of God; Oh! be still thou
wretched, thou proud spirit, and know that God is the Lord, he will prevail
against you. God made Julian to know this, that when a dart was struck into
him, Julian the Apostat.
he cast his heart blood into the Air, with an O than Galilean, thou have
overcome me! And so all wicked men shall be forced to say one day, Well, though
I would cast off the Commands of God behind my back, and break his Cords, yet
the Lord has overcome me, and though I perish to all eternity, yet God will be
God blessed for ever, and Lord of the whole Earth.

And thus through Gods mercy we have gone through this Twelfth Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
VER. 1.
When Ephraim spoke, trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he died.

THis Chapter is partly Legal and partly Evangelical. Legal, charging this
people with their fin of Idolatry, and of Ingratitude, showing them Gods wrath,
partly already inflicted, and further threatened them to the 14. Verse; and
again in the 15. and 16. Verses, there returning to further threats: but in the
14. Verse. there is something mixed of the Gospel in the midst of these charges
and threats. Ephraim would have put off all the evil that came on him, upon
God; but God charges Ephraim himself with it, all the change of Ephraim's
condition from what it had been, comes from his own sin; and the evil that is
like further to come upon him, will be for their own sin.

When Ephraim spoke, Trembling; not when Ephraim spoke tremblingly; but when
Ephraim spoke, (there is a The pointing of the Text.
stop) Trembling: as much as if it were said, There was trembling when Ephraim
spoke, those that heard him did tremble. When Ephraim spoke, there was
trembling: There was a time when Ephraim was very honorable among the Tribes,
when the very speaking of Ephraim had great power, and took great impression
upon whomsoever he spoke to. Yea, though Ephraim was the younger brother, that
came of Joseph, yet by the guidance of the hand of God upon Jacob's hand, the
blessing came upon him more especially; and so from time to time God put much
honor upon this Tribe of Ephraim, according to the blessing he had from Jacob,
when his right hand did lay hold upon the head of Ephraim. Joshuah Joshua.
he was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and when Joshua spoke, what trembling was
there among all the people? what mighty power and authority had he? And you
read in Judges, 8. in their speaking to Gideon, what trembling they caused,
and what yielding presently when they spoke, in Judges, 8. the beginning, And
the men of Ephraim spoke unto him, Why have thou served us thus, that thou
calledst us not when thou wentest to fight with the Medianites? and they did
chide with him sharply. And he said unto them, What have I done now in
comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the Grapes of Ephraim better than the
vintage of Abiezer? And so in Judges, 12. when Ephraim came to fight with
Jephthah they had thought to have done the same, they spoke great and swelling
words, Ephraim took much upon him, and made account that all should tremble and
shake when he spoke.

And Jeroboam he was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and so Jeroboam.
it has reference in a more especial manner to him, and his house, when
Jeroboam spoke, the Princely Power being put upon that Tribe of Ephraim in
Jeroboam, and they having power in their hands they did prevail very much at
the first, and caused trembling to all those they spoke to. But as if the holy
Ghost should say, There Is a great change now in Ephraim, he is not now as he
was, nor is not like to continue so. Ephraim presuming upon his excellency, and
upon his strength, and worth, he presumed to sin, he sinned in Baal, that is, in
a way of Idolatry, for so Baal sometimes is a general word for an Idol, Jer. 9.
14. They have walked after the imagination of their own hearts, and after
Baalim, after their Idols. And the Chaldae Paraphrase, they seem to allow of
this, say Chald. paraphrase.
they, They did sin, in that they did worship Idols.

When he sinned in Baal: But though it is meant of Jeroboam presently, including
his Calf, yet especially is it meant of that special sin that was afterward in
this Princely Tribe, in the successors of Jeroboam, and that was in Ahab in a
more special manner, ^ Kings, 16. 31. there he did not satisfy himself in
worshipping of the Calves, but added this, to worship Baal, the God of the
Sidonians. When he sinned, then he died.

He died.] His spirit even died; he was of a stout spirit, but afterward came
to be of a low, base, and sordid Expos. 1.
spirit, and died. They were under the sentence of death, Jeroboam's house was
cut off, and Ahab's house 2.
cut off, and the people died at last: They came to be vile and contemptible at
last, so that every body could insult over them. When a Lion is alive and
roars, he is terrible to all the Beasts; but a Lion that is dead, the most
timorous thing that is will run over, or trample upon him; So Ephraim was
terrible to all about him, but when he had sinned in Baal, his honor was taken
from him, and every one would insult over him, and then he was fain to crouch
to every one, and the wrath of God did pursue him till it never left him, nor
his family, nor the people, but they died and came to nothing; Oh the poor
spirit that there was in this Tribe afterward, When they sinned in Baal! In 1
Kings, 20. you shall see what a low and mean spirit they had, whereas before
when they spoke, men trembled, none could make them tremble, but they made
others tremble, but now in 1 King. 20. it is said of Benhadad the King of
Syria, That he gathered all his host together; and he sent messengers to Ahab
King of Israel into the City, and said unto him, Thus says Benhadad, Thy
silver and thy gold is mine, thy Wives also and thy Children, even the
goodliest are mine. And the King of Israel answered and said, My Lord, O King,
according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have. They had a low and a
mean spirit yielding to any thing, and Base spirits most insolent.
yet of a mighty surly spirit to be cruel over those that were under him; The
Lord was departed from him, and so their spirits were gone, and they were as a
dead carcass, and every one then could insult over them. Thus you have the
meaning of this Scripture in general; yet we shall see more particularly when
we examine it in reference to Jeroboam. But from what has been said, these are
these Observations.

First, It is an honor to have respect from others, when we Obs. 1.
speak, to have what we say to be received with reverence and respect, that it
takes impression upon the hearts of others, when we speak to them, that it is
not cast out as a vain and worthless thing; thus Job describes his honor, in
chap. 29. 9. The Princes refrained talking and laid their hands on their mouth,
the Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth; and in the 21. verse. Unto Me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence
at my counsel. A great honor it was to Job, that when he spoke, his speech was
regarded.

Let Children, and Servants, and all inferiors learn to give Use for Inferiors.
due honor unto those that God has set above them, not to scorn at their
speeches, not to slight their speeches, when they speak to them, to go away and
smile and jeer, but it is fit when a Father speaks to his Child, that the Child
show reverence and respect, there should be an awful reverence manifested in
the very countenance and carriage of the child, and so when Governors speak to
their Servants, and Superiors to their Inferiors. But especially let us give
God that honor when God speaks, Oh let there be We are with reverence to hear
the Lord speak.
trembling, Is this an honor that inferiors should give to their Superiors to
show reverence when they speak, Oh let us give this to God, Psalm. 103. 20.
Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in strength and do his Commandments,
hearkening to the voice of his Word. The Angels they excel in strength, the
most excellent Creatures, and what, do they slight and disregard the Word of
God? Oh no, they hearken to the voice of His Word, they give a reverent respect
to the voice of Gods Word, and it infinitely beseems us when God speaks to give
respect to him, that is the first.

Secondly, Those who are in place of power over others they Obs. 2.
account it their honor, not only that those under them regard what they say,
but that they should tremble at what they say. It is a great delight that man
has to lift up himself above others, and to be imperious above others, we
might give diverse examples of men that have had great power in their hands, and
when any thing has displeased them, they would speak so as to make others to
shake and tremble; Nay, not only men in great place will do it, but you shall
find this disposition in men that are very mean and of a very low rank, yet if
they have any under them, they will be imperious over them; as now in Families,
The imperiousness of some in their families.
how many when they do but speak to their Wives, though she be colateral, and
not directly under him, yet how imperiously do they speak, speak so as to make
the house shake almost when they speak, and so Servants and Children: and this
they account their Glory. My Brethren, though this be often through much
distemper, and pride, and vanity in men to delight to make all that are under
them to tremble when they speak, yet this is an honor due to God, and God
expects it from us, for the Lord is infinitely above us, and we are all of us
under Trembling due to God.
the feet of God, and at his dispose, both for our present and eternal estate.

And it is ^it for us, therefore to give regard and some reverence to God when
he speaks, to have an heart to tremble at his Word, that is that God looks for.
In Isa. 66. 2. The Lord that is on high, yet he looks to him that is of a poor
and contrite spirit, and trembles at his Word; the Word that God speaks is
that that has the dreadful Authority of God in it, It is that that binds
Conscience, it is that Word that if thou obeyest not, will bind thee over to
eternal death: It becomes the greatest Monarchs in the world to have shaking
and trembling hearts when God speaks: Oh! who art thou that can stand against
the Voice of God when he speaks? Oh bold and hard heart (I say) that can
stand out against Gods Voice. In Psalm. 29. 4. The Voice of the Lord is powerful
the Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty. And in Hab. 3. 16 When I heard, my
belly trembled, and my lips quivered at the Voice, and I trembled in my self
again. This is the honor that is due to God, Oh it is a comely thing to see a
Congregation sit even The posture of a Congregatio^^
trembling under the Word of God, manifesting their hearts to be affected with
the Authority and Majesty of what it is that God speaks; for there is much
Majesty in the Voice of God, Oh! it is full of Majesty.

Again, When he spoke, there was trembling.

This the Prophet mentions as a means to aggravate his Expos.
sin and misery afterward, As if the Prophet should say, There was a time that
God did subdue the hearts of people under Ephraim, so that Ephraim had a great
deal of Authority over those that were under him, When Ephraim spoke, there was
trembling.

From whence the Note is this, which Pareus has upon the place, says he, The
subjection of the hearts of men Pareus. Obs. 3.
unto those in Authority, it is a work of God, God is to have the glory of it:
It is from God that the hearts of multitudes shall be brought under some few so
as to fear them, and to receive what they speak with trembling, it is from God.
In Josh. 4. 14. On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all
Israel, and they feared him as they feared Moses. Joshua before Moses dyed, was
but a servant to Moses, and we do not read that he was so magnified among the
People, they did not fear him so much; No, the fear was then upon Moses,
because Moses was in place of Authority; but when Moses was taken away, and
Joshua was to succeed him in Authority, then the Lord magnified him, the Lord
put a luster upon him, and the Lord caused the People to fear him, as they had
feared Moses: It is a work of God to cause People to fear Magistrates. So in
Dan. 5. 19. For the Majesty be gave him, (that God gave the King) all People,
and Nations, and Languages trembled and feared before him. It Is God that puts
majesty upon Governors, to make those that are under to fear. It Is a very
observable Scripture we have in Psalm 77. 14. there it is spoken of God, that he
did wonders Psalm. 77. 14. Observed.
and mavelous things; What are those wonders and mavelous things? If you
read, you shall find among others, Thou leadest thy People like a flock of
Sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron; that is reckoned among the wonders and
mavelous things that God does, That he did lead his People like a flock of
Sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron; that so great a multitude should be led
like a flock of Sheep by the hands of two, it is a wonderful work of God, God
is to have the glory of it, it is for the maintaining of Government and Order
in the World, that God does so subdue the hearts of many under few.

Then Fourthly, When Ephraim spoke, trembling. Obs. 4.


Though Ephraim the younger, yet when he got Authority in his hand, how
imperious was he? And observe, The meaner the beginings of men are, the more
imperious oftentimes they are when they come in place of Power, none more
imperious and insulting over men than such as have meaner beginings: this was
the younger Brother, and had power by a special providence of God, not according
to the ordinary common course, and very often we find it, that men of mean
quality, and that were inferior to others, if any providence raises them
above others, they grow more imperious than others.

And then a Fifth is this, (which is a principal thing to be observed here, a
Note from the change of the condition of Ephraim, when Ephraim spoke,
trembling, but after he sinned, he died.) That men which heretofore have Obs. 5.
been of very high repute, and of reverend respect, so as they had much power
to prevail with people that they had to do with, yet by their sin they fall off
from their dignity: Sin will bring men's honors down; though there was a time
that every one reverenced him, had high esteem of him, and did much regard what
they spoke, yet they falling to sin and wickedness, it is just with God to bring
their honor and esteem down, to bring it into the dust, and to make them vile
and contemptible in the eyes of those that ere while did reverence them, we
find this threatened both to those in the place of Magistracy, and in the place
of Verified in 1. Magistracy
Ministry. For Magistracy in Job, 12 21. He powers contempt upon Princes, God
powers contempt, though they had very great honor and esteem, yet through their
sin contempt is thrown upon them. And then for those in the Ministry, in Mal.
2. 9. Therefore also have I made you 2. Ministry.
contemptible, and base before all the people. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and they were very honorable those that were faithful, but when they
come to be partial in the Law, that is, when they come to turn the Word of God
to their own ends; it is a remarkable Scripture, that the Lord made them vile in
the eyes of Note.
the people. It was, that they were partial in the Law, that was a main thing,
that is, they would handle the Word of God partially, what they could get to
drive on their own ways by, they would improve that to the uttermost, and turn
the Word which way they pleased; upon this, though they thought to prevail that
way, and to get esteem of the people by this means, ye^ this was the thing that
God threatens, to make them to be vile and contemptible in the eyes of the
people because of this. When people come to discover this, that men do indeed
drive on their own designs, and their own ends in the ways of God, there is
nothing will take away their repute and their honor more, Oh the great change
that there is, in the honors and esteem of men, God for their sin casts them
out, and their names as vile men and women who have outlived their honors,
even in the very hearts of the Saints: Indeed when there is a change in an
outward condition from prosperity to afflictions, then wicked and carnal men
will not regard those that they did honor before. As in Job's case, in Job, 29.
Job tells us how he was honored, and regarded, and reverenced where he lived in
prosperity, but when he was in affliction, in Job, 30. 1. Now those who are
younger than I, have me in derision, that is a wickedness to change our minds of
the esteem of men, because of their prosperity, or adversity; it shows a great
vanity of spirit, and where the heart is right, if one that has been godly and
in public place heretofore, and now God by his providence Note.
has brought him down in regard of his outward estate, yet he is to be honored
still continuing in his integrity and holiness. But now this is that which I
speak of as a Judgment of God upon men, when God casts out their names from the
very hearts of the Saints, and that worthily too, when they shall be worthy to
be looked upon as dead carcasses, though heretofore much honored and respected,
heretofore they were as Gardens that had many sweet Flowers, excellent common
gifts they had for which they, were respected; but now like Gardens overgrown
with Weeds that no body does regard; As Houses that were hung with costly
Hangings, but afterward pulled down and nothing left but the bare walls: so
their gifts were very precious, but now as those Houses having their Lord and
Prince gone away there is nothing but bare walls, and it may be Mice and Vermin
Simile.
run up and down in those rooms that were hung so bravely: So it is with many
that had excellent gifts which were highly honored and esteemed of by people
that knew them, but now the hangings are gone, now there is nothing but Vermin
running up and down in their spirits; Oh! what a mighty havoc sin will make in
the honor and esteem of men!

Let men therefore take heed of trusting in their former Use. for Magistrates
and Ministers that have bin of Repute.
repute, for let them have done what they will heretofore, yet if they depart
from God their honor will be gone; Men that are in place of Authority, or in
place of Ministry, had need consider this point well, for it is a matter of
great moment for men in place of Authority to keep up their repute and esteem
that they may be the more useful and do service, not only for themselves, but
that they may be of the greater use to do service for God. And it is one of the
great designs of the Devil to seek to cast dirt upon those that God does use as
Instruments for good* Oh! it concerns them to look to it that there be nothing
justly cast upon them.

It Is very observable how God remembers Ephraim a long time after to put
dishonor upon him. You shall read in the Book of the Revelations where the
Tribes are reckoned up, in chap. 7. there is only two Tribes left out, Dan and
Ephraim, Ephraim is not mentioned there by Revel 7. 8. Explained.
his own name, but by the name of Joseph, and the reason that is given is,
because those two Tribes were Ringleaders See Mr Mead in loc.
in ways of Idolatry; as Dan, if you read Judge. 18. you shall find him there
a Ringleader; and you know the great change of things that Ephraim made in the
Worship of God, by Jeroboam's setting up of Calves, and so afterward sinn^ng
in Baal, and so the great dishonor that God put upon him afterward. When
Ephraim spoke.

Spoke, what? What did Ephraim speak when he caused Expos. in partic.
trembling? All this has been only from the general, but what did he speak
referring it to Jeroboam that was of Ephraim, and so to the Courtiers that were
with him? these spoke these two things, and so caused trembling What Jeroboam
spoke to cause tremling. 1. Alteration of Government
in the hearts of the people.

First, When Jeroboam spoke about the altering of the way of Government, about
the taking off of the ten Tribes from the house of David, What portion have we
in David, and in the house of Jesse? When this was mentioned, then there was
trembling; it did certainly at first cause the peoples hearts to shake, they
thought it was a very great matter, they knew not what would come of it, What,
for to forsake the house of David and to have a change of Government in another
way! this caused many thoughts of heart, and much trembling, fearing that there
might come very ill consequence of it: When he spoke there was trembling. But,
he exalted himself. Notwithstanding such concussions of spirit as there was,
yet Jeroboam went on in his way, and would venture the Expos.
worst, let come of it what would, he would on, He exalted himself. But then
afterward he sins in the way of his Idolatry, (and so his successors sin in
Baal) and then he died, God struck him, and his Family, and so the ten Tribes.
From whence our Notes of Observation are,

First, That alteration in the matter of Government, is a matter of very great
hazard and difficulty; men that have to Obs. 1.
deal in any kind of alteration in matter of Government, had need be very wise
in their carriage in it, in respect of the people, for much depends upon them.
When there was any alteration in Government there was trembling then, mighty
fears and troubles in the hearts of the people.

Secondly, Men of Spirit they will break through difficulties, Obs. 2.
if once they be resolved upon a business. And when God does intend to have a
work acomplisht, he will raise up men of Note.
Spirit to go through with it, notwithstanding any difficulties there is in it.

He exalted Himself. Though the Peoples spirits were very much troubled, and a
great deal of shaking there was throughout the Land, yet he lifts up Himself,
he had some encouragement from the Prophet and otherwise so that he would go
through. When God (I say) has an intent to bring a business about; for this
was, that he might fulfill what was threatened to Solomon for his former sin.

And then Thirdly, If men when they have been helped to Obs. 3.
go on through difficulties, yet if they shall afterward rest in their parts,
rest in their strength so as to forsake God, and sin against him, it is just
with God to leave them that they shall vanish and come to nothing: He did exalt
himself and prevailed in what he spoke, notwithstanding the trembling of the
People, for having got himself warm in the nest, and strong in his Kingdom,
then he lifts up himself in another manner, and forsakes God, and trusts in his
own strength, And now he dies, now God casts him off.

Men had need take heed, though they be carried through Use. Caution.
many and great difficulties, and by a Spirit more than ordinary, they had need
take heed (I say) that afterward they do not walk in their own strength, but
walk humbly before God; If they forsake God, they will die and perish. That Is
the First thing that Jeroboam spoke.

Secondly, When he spoke, when he first mentioned the business in the
Alteration of Religion, this it is like caused Expos. 2.
more trembling than the other: What is that Jeroboam spoke? That now they were
not to go up to worship at Jerusalem, God did not stand upon such things, No,
they might save that long journey; and so there was a Calf set up at Dan and
Betbel, and they must go and worship there: This was a mighty alteration in the
matters of Religion. And surely when this was mentioned first to the People
there could not but be great trembling, the spirits of the godly to be sure
they would tremble at such a motion, they would look upon it as a most dreadful
Curse of God upon the Kingdom, that there should be such a change in the
matters of Religion, from the Truth to that which is False; and even others
too, there was a general trembling, for men have some kind of conscience of
Religion and of worshipping God, this was so flat against the Word, that where
there was but any Conscience of God they could not but have some fear, they
could not tell what might come of it, and therefore there could not but be a
very great concussion of spirit in the People of the Land, to tremble at such a
strange kind of thing as this was: at first it was so; But yet afterward they
had dead spirits, that he might do with them what he would, and so joined with
Jeroboam, and joined with Abab, and sinned more and more. From this speaking
and trembling, you have these Notes.

First, That the Alteration in Religion is a very difficult business, Obs. 1.
it cannot be expected but the hearts of People will stir much upon the
Alteration of Religion, though it be from worse to better, yet the hearts of
People will stir very much at first. When the Reformation was first from Popery
here, what a stir was there? they were presently ready to take up Arms in
Cornwel; What ad^ was there for the Book of Common Prayer, so that the King was
fain to write to them, That it was no other than the sum of what they had
before, only translated into English, with some Amendments. And certainly the
casting out of Prelacie has caused a great deal of trembling, a great
Episcopacy
ado there is, How hard it is to get but any rotten tooth out of a man's head,
it costs a great deal of pain and trouble. Though the Wars were undertaken for
the A fit simile.
maintenance of our Liberties, as we are Subjects, and Men, and for the
Civil-Right we have to our Religion also; but yet we see that the very thoughts
of any kind of change in matters of Religion whatsoever it be, it causes the
hearts of men to be up, and shake, and to be unsettled, it is a matter of great
moment the change in matters of Religion, and therefore requires much Prayer
where it is changed, though from the worse to the better. If it cause trembling
when it is changed from the better to the worse, it will likewise cause trembling
where it is changed from the worse to the better; and therefore it requires that
all the Godly should join al their strength together, against those that would
oppose their strength against it.

The Second is this, That men of resolute spirits will go on, Obs. 2.
even in the matters of Religion, though it be from the better to the worse,
yet you shall have some men whose spirits are resolute that they will go on.
Oh! but you will say, The People will not bear nor endure it. Yea, but they
will venture to go on with their way and design, though it be from the better
to the worse; but now, if the change be from the worse to the better, than it is
a special gift of God to give men hearts to go on, notwithstanding difficulties.

And then in the Third place, He exalted himself, though Obs. 3.
there were trembling: That is, He did prevail in this his way, in this change
of Religion, Jeroboam did not carry things by open violence presently, it was a
great while first, but he carried things on by fair shows, one thing after
another, and so he prevailed with the People. This is the way to get a design,
and not by open violence at present.

And then Fourthly, Then he died, when he sinned in Baal. Obs. 4.
Though God may suffer men to make some alteration in Religion, though it be to
the worse, and let them prosper, yet if they will grow from one degree to
another in forsaking God, then God comes upon them with his wrath, then they
die; if they know not where to hold, then God will not continue patient toward
such a people any longer.

And then the Fifth thing is this, That a Family or People Obs. 5.
from whence God has withdrawn his protection and blessing, is a dead carcass.

Then, He is dead, that I take to be the meaning of that in Mat. 24. 28. For
wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Mat. 24. 28. Interpreted.
Eagles be gathered together; though it is true, it is spoken about the coming of
Christ, yet I do not think that the Carcass is Christ, and the Saints like
Eagles, and so will be where Christ is, yet it has been carried so by diverse;
now though it is spoken there of Christ's coming, yet it is meant, of his coming
against Jerusalem, there is a great part of that Chapter of the coming of Christ
in his Judgments against the people of the Jews, and now they were as a dead
carcass, God having forsaken them; And the Eagles, Birds of prey, would come
upon them: And it might have reference to the Romans coming upon them, whose
Ensign is the Spread Eagle, those Eagles would Note.
come. The body of the Jews that had forsaken God, and his Truth, and so was
but as a dead carcass, the Eagles would make prey of them. A people, or family
that forsakes God and his Worship is as a dead carcass.

And then Sixthly, It Is corruption of Worship that causes Obs. 6.
God thus to withdraw from a people, and make them to be as a dead carcass.

When they sinned in Baal. As it was said of Troy so long as they kept the
Palladium* [the Image of Minerva] Troja retineus Palladium inexpugabiles
manebat.
it was safe, and could not be overcome, but when that was gone then they were
overcome and spoiled. So when Gods Worship which is the life and safety of a
place when that is gone, and Worship is corrupted, then there does come death:
Though I do not think that God always observes the strict rule for matters of
worship, as toward the Jews; for the Jews certainly though A Caution.
they had a Covenant of Grace that God dealt with them in, yet they had a
special Covenant that God made One of Gods special Covenants with the Jews.
with them for their being in the Land of Canaan; now indeed God goes by
general rules, that is, to punish the disobedient, and to reward those that are
godly, the ways of God now toward Nations and People for his outward
punishments, and mercies, are but according to general rules, but Gods
administration toward the Jews, His way with them.
besides general rules were according to a special Covenant that God made with
them about their living in the Land of Canaan, either prosperously, or in
adversity.

But then further, When wicked men are most active in their evil way and
violence, yet then they may be under the sentence Obs. 7.
of death, when they seem to have the greatest power to do what they list (I
say) then they may be as a dead people.

When he sinned in Baal, then he died. If you will but observe the story, for
these Prophets cannot possibly be understood without reference to the story of
Kings, and Chronicles: observe but the story of the Kings, When was it that
Ephraim did sin in Baal? It was in Ahab's time, Ahabstime.
you shall find that they were never more active for their way of Idolatry than
then, nor never more violence, never more cruelty to the Prophets of the Lord,
than there was at that time. For then Jezebel she had her 100. Prophets set at
her table, but the Prophets of God were fain to be hid in a cave, and Eliah to
shift for his life; And yet when he sinned in Baal, he died. Died! why he
seemed to be full of life and activity and vigor, and thought to do what he
list, and to trample all under feet that would stand against that way of
worship, but for all this their bravery and pride they were dead, says the
holy Ghost, they were under the sentence of death, and a base people, God was
gone from them, and they were decaying, and so should deny more and more till
he did perish; When he sinned in Baal, he died.

VER. 2.
And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten Images of their
silver, and Idols according to their own understanding, all of it the work of
the Craftsmen; they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, kiss the Calves.

THE Family of Ephraim and the ten Tribes, for so Ephraim is taken for Jeroboam
sometimes, and sometimes for the whole Tribe, and sometimes for the Governors,
and sometimes for all the ten Tribes as distinct from Judah. Now they sin more
and more.

From whence I beseech you observe the taking in the people now together with
Ephraim, now the number is changed; at first it was, When HE sinned in Baal,
then he died. But now it is said, THEY sin more and more, all the people join
with him in way of sin.

At first, when he hegan to speak about the alteration of Religion, the people
trembled to think of it, but it Expos.
seems afterward they could swallow it down well enough, they could join with
Jeroboam, yea, and Ahab too, more and more, let them impose what they would
upon them, they could yield to it.

From whence the Note is, That men at the first apprehension Obs. 1.
of things they are much affected, and it may be think that they will never
yield to them, yet within a while when they have been a little used to them,
then there is a mighty alteration in men's spirits both to yield to this, and
indeed to yield to any thing. How many men's hearts and ways are so different
from what they seemed to be? If one had mentioned hereto(...)uch things as now
they do, they would have trembled at them, If about six years since one could
but have presented in a Map all our speeches and ways one against another, and
told us how things should be, our hearts would have shaken, and we would have
trembled at the thought of it: but now more and more we go on, and God knows
whither we shall go; Oh! the alteration that a little time makes in men's
spirits! now (says he) they are a dead, heartless people, now you may do what
you will with them, now they will do things so disagreeing to their former
principles, as nothing can be more; a man would wonder, What, that this people
that were so astonished at the very thought of the change of Religion, now that
they should be swallowed up in Idolatry.

My Brethren, Let us never regard much the sudden affections and sudden
expressions of people, though people may Note.
seem to be up and very forward in their affections and expressions, yet (I
say) never rest too much upon them; There is nothing more uncertain than the
spirits of the multitude, and therefore it is the most irrational thing Mobile
vulg(...).
for any of wisdom to think to carry things that way, if he thinks to carry it
constant; you may get them in a hurry in one way at one time, but they will be
quickly off again, and that which one time they will cry up, at another time
they will cry down; and such a kind of alteration of spirits these times will
be a witness to, I believe as great as ever times were, from the beginning of
the world, Now they sin more and more. And now.

There Is a great emphasis in this Particle, [Now] They sin more and more, that
is, even now, when the very sentence Expol.
of death was out against them, even now, they do it. Thus did Ahab in 1 Kings,
16. 30. And Ahab did evil in the sight of the Lord, above all that we(...)fore
him, he added evil. From whence observe this,

That when destruction is nearest, then evil men are wickedest. Now their sin
ripens apac^; when the scum grows highest, Obs. 1
then it is nearest the fire, and so the nearer it is to the fire the higher it
will grow: It Is a great sign of the neerness An apt simile
of men's times, that they are not long, when they grow notoriously wicked; See
a man that has been forward in that which is good heretofore, he may have
failings and yet the Lord may pity him; but now let this man grow to be very
wicked, not only to abate of his profession, but grow to be very wicked, expect
the ruin of that man suddenly, it will not be long.

And then Secondly, It is a great aggravation of men's wickedness to sin after
Gods threats, and in the times of Judgment, Obs. 2
when they are under Gods hand; Oh! when God appears against us we should
presently submit, at the least holding up of his finger: but this is the pride
of men, not to stoop even when the hand of God is against them, and the rather
because they would justify their sin; if they should stoop and yield upon the
hand of God coming out against them, this would debase them, but they rather
will stand out the more that they might justify their sin, that they are not
thus and thus as men would take them to be.

And then a Third Note is this, That when men have lost their credits, honor,
and esteem through the just Judgment Obs. 3.
of God, then they grow more base and vile in their sinful ways than ever.
Ephraim had a great deal of esteem and honor, but he lost it through Gods just
Judgment, and now he, and the people together sin more and more. We find this
usual, that men's esteem and credit though they have very base hearts within all
the while, yet it will keep them in a very fair way; but now you shall have
many men that though they lived very fair so long as they had esteem and
credit, yet if their credit be but cracked, and their este(...)e but gone, they
will prove very sordid in their ways; As it is in a Garden, you know if a man
have but a few weeds grows up in it, he will have them pulled up, but if it be
overgrown with weed, then he Simile.
does not much care for it, but lets it run more and more; so it is in men's
hearts, indeed though there be something amiss in them and their names kept up
they will reform, but if once they have fallen so as their honor, credit, and
esteem is gone, then they go on more and more, and fall still more and more to
further and further wickedness; or as it is with a man when he has a new
Garment, Oh Simile.
he is afraid at first of every little spot, and much more afraid of a rent,
but if afterward the garment be come to be sullied much, or be dirtied a
little, he is careless of it then, then he never stands brushing of it so as
before: It is thus for all the world with men in respect of their hearts, and
in respect of their lives, and therefore it is good for men to look to it
betimes, when their names begin but a little to be lost, when they may see the
just hand of God beginning to come, then to reform; for if they let themselves
go upon liberty, they will grow vile and abominable. They sin more and more.

And then a Fourth Note is this, That there is no stop in Apostasy; let men
Apostatize once from God, and there Obs. 1.
is no stop then, they cannot tell whither to go then, if once they be rolling
down, a man may not think thus, I will but roll thus far, and there I Will stop;
no, if you be once rouling, you will roll, and roll down to the bottom, and you
know not whither you may roll or fall: If a man should leap into the water and
say, I will but sink thus far, to the middle and no further, this were but
folly, you will sink more and more: so it is with Simile.
Apostates, I verily believe those that did make slight at first, they did not
think that they should go so far, Oh! God forbid that they should do such
things as were so vile and abominable, yea, but when once they are rouling,
when once they are sinking, they (...) and sink more and more, till they roll
into the bottom(...) pit of Hell, they sink more and more till they sink into
the very bottomless gulf, into such things as they would abhor before. There Is
a Curse upon the wicked in Psalm. 35. That God would set them in slippery
places, and that the Angel of God should persecute them; when men will go out
of the ways of God into the slippery paths of their own, it is just with God
that an evil spirit should drive them on in those ways. It is in going from
the ways of God, just as you shall find it in your traveling in Champion
Countries, there is a Highway goes to such Simile
a Town, and there is another way that lies close by it, and you (it may be) are
got out of the right way, and so go on and think it will bring you to the place
where you are traveling, but it winds you out of your right way, and so you go
further and further, out of the right Road, perhaps some miles before you are
aware of it. And so it is in Apostacy, it may be at first when they are got
out of the way of God they think it not so much, but then these evil ways wind
them out by degrees so that they grow further and further; They sin more and
more.

I will give you the steps of an Apost^t, going more and The steps of Apostasy.
more from God.

First, When one does apostatise and sin against God, 1.
if it be any sin against knowledge, though never so little, For sin of mere
infirmity I cannot call Apostasy, but if it be ever so little against
knowledge, this breaks the bond of obedience; when I will venture to do that
which I know is against God, this bond of obedience being broken, no marvel
though you fall and sin more and more.

Secondly, Every act of sin has such a nature in it, as to increase the
habits: Corruption does grow by acting. As 2.
it is with Grace, every act of Grace does extend Grace in the heart of a man;
the way to grow in Grace is, to act Grace much, so that when you are acting of
your Grace, you do not only that that is your duty, but you are growing in
Grace, for when you are acting of Corruption, you are not only doing that that
is evil, but you are increasing it, and therefore every sin that causes us to
decline from God, makes us to go more and more from God.

Thirdly, Every sin that is against Conscience, it weakens 3.
the work of Conscience; the Authority of Conscience will quickly be weakened
when it is once broken; break but off the yoke of Conscience, and Conscience
will be weaker than it was before: At the first time when a man sins against
Conscience, his Conscience has a great deal of strength in it, and mightily
troubles him at the very first, but having had a flaw (as it were) it grows
weaker. I remember a notable story which that reverend and famous Divine,
Doctor Preston has, of one in Cambridg that had committed a great sin, and he
had this temptation A story related by Dr. Preston.
upon him; Do the act again, and your Conscience will trouble you no more: and
this temptation did prevail upon him, he did it again, and then he grew a very
sot indeed, and went on in his wickedness: Every sin does somewhat to weaken
Conscience, and therefore one that falls off from God, will sin more and more.

Fourthly, When a man has once fallen off from God in any 4.
degree, according to the degree he does lose his comfort that he had in God;
for some kind of comforts Hypocrites may have; as there may be Common gifts of
the Spirit to enable them to do service, so there may be Common Gifts of the
Spirit to comfort them; they may taste of the Powers Common Comforts.
of the world to come, many have some flashes of joy; but when they are
departed from God then they cannot have so much comfort as they were wont to
have, and when they have not the comfort they were went to have, they must have
it some way, and they are fain to go sharking up and down to get it some where
else; I cannot have that comfort in God as I was wont to have, I was wont when
I was troubled, to go and read the Word, I could find comfort there, let me go
into good Company I could find comfort there, let me go into the presence of
God I could find comfort there, but now I cannot, and so the heart must have
comfort some way or other, and therefore goes more and more from God.

Fifthly, When one has sinned against God, then his spirit and holy duties
comes to be very unsuitable, they are harder 5.
than they were before, it is a more difficult thing to get his heart to any
holy duty than before, and so comes to neglect Duties, and by neglecting them
his Corruption grows, they were a means to restrain Corruption very much; for
when a man is abroad and takes liberty, yet when he thinks thus, yea, but I
must pray before I go to bed, I must go to prayer, and how shall I beg Grace
from God another time, when as I wilfully sin against him? this curbs a man: so
long as he can keep any kind of sutableness between his heart and holy duties,
though he should fail in some kind of things, he would quickly recover; but
when he begins to have holy duties so veiled as he leaves off holy duties, then
he will sin more and more, for the curb is taken off.

Yea Sixthly, The presence of God is terrible to an Apostate, he cannot think
of God without some terror; before he 6.
would often think of God, and speak of God, but now he puts off the thoughts
of God because they are terrible to him, and having put off the thoughts of
God, and Gods presence being terrible, it must needs be that he must wander up
and down even more and more, be as a Cain wandering away from the presence of
God.

Yea further, The thoughts of whatsoever might turn an Apostates heart to God,
are grievous to him. If he has gone away, 7.
if he thinks of turning to God, Oh presently will be presented to him some
difficulty that will make him even put off al those thoughts, and rather give
himself liberty to his own ways.

Yea further, there is this in it, That when a man has 8.
sinned against God, one sin cannot be maintained without another, one sin calls
to another to help it, and maintain it. As now, you find it ordinarily when a
man has done wrong to another man, he knows not how to carry it out, but by
doing him more wrong, to crush him if he can: And so there is diverse other sins
that have many sins depending upon them, if a man be engaged in a business that
is sinful, that he might carry out his business, a great many other sins he
must commit, and so comes to fall off more and more.

Yea further, The pride of men's hearts is such, as when they 9
are once got into an evil way, it is a mighty difficult thing to keep them from
not justifying their evil: men love to justify what they have done; when they
have sinned, they will grow more resolute and violent, that all people might
think that they have not the least kind of recoil in their hearts, you think
many times when you see men mighty strong and violent in an evil way, you think
surely they are Note.
fully satisfied in it; Oh! you are mightily mistaken in that, they may be very
violent, and very strong in their way, only that they might persuade other
folk, though their own consciences tells them, that they are not satisfied; and
thus the pride of men's hearts makes them sin more and more.

And besides, If they have grown far in their sinful way, 10.
then they grow desperate, they grow into desperation, they little hope ever to
recover themselves so as before, and therefore go on more and more.

Yea, And God in his just Judgment withdraws himself 11.
from them. God withdraws those gifts and common graces that they had, and
says God, Let them go on, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

Yea, and besides Gods withdrawing, there is (...) judicial 12
Act of God upon them, To give them up to their Corruptions, and give them up
to the Devil; It Is a dreadful thing when the Church does it, but that is for the
salvation of Difference between the Churches excomumnion and Gods.
the soul, and for the destruction of the flesh; but when God delivers up one
to his corruptions, that is for the destruction of the soul: Do you rule him
(says God) because he would not be ruled. No marvel then though an Apostate
sin more and more.

Oh! stand against the beginning of sin what you can, Note.
keep a trembling frame at the beginning. Oh! had this people done so! at the
first they trembled; Oh! had they but kept that trembling heart continually, it
would have kept them from abundance of evil: And so, do not some of you
remember that there has been a hearttrembling at the very thought, of those
things that it may be some of you now practice? Oh! happy had it been for you
that you had kept your trembling frame. And you that are young beginners, in
whose heart there Young beginners.
is a trembling frame, you tremble at temptations, you tremble at the thoughts
of sin, at the first rising of corruption in your hearts, Oh keep this
trembling frame, and do not regard that boldness of spirit that there is in
some, some are always so frolic, and so bold in their way, Oh but that is a
dangerous condition for you to be in; but rather keep a trembling heart,
fearing sin, for if you lose that and begin but to tamper with some sin, if the
Devil tamper thus with you, 100. to one but when you are once gone, you will go
more and more, and never leave tumbling till you come into the pit.

And let us learn, my Brethren, to be more and more Use for the Saints.
in the ways of God, as Apostates are more and more in the ways of sin, Oh
that it were so with us in the ways of God, let us not content ourselves to do
a little for God, but still more and more, as David in Psalm 71. 14. I will yet
praise thee more and more, I will add to thy praise, so the words are in the
Hebrew: Lord, some praise thou have had in the world, Oh that I could live to
ad any thing to it, I will praise thee more and more.

And t(...) further Note is this, That Idolatry (for so Obs. 5.
it is spoken of their Apostasy more generally, but particularly it aims at
their Apostasy in the matters of worship) is a very growing sin. They have
sinned in Baal, and died, and now they sin more and more. Gross Idolatry has
grown upon men by fair pretenses, upon plausible Principles.

My Brethren, do but break this one bond in the matters The General rule of
Worship. 1. 2. The beginning of superstition. 1. 2.
of Worship, and that is this, That all worship must be by institution, I say,
all the Worship of God must be either that which is written in man's heart; or
otherwise what is in the Word by institution. If so be that men will venture to
raise any creature, beyond what God either in a work of NATURE has raised it,
or by an INSTITUTION has raised it, then begins Superstition, then begins
false Worship, I say, here is the beginning of all false Worship, to raise any
creature higher than ever Nature has raised it, or then it is raised by
Institution, do but venture upon one Ceremony to Ceremonies.
put any thing in it more than Nature, or Divine Institution has put into it,
then you know not where you shall stop. You know what a height of Idolatry
Popery is grown to, but it began fair at first. And so we were Popery.
going to most vile and abominable Idolatry, but by what steps? We had broken
the bond of binding up the Worship of God unto the Word, and bringing in men's
own reason and inventions, and for to put a Religious respect upon that which
God had never done, now do but grant that thing in the least matters, and then
you do not know whither you will run in way of Idolatry, you will run more and
more.

Oh let Reformation be to us as Idolatry is to wicked Use to Reformers.
men, let not us rest in any degrees, but still reform more and more: Idolaters
they will not stand at a stay, Oh why should they then that seek to reform
stand at a stay! It follows; And have made them molten Images of their s(...)r.

They were at great charge in making of them, and so Expos.
went on strongly in their way; though it would cost them much, yet still they
would go on strongly in their way. They made themselves Images

Tertullian in his Book of Idolatry, in the 4, 6, and 7. Tertull. de
Idolataria, cap. 4. 6, 7.
Chapters, enveighs much against the maker of any Images in way of Religion,
and says he, It Is not enough for you to say, we will not worship them, but you
must not make them. -- Of their silver.

Silver is put for their money. Silver is used in diverse Silver.
Languages for their money in general: the Calves were of Gold, but it is said
they were of Silver, because the people did contribute their money; and other
images they added to them that they made by their money; their Idolatry was
chargable to them, to avoid trouble in going to Jerusalem, and charge there in
their journey, Oh they would not go to Jerusalem to worship; but they were
willing to be at charge in their way of Idolatry.

Though Men will not have Gods service to be chargable Note.
to them, yet their own ways are chargable to them. They made them molten
Images, and Idols. The word that (...) Dolorei terriculamenta.
is translated [Idols] it signifies griefs, and those things that do terrify;
and indeed Idolatry will bring grief, and men that are of Superstitious,
Idolatrous spirits they are filled with fears many times. But this is all
according to their own understanding, that is as they thought fit themselves,
such as should be suitable to their own ends, they took the liberty to tender up
their respects to God according to their own inventions; and herein indeed
comes superstition, as I told you. Hence comes the Worship of God to be so much
corrupted: When men will interpose their own understandings, when men will
leave The Cause of corruption in Gods Worship
the simplicity of the Rule, and go their own way, when men think that the
Worship of God is not pompous enough of its self, They which do not worship God
in a Spiritual way, they will labor to make up the want of the Spiritual The
root of that evil.
part by addition of many outward things, by their own understanding; and
because they think those things in the service of God are rational to them,
they think they must be acceptable to God, and therefore wonder that any body
should be against them.

Calvin upon this very text has most notable expressions Hoc agitur de cultu
Dei, in quocessore debet quicquid est prudentiae, quicquid est rationis in
hominibus, quicquid consilij and omnes co^^um sensus; na^ si hic tantillum fib^
er(...)tunt, nibil aliud (...) am Dei cultum vitiant. Hic principiu^ est vite
colen^^ Dei, ut ^omines ^^ul^ ^ant neque permittunt sibi sapere, s(...) tantum
prele^nt aurem Deo, Hic damnat quicquid arridet judicio hominum, vel rationi.
Calv. in l c.
against men bringing in their own understandings in the Worship of God, says
he, Here is ^oken of the Worship of God, in which whatsoever is of man's
Prudence, whatsoever is of Reason must give way, Prudence and Reason must give
way to it; yea, whatsoever counsels of men, that they in a Prudential way shall
think this and the other fit, they must not judge by Sense, by Reason, by
Prudence in the matters of Worship; If they do give way to themselves in the
least degree, they do nothing but defile the Worship of God And another notable
expression he has about it, This is the very Principle whereby men must be
taught to worship God ^^ight* that they must be made Fools first themselves. It
men will come to worship God, they must deny their understandings, they must
lay down their understandings, they must not so much as permit to themselves to
be wise, and thus he heaps one upon another, these expressions, Only (says he)
let them listen to the Word of God, for this (says he) does condemn whatsoever
is pleasing to the judgment and reason of men.

Oh! God is little beholding to men's understandings in the matters of Worship,
and in the matters of Faith, those two things; the respect it may be to the man
may be somewhat the more to make such an expression to go down, that it is the
very Principle of right worshipping of God for men to be fools; and here is the
rea(...) that you have many of the Learned men of the world accounted them
fools and simple men; as heretofore the Non-conformists, were not they
accounted simple men and fools, Non-conformists.
because they would not yield to those things that were imposed upon them? yea,
we must be fools; It Is true, there is use of men's prudence and reason when once
I The use of Reason in Religion.
have an Institution to help me further to manage an institution; but for to
raise up any thing in the Worship of God beyond what I have warrant for in the
Word, there it is not enough for men to say, This is good, and what hurt is
there in it? and without this there will come a great deal of stir, and can any
man in Reason but think that this is good? I say, when we come to matters of
Worship that we must expect a presence of God in them for a Spiritual Work upon
the soul of a man, all these arguments, we must lay them aside, and there is no
use of them. Here I cannot argue for a thing that it is good, and I have need
of it, and therefore I must have it; but I may argue it is good, and I have need
of it, because there is an Institution. And there is another speech of Luther,
says he, In matters of Worship we must not regard so much what the thing is,
but who it is that commands it; do not lean to our own understandings. This for
their sin of Idolatry.

But further, They thought to carry themselves in a prudential way, but the
Lord condemns it as sottish, they thought they were very understanding in it,
yea, but it was but sottish. For it follows; All of it is the work of the
Craftsmen, they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, kiss the Calves. Text.


As if he should say, What a sottish thing is this, That when themselves put
all the excellency that the Creature Expos.
has put upon it, and yet they will worship it, and say to the men that
sacrifice, Kiss the Calves? But God challenges Worship upon this ground,
Because He is the Cause, the Supreme, the only Cause of all Excellency Himself.
From hence note,

That those that venture most upon their own understandings Obs.
in the matters of Worship, God gives most up to sottishness; I say If men will
venture to go according to their own understandings in Worship, God may justly
give them up to sottishness, and none are given up more than those that think
to be most prudential and wise, in the matters of Worship: Isa. 29. 13. says
he, Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men: What then?
Therefore I will Isa. 29. 13. Observed.
do a mervailous work among the People, even a mervailous work and a wonder;
(What Is the mervailous work, what is the wonder?) The wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid. What, they
will venture upon their own understandings in the matters of my Worship, and
they will prescribe what I should have, and they think they are very wise in
what they do; I will do a mervailous work and a wonder: (what is this?) I will
cause the wisdom of their wise men to perish, and the understanding of the
prudent shall be hid, they shall be left to sottish ways, to absurd ways, that
all that are about them shall see that they are blinded in their courses and
ways.

Oh my brethren, we do see this fulfilled at this day, those Fulfilled in
England of la. e.
that will venture upon their own understandings in Worship, how has the Lord
left them in blindness? though they were men of excellent parts in former time,
yet their parts begin to be blasted.

And observe it, you will find that more and more Note.
such men as bring in their own understandings into Gods Worship, I say, the
Lord will blast them at one time or other, so as others shall see, and take
notice of it, and stand and wonder at it. All of it the work of the Craftsmen,
etc.

All of it.] As if he should say, If there were any thing of God in it,
possibly it might be accepted, but when it is Expos.
all of man --

This may be said of many of our services; they are all Applic.
of man, there is nothing of God, nothing of the Spirit of Christ in them; no
mervel though they vanish, and we vanish in them. -- They say of them, Let the
men that sacrifice, kiss Text.
the Claves.

The old Latin has it: Sacrifice men, in the Imparative: Expos. (...). G(...)
so the Greek. In zeal to their Idols they sacrificed men. [According to which
reading the sense would be] Those are worthy to kiss the Calves that sacrifice
men. This was forbidden, Levit. 18. 21. and Chap. 20. 2. But it was done in a
perverse imitation of Abraham, who would have offered up Isaac. It prevailed
much among the Heathen. The King of MOAB as we read in 2 King. 3. 27.
sacrificed his eldest Son, that should have reigned in his stead. Tertullian
says Tertull.
(Apolog. Cap. 9.) That it continued till the time of Tiberius. Lactantius has
a story of the Carthaginians, who Lactant. Just. lib. 1. cap. 21.
being vanquished by Agathocles King of Sicily, they thought the gods to be
displeased with them, and that they might appease them, they sacrificed two
hundred of the Noblemens sons.

The place where the Jews sacrificed men, was in Tophet, in the valley of the
Son of Hinnom. Hinnom is Ge-Hinnom. In valle filioru^ Hinnom. Hinno^ (...)
Nahem, Genuat Rugijt from whence Gehenna.
drawn from a word signifying to lament, and roar. [Because of the noise of
those that were sacrificed] whence Gehenna.

Tophet, of a word signifying to beat on a Drum. Which they used not only to
drown the noise; but all the kindred of the sacrificed person did rejoice with
Tymbrels and Dances in great mirth, till the sacrifice was fully consumed. The
Hebrews are quoted by Seldom de diis spris. Cognati omnes Tympanis and Chordis
summa cum laetitia exultant quoad omniuo combust us fuerit.

But (to pass by that Interpretation and to) take it as it is read in our
Books: by these words they call upon the sacrificers and encourages them in
their Idolatrous ways.

Kiss.] The kiss is a Ceremony of Worship. Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son; but
withal it expressed their Love and Delight as well as their Homage. Herculus
his Chin, in Sicily, was worn bare with kissing, says Cicero. And if they
could not reach the Chin, then they kissed the hand in token of their Worship
of the thing: Hence Job, 31. 26, 27. If my hand has Adorare ad os
kissed my mouth. See Pliny, Lib. 28. Chap. 2. of the Ceremony of Worship. How
foolish were they, to forsake the blessed God, to worship Calves?

How should we be forward and cheerful in the Worship Applic.
of the blessed God, in coming to kiss the Son.

It is false Worship, to give Religious respect to any creature, Obs.
what ever the Creature be, by kissing, as well as by bowing to it.

I know no reason why a Book may not be set up to be Use. Against kissing the
Book in swearing.
bowed to as well as to be kissed in taking an Oath. The lifting up the hand to
the High God in an Oath, we find in Scripture, therefore that is safe.

VER. 3.
Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud and as the early dew it passes
away; as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out of the floor, and as
the smoke out of the chimny.

HERE are four Elegant similitudes to fet forth Ephraims weak vanishing
condition, Gods power Expos.
over them, the swiftness of the punishment, the violence of it, and his utter
desolation, so that his place shall not be found.

1. A cloud.] Ephraim was risen, seemed to threaten great things, overcast the
leaves [like a cloud] but upon the brightness of Gods Justice appearing, all
was dispelled. Their righteousness (chap. 6.) was as a cloud and dew [now they
shall be so themselves.]

2. Dew] The dew it seems to bespangle the grass; but the Sun rising, it is
soon dried up. Ephraims estate was beautiful, but the heat of Gods wrath
consumes all presently.

3. The Chaff.] The word signifies the smallest of the chaff, the dust of the
chaff-heap, and that abroad where (...) Gluma palea temissima
their floors were, and a whirlwind coming upon it, Psalm. 35 5. Let them be as
chaff before the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord chase them.

Oh! Many when they begin to be unsettled, to be going the Angel of God as a
messenger of wrath drives them on apace to Obs.
misery.

4. Smoke.] The smoke out of the chimney, it seems to darken the Heavens but
presently, it is scattered. The words signifies a chink or hole: Because in
Judea there were not such chimnies as we now adays use, but as it were
windows, or open places in the upper part of the house, or in the wall, as it
is this day in Norway, and Swethland, says a Learned Interpreter upon the
(...) Significat Foramen, in Judaea non fueru^t tables camini, qualibus nos
hodie ultimur, sed Feuestrae superiore part domus, vel in pavicte, quemadmodum
body in Norwegia, and Suecia, Tar(...)ov, in loc.
place. We may note hence.

The vanity of proud men. Here God compares them to Obs.
such mean vile things, persons that heretofore were so lofty. So 1 King. 14.
10. Jeroboam's house is threatened to be destroyed, as a man takes away dung
till it be gone.

Why should wicked men be feared who are thus before Use.
the Lord. Do not bless you selves in any prosperity, never think your selves
settled; for when you are in the most prosperous settled way, yet are ye but as
the cloud, yea, as the dew, the chaff, the smoke.

VER. 4.
Yet I am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt, and thou shall have no gods
but Me, there is no other Savior besides me.

THIS is spoken first by way of aggravation of their Expos. 1.
sin; as if he should say: you have thus provoked me, notwithstanding I am the
Lord thy God. I have done very great things for you and for your forefathers:
Yet,

It Is very evil to sin against great works of mercy, wherein Obs.
the hand of God has appeared plainly. When we do any thing for another
wherein we think we might gain him to our selves for ever, and he yet -- this
is very grievous.

2. It is spoken by way of encouragement. Yet I continue Expos. 2.
to be the Lord thy God, I am ready to show thee the like mercy still. This is
to break their hearts, and to provoke them to come in to the Lord. He speaks to
an Apostate people; as if he should say; Were you yet what you sometimes seemed
to be, Oh how gracious should I be to you! I am yet what ever I seemed to be to
you, why are you so perverse and untoward toward me? Jer. 2. 2. I remember the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me
in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown

I am the Lord thy God.] This should have been a strong Expos. 3
argument to obedience. When the will of God is once known (says Luther) we
are no further to dispose of See Luth. in Genesis 27.
Rights, because neither Parents, neither Lords and Masters have this Title, I
am the Lord thy God.

From the Land of Egypt.] As if he should have said, Expos. 4.
what a case had you been in, if I had not delivered you out of Egypt, from the
Iron furnace, a low, base employment? ye had been bondslaves, there you might
have spent your days in sorrow and trouble. Consider first your low estate. 2.
How your strength might have been spent. 3 When this anguish was upon you what
crying to me [and my delivering of you.] Hence note, that,

Deliverance from Egypt is a great note of Gods being our Obs.
God.

Q But how does this concern us?

A. Yes, There is a spiritual Egypt from which we have been delivered, as the
Apostle makes use (1 Cor. 57. etc) of the paschal Lamb in a spiritual sense:
The power, severity, and holiness of God appears in the delivery of his people
from Egypt; so also of us from Antichrist, as Revel. 15. 2, 3. the Church is
brought in singing the song of Moses (which the children of Israel sung for
their deliverance from Pharaob) for its deliverance from Antichrist. Pharaoh
was the Dragon in the waters, Psalm. 74. 13, 14. so is Antichrist. The City of
Zurick engraved the year of their deliverance from Antichrist, upon Pillars in
letters of Gold. -- Thou shall know no God but me. Text


That is, Effectually acknowledge, worship, serve, love Expos.
God as a God, and no other. Hence note,

That the end of Gods great work is, That he may be known to Obs.
be a God, A sincere, gracious, holy One. The knowing God to be a God is a
special part of that Worship that is due to God.

To acknowledge God to be God, is to know him in his Excellency, Majesty, and
Glory, above what is known of him by the light of Nature.

This cannot but have a mighty operation upon the heart. For,

To know God to be a God is, 1. To know him to be What it is to know God.
the First being of all. 2. The Infinite, Al* sufficient God. 3 The Fountain of
all good to his Saints.

1 This must needs gain the heart to him. 2 There is no worship of God where
this is not. 3 Where this is all follows. 4 The right knowledge of God keeps
from false worship. Gal. 4. 9. Since you know God, or rather are known of God,
how turn ye to the weak and beggarly elements of the world? [See the Jewish way
of Ceremonial worship] -- Thou shall know no God but me. This is the first
Commandment, of which Luther says, All flows from that great Ocean of the
first Commandment, and again return thither. We see the Prophets to be most
exercised in the use of the first Commandment. Hence note,

It is not good to know Idolaters worship at all: [for this is Obs. 1.
spoken in the Text by way of opposition: Thou shall know no God but me, that
is, Thou shall be acquainted with no other worship, according to that in Deuteronomy.
12. 30. Thou shall not enquire how these Nations worshipped their gods]

Therefore for those that are not grounded (And who is so grounded if it be
against the precept of God?) not to go to see it.

Again, Nothing should be known or acknowledged to have Obs. 2.
any good in it, but with an infinite distance between it and God, for so the
words also imply, Thou shall know no God but me, i. e. Nothing but with
infinite difference from me, as much as between God and the Creature, There is
none like to thee, says the Psalmist (Psalm. 89. 6. 8. and other places) there
is an infinite distance between God and every Creature. We may know Creatures
as Creatures, but nothing as God, but God.

We should know God and acknowledge God when we are in misery and straits. So
the Church, Isa. 45. 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of
Israel, the Savior. Many in time of prosperity will know God, and acknowledge
him; but when troubles come, they change their thoughts. -- There is no Savior
besides me. Text


Hence note, That God delights to manifest himself a God Obs. 1.
in the way of salvation. Jer. 14. 8. O hope of Israel, the SAVIOR thereof in
the time of trouble. Isa. 60. 16. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and
shall suck the breast of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy
SAVIOR, and they Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. Chap. 63. 1. Who is this,
that comes from Edom? -- I that speak in righteousness, mighty to SAVE. And
Act. 5. 31. speaking of Christ, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be
a Prince and a SAVIOR, for to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
There is his Glory, and there should ours be also. He might manifest himself a
God in our ruin.

Again note, That saving mercies, are great mercies. Obs. 2. Obs. 3.


Thirdly, Though God does more for us than any, yet he has not so much from us.

Fourthly, No Creature can do us any good further than Obs. 4.
God gives a saving power unto it.

Fifthly, Our faith should be exercised on God as a Savior, Obs. 5.
as such a Savior as none but he. Be strong in the Lord (says the Apostle
Ephesians. 6. 10.) and in the power of his might; if our dangers are more than any;
yet, our Savior is more than any also, 2 Samuel 22. 4. I will call upon the Lord
who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine Enemies.

Sixthly, God must be acknowledged in all salvation. Psalm. Obs. 6.
106. 21. They forget God their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt.

We should make use of all his saving mercies, to engage our hearts to him.
For, 1. God saves from such evils as none The Excellency of Gods saving.
else can. 2. He saves some from as great or greater than ever he has. 3. God
saves from all evil. 4. Without means. 5. Above means. 6. Contrary to means. 7.
None saves but by him. There is no God else besides me, a just God and a
Savior, there is none beside me. 8. God saves in all kind of ways of saving.
See 2 Samuel 22. and Psalm. 18.

But will he be such a Savior to me, in my condition? Quest.


Yes, He expresses himself thus in the midst of threats, Answ.
in that place of Isaiah now cited, and adds verse. 22, Look unto me and be ye
saved, all the ends of the earth; even then when he threatens, look up to him
as a Savior above all. God magnifies this his Title every day to some in one
kind, to some in another: Time is coming when he will magnify this to all
together saving them from all evil.

Though God does us more good than any, yet for our Obs. 1.
hearts not to be with him as with other things, this is vile.

Happy are they who have an interest in this God; if Obs. 2.
we have interest but in one man that is able to do us good we bless our selves
in it.

We are never safe but when our peace is made with Obs. 3.
God.

Unless you pray to God as a God, having all power Obs. 4.
to save, you pray to an Idol, Isa. 45. 20. They have no knowledge that set up
the wood of their graven Images, and pray unto a God that cannot save.

Then is God acknowledged as God, and worshipped as a God, Obs. 5.
when he is acknowledged and trusted in as a Savior. It is not to say God is
our God; but to rely on him as a Savior.

VER. 5.
I knew thee in the wilderness, in a place of great drought.

THE Wilderness, where there grew not one grain of Corn. And you who were so
poor in the wilderness, Expos.
depending on me for every bit of bread; yet after when you were fed, how proud
and wanton grew you? Deuteronomy. 32. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked -- then he
forsook God etc. Ezekiel. 16. 49. the Sodomites are condemned for behaving
themselves contemptuously against the poor. But these do it against God.

God evidenceth this his knowledge and acknowledgment of them as his People, in
leading them through the wilderness, by several instances and expressions; he
takes notice of this wilderness. Deuteronomy. 8. 15. Who led them through that great
and terrible wilderness; Luctus ubique pavor, et plurima mortis imago. He knew
them as peculier treasure above all people, A Kingdom of Priests, an holy
Nation. Exodus 19. 5, 6. He kept them as the apple of his eye. Deuteronomy. 32. 10. As
an Eagle bears her young ones on or wings, Verse. 11. They lacked nothing,
Deuteronomy. 2. 7. He led them with a glorious Arm Isa. 63. 12.

Now God knew them in the wilderness, 1 In respect of their sin, which he
visited. 2 In regard of their wants, Gods knowledge and conduct of the People
in the wilderness,
which he provided for.

First, They went Three days and found no water, Exodus 15 22. Then when they
found it, it was so bitter they could not drink of it, Verse. 23. Then he
sweetened it by a miracle, Chap. 16. Then in the wilderness of Sin they
complained that the whole Assembly would be slain with Hunger. Then Manna, a
rain of Manna. Then Quails, Numb. 11. Exodus 17. 2. They pitched in Rephidim, and
there was no water, so that (Verse. 4.) they were ready to stone Moses. Then
water out of the Rock is given them. But Verse. 8. Then came Amalek to fight
against them. As an even lay they were, when Moses hands hung down, Amal(...)
prevailed, but at last Joshua discomfited them Cap. 18. Jethro was sent to
refresh them, with Moses his Wife, and two sons. Chap. 19. and Chap. 20. God
gave them his Law. Miriam and Aaron contend with Moses, Numb. 12. [that God
appeases] Numb. 13. Spies being sent they discourage the People, yet God leads
them on, Numb. 16. Corah, Dathan and Abiram conspire, upon which the earth
opened and swallowed up the Rebels. On the morrow (Verse. 41.) all the
Congregation (an hundred forty and seven thousand) murmured against Moses and
Aaron for it; upon which the Plague came. They were Idolaters, Amos 5. 25. Act.
7. 43. besides the Calf, Number. 21. King Arad the Cananite fought against them,
and took some of them prisoners. Verse. 5. They loathing Manna, had fiery
Serpents sent, Verse. 22. Sion King of the Amorites coms out against them and
fights. Verse. 33. Og King of Basin fights against them. Chap. 22. Then Balac
sends to curse them. Numb. 25. The People committed whoredom with the Daughters
of Moab (upon which a plague) and went to the sacrifice of their gods at
Baal-Peor, upon which all the Heads of the People, which joined to Baal-Peor,
were hung up before the Lord. Numb. 31. They war with Midian, slay their five
Kings, destroy their Cities, Women, Children, Flocks, Thirty two thousand Women
that had not known Man, they take captive. And in this war they had not lost
one man, Verse. 29. Now,

1. From their sin that God knew, and yet destroyed them not for it. Observe,
man's wickedness, and Gods goodness. 2. From the provision God made for them.
Observe First, It Is a great mercy for God to know a man in time of Obs. 1.
distress. This is Gods way.
Men know in prosperity; But let us make God our Use.
friend, he will be a friend otherwise than men will be.

Let not us be dejected in times of trouble; that is the time Obs. 2
for God to know thee; be willing to follow God in any estate.

Gods knowing of us in distress, is a mighty engagement. Let us look back to
the times when we were in trouble. Obs. 3.


Let us know Gods Cause when it suffers, and know our Brethren Obs. 4.
when they suffer.

Gods knowledge is operative and working: It does us good. Obs. 5.
Our knowledge of God should be so too. To sin against our knowledge of God is
evil, but to sin against Gods knowing of us is worse.

VER. 6.
According to their Pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and their
heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.

YOU have formerly heard the gracious providence of God toward his people
while they were in the wilderness, I knew them in the wilderness, in the Land
of great drought. God glories much and mentions often, the care over, and
goodness to his people in the wilderness; when they had got out of the
wilderness into the Land of Canaan where there were much Pastures, they Expos.
thought themselves to be well, now they could live of themselves, they could
provide for themselves, and so they lived to themselves, and in a little time
destroyed themselves, the truth is they were in a worse condition then, than
when they were in the wilderness, for says he, According to your Pastures, so
you were filled, and then you forgot me, and therefore I Will be as a Lion to
you, and as a Leopard and a Bear.

We do not hear such terrible things against them when they were in the
wilderness.

I knew them in the wilderness, but now it is otherwise.

From the connection note first,

It Is better to want the comforts of the creature, and to have Gods Obs. 1.
care and protection, than to have abundance of the creature, and to live of
our selves. We do not love a depending life, but it is safest; many have more of
Gods presence with them, and protection over them when they are in the
wilderness, when they are in adversity, than they have when they come into
prosperity, when they come to enjoy abundance of the creatures; God knows them
when they are in afflictions, and they knew God, but when they come into
prosperity, God does neither know them so much, nor they know God so much.

Examine I beseech you, when you were low any of you, say, had you not more of
Gods presence with you Applic.
then, than you have now? did not God know you more then? did not you know God
more then? had not you more sweet communion in those times than now you have?
Oh! God made you know him by gracious visitations of his Spirit, and there were
gracious workings of your spirit toward him. Are not you grown flat, dead, and
drossie, and carnal now more than before? do not you seek greedily after the
world to fill your selves? and do not you begin to be exalted in your own
hearts? do not you begin to be puffed up? have you none of your friends so? If
you know but any of your friends that when they were lower than now they are,
knew God better than now they do, and God knew them, and there was more sweet
converse between God and them than now there is, put them in mind of this text,
I knew them in the wilderness, in the Land of great drought, but now according
to their Pastures they are filled, and their hearts are exalted, and they have
forgotten me: God deliver them from the remaining part of the text, I Will be a
Lion, and a Leopard, and Bear to them to tear them. You seldom find in None of
the Saints worse for Affliction: many for Prosperity.
Scripture any of Gods Saints worse for afflictions; give me any one example,
for my part I know not one in all the Book of God that came worse out of an
affliction than when they went in; But I can tell you of many, even of Gods
dear people that came worse out of prosperity than when they came in; therefore
it is observable in 2 Chronicles. 17. 3. it is spoken in commendation of Jeboshaphat,
it is said that Jeboshaphat walked in the first ways of David his Father; David
his Father at first was in an afflicted David.
estate, afterward in a more prosperous estate; he was hunted like a Partridg
at first, but when he came to prosperity, his ways were not so good, therefore
the holy Ghost does put a commendation upon his first ways rather than upon
his after ways. I fear it may be said so of some, that their first ways when
they were low were a great deal better than their after ways. This for the
connection. According to their Pastures, so were they filled. Text.


According to the fatness and riches of the Land when Expos.
they came into it they were filled; they fell upon whatsoever sensual content
they could enjoy to the uttermost, according to what means they had for to
satisfy the flesh. According to their Pastures.

They would improve all the means and opportunities they had for to give
content to the flesh, so that they were filled. Thus you see men that love to
live in the satisfaction of the flesh up to the height of their means,
according to all means that they have to satisfy the flesh, this way, or the
other way, they will be sure to have satisfaction if it be to be had; therefore
you shall see men that have estates, they please the flesh to the uttermost
they can think of; if they go abroad and see any thing that may give content to
the flesh, they resolve to have it if they can when they come home. According
to all the means that they have so they will have the flesh satisfied. Oh! how
happy were men if they were so wise for their souls, if according to the means
of grace we sought to fill our souls: Oh how does the Lord lead us in green
Pastures, and yet what empty souls have we!

According to their Pastures, so were they filled.

But can we say, that according to our green Pastures that God leads us in, so
are we filled? Oh! we live in green Pastures, and yet are empty. Here we see
that men regard their bodies, regard the sensual pleasures of the flesh
abundantly more than spiritual, as if there were a greater good in sensual
delights, than there is in all spiritual comforts.

According to their Pastures they were filled, they were filled; twice we have
filled, filled.

A little will serve the turn in Spiritual things for men, but they will fill,
and fill up again themselves in Note.
sensual things.

It notes the greediness of their spirits in falling upon those Contentments
they had to the flesh. When they came into a fertile Land they were filled,
they were filled; such is the nature of men that are carnal, to fall with
greediness upon contentments to the flesh, and to think on nothing but filling
themselves, filling, filling, in Psalm. 78. 29. you may see what their
disposition was, even before they came into there fat Pastures, when God but in
the wilderness granted them flesh, so they did eat (says the text) and were
well filled: so it is in your books: but it is, They were filled very much,
they were filled exceedingly, Valde, they were filled, that is the propriety of
the Hebrew phrase there; Oh! they filled themselves to the uttermost they
could. And you may see a description of the greediness of men's hearts to carnal
contentments, when they have any opportunity to enjoy them, in Prove. 23. 5.
Will thou see thine eyes upon that which is not? you have it thus in your
books, Will thou set Prove. 23. 5. Noted.
thine eyes upon that which is not? (speaking of riches) Now it is according to
the Hebrew, Will ye make your eyes to fly upon that which is not? A carnal
heart when he sees any way of enjoyment of carnal contentments, he makes his
eyes to fly upon them, to fly upon them with eagerness, there was a mighty
greediness.

According to their Pastures they were filled.

They thought of nothing but filling themselves, whereas there should have been
the mixture of other thoughts, when God brought them into their fat pastures,
there should have been such thoughts as these mixed with the enjoyment of the
comsorts that God gave them, It Is true, that we may enjoy what God gives us,
comforts, yet, but we must not only seek to fill our selves, but we are to
labor to mix these kind of thoughts with the good things that we do enjoy: As
thus now;

Here I come to enjoy abundance of good in the creature, What thoughts we
should have about enjoying outward comforts. 1.
Whence have I all this? is it not from God? They did not think of this, so be
it that they may fill themselves, like the Swine under the Acorn Tree seeks to
fill the belly, but never looks from whence the Acorns come; so carnal hearts,
they fill themselves, but never look from whence they come; whereas a gracious
heart may take the comforts of the creature that God affords, but while it is
receiving of them, it looks up to God the Principal of all.

Secondly, What do I think God aims at? God gives me abundance of the creature,
but what is Gods end? is 2.
it only to satisfy my flesh? has God no further end than this?

Thirdly, I come now to fit my self with these contentments, but what
opportunities have I by these to do 3.
good more than before? Surely these are not given me merely to pamper the
flesh, these are given me as large opportunities of service for God.

Fourthly, Now I come to enjoy abundance, What Is the rule that God has set in
the Word for the ordering 4.
of my heart in what I do enjoy?

Again, I come to have much now in the world more 5.
than before; but O my unworthiness! how unworthy am ^of these comforts I have?
unworthy of the least bit of bread, and yet my Table is furnished, and I am
filled: Oh! but carnal hearts they fall upon their dishes, and power down their
full cups, and never think of their unworthines, how unworthy they are of the
least drop of water.

Sixthly, God gives me abundance of the Creature: but 6.
what is it that makes the difference between me and others? others there are
that are empty enough, their bellies are empty, their houses empty, their
cupboards empty; but I am filled, Why should God deal thus with me rather than
with others?

Again, I come to enjoy abundance here in the Creature: 7.
But is there not danger, is there not a snare in what I do enjoy? have not I a
naughty vile heart? How if these should prove to be temptations to me to draw
my heart from God; were I not better be without them? It Is made (in the Epistle
of Jude, 12. verse.) an argument of one that is carnal and wicked, that he does
feast without fear, he falls upon what is before him and fills himself, but
without fear; whereas we should never enjoy fullness in the world, but we should
mix fear with it: these thoughts should make us fear the snare that there may
be in abundance.

Further, I have abundance; but what uncertainty 8.
is there in all these things? I have it now, but how quickly may it be gone?
these things taken from me, or I from them.

Again, I have much, and therefore I have a great account 9
to give to God of these Pastures that now I have, this Fullness that now I
enjoy will make my account to be so much the greater.

I have much, Oh but considering how little service I 10.
do for God, may not I fear that this I have it is to be my portion?

I have much, but have I not much engagements with 11.
what I do enjoy? that fullness that I have, does it not more fully engage me
unto God than others? Carnal hearts are void of these thoughts in the enjoyment
of their fullness, they care not, sobeit they can but fill themselves, how they
get what they have, or use it.

Oh my brethren, our hearts should be filled with these thoughts in our
fullness; But it is with most as we read in Isa. 56. 12. Come ye, say they, I
will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong Drink; and to morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant: there is all that they care. And
especially those fall most greedily upon carnal contentments that have been
kept short a long time. So it was here.

I knew thee in the wilderness: But according to their Pastures they were
filled; they were filled, they minded nothing but filling themselves, now they
gormundize, now they fill themselves; As it is usual with them that have lived
very sparingly and meanly before, if they come to a full diet they fill
themselves greedily more than others, so as to distemper themselves, and
occasion Plagues and grievous Note.
diseases by filling themselves greedily when they come to fuller diet than
formerly they did enjoy; when a man has fasted to starving almost, he had need
be very careful what he does when he comes to a full Table: Physicians will not
suffer men that have fasted long to eat much; It Is that which brings many
diseases in Soldiers and others, because sometimes they want much, and
sometimes they have abundance, and so they spoil themselves: As we read of
Readiness men that they fell upon the Cattle so as they did eat the blood they
were so greedy of it. Oh let us take heed of this, this should be a seasonable
Lesson to those that have known what emptiness has meant in these times, and
now they are going into their Countries again, and to enjoy their Possessions,
Oh let them take heed how they fall upon the comforts of the Creature greedily,
Oh they should rather prepare themselves before hand, and season their hearts
with those thoughts, that may keep them from the danger that there is in
fatness; and when they come to their Houses and Lands, and begin to stock them
again, they should think, Oh! what were those sins of mine when I was here
before in my house, and enjoyed fullness? how little honor had God by my fullness
before! Oh! let me now remember all my murmurings and repinings when God took
away my estate, and let me seek to make peace with God even for them; In the
time of my distress, I cried to God then, and I was afraid that I should never
come to enjoy my estate again, and has God given it to me again? Oh let me
improve it better for his Service than ever I have done. Such kind of thoughts
men should have when they come to their estates again, and not to fall upon
them, and only seek to make up all again, and think of nothing else. There Is a
great deal of danger here, God has ways to make men cast out their sweet
morsels when they regard nothing but the filling of themselves. It follows; And
their hearts were exalted. Text


This their fullness puffed them up; Pride is an ordinary disease that follows
fullness. Says an Ancient, It Is hard to be in honor without swelling; Pride is
the disease of prosperity, in Psalm. 73. 3. I saw the prosperity of the wicked,
Difficile est esse in Honor sine Tumore. Bern.
and so on, he describes their prosperity, and in the 6. verse. Therefore pride
compasses them about as a chain, violence covers them as a garment: and hence
that caveat of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded. Charge them says Why the rich and great
are apt to be high minded. 1.
the Apostle, for it is usual for men that are rich, that are full, to be high
minded. Charge them.

First, Because that these things in the world, they are great things in their
eyes, yea, they are the only good things to a carnal heart, they are his
happiness, and therefore he blesses himself in them, and that puffs him up.

Secondly, When they enjoy fullness in the world, 2.
then their lusts are satisfied, then they have fuel for their lusts, and
their lusts grows mighty high.

Thirdly, They can live of themselves and depend upon none, and this it is that
puffs them up, in Psalm. 10. 5. 3.
(speaking of proud men in prosperity) They puff at their Enemies, they care
for no body in the world, they can live of themselves; others depend upon them,
and they depend upon none, and this puffs them up.

Fourthly, They conceive some excellency in themselves, why they have more than
others, as if it were because 4
they had more excellency in themselves, and were more worthy than others; and
they are not every body, but are culd out among others as the prime and chief,
as if there were more worth in them: this puffs them up.

Fifthly, They see all others desire what they have, 5.
they see a great distance between them and others, and those that are under
them do highly esteem of them, They call the proud, happy, they have many
flatterers. They were filled, and their hearts were exalted, not only above
Note.
men, but above God. Psalm. 73. 9. They set their mouths against Heaven, and
their tongue walks through the Earth. (speaking of wicked men in prosperity)
They will speak against every one when they are high themselves, scorning at the
ways of God, and at his Saints; When is the time wherein wicked men that are
of scornful spirits, do scorn and speak most roughly against the people of God
and the ways of God, but when they are filled, when they are at Taverns and
have filled themselves with Wine and good Cheer, then they scorn, and
blaspheme, and set their mouths against Heaven, and their tongues walk
throughout the City and Country, against Parliament and all; their tongues are
free at that time, it is when they are filled. Hence that Scripture in Psalm.
35. 16. Psalm. 35. 16. Noted.
With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth: in
the time of their feasts when they were filled, then they were mockers, and
then they gnashed upon me. Oh abundance of evil is done by scorning and
contemning at Feasts, and in that respect their Wine that then they fill
themselves withal may be called by the name of that in Deuteronomy. 32. 33. Their Wine
is the poison Deuteronomy. 32. 33. Applied.
of Dragons, and the cruel venem of Asps; for as it fills their bodies with
heat, so then their spirits are filled with rage, and malice; and especially
those who were heretofore low, if They come to be filled, Their hearts are most
exalted: Oh! the sad examples we have of this at this day, many that were not
long since we know in a low and mean condition, and they have gotten places,
they have got estates and power in their hands, Oh how are their hearts
exalted! Would you ever have thought to have lived to the time to have seen
such a change in their spirits as at this day? how do they discover their pride
Notes of the pride of some new Officers. 1
now they are got up?

First, in their estrangement toward those that they were familiar with
heretofore, they go aloof off from you, they are filled, and now their hearts
are exalted.

And then Secondly, their carriage is very high and 2.
lofty, you must wait now if you would but speak to them.

Thirdly, now they need no advice or counsel; they 3
were wont to communicate themselves to you, and to be willing to hearken to
advice and counsel, yea, but they are filled now and their hearts are exalted,
as if the exaltation of their estates put more wit into their heads.

Fourthly, Now they are harsh; to those that are under 4.
them they speak harshly and ruggedly, and care not for any under them; when
they lived formerly among their neighbors then they would complain of harshness
and ridgidness of others, but since they are filled they are as harsh as any;
and so before, when they were low they cried out of oppression, but when they
come once to be in place themselves and be filled, then they go the same ways
that others go; hence that in Psalm. 73. 8. Concerning Psalm. 73. 8. Observed.
oppression, they speak loftily. If you complain of oppression, you have lofty
expressions from them; It Is spoken of wicked men in prosperity.

Fifthly, They show their pride; when they are filled they cannot beat
contradiction now as they were wont 5.
to do, they cannot endure reprehension now.

Again, Those mercies that not long since they would 6.
have highly prized, now they slight them, now they are mean things.

And lastly, All the use they make of what they do enjoy 7
now more than before, it is to get higher and higher, there is all the use they
make of all. Those that have bin low and mean in their estates heretofore, now
they begin to be filled, their hearts are exalted, and thus do they discover
the exaltation of their hearts. Oh! but this is a great and a sore evil, for so
it is rebuked by the Prophet. Oh thou that have thy heart exalted, being filled
it is a Why we should not be exalted by prosperity. 1.
sign thou have a poor, low spirit of thine own, to be lifted up with those
things that thou do enjoy.

For First, What low and mean things are they? What are they but crumbs that the
Master of the Family casts to Dogs? They are such things as make thee never a
whit 2.
the better, nor the more excellent; Indeed it is said, that knowledge puffs up
the heart, for that puts an excellency upon the man: The heart of the wicked is
little worth, let him have never so much prosperity. Those things that thou
pridest thy self in, they are no other than may be the portion 3.
of a Reprobate, and have been, they are no other than may stand with Gods
eternal hatred of thee, and Gods eternal wrath against thee: Yea, they are such
things as 4.
may come from Gods wrath, and like enough they do, and it is a sign they do
when thou art filled with them, and thereby puffed up by them, it is a sign that
there is a curs mixed with what thou have filled thy self withal. If a man comes
to a Table and eats, and then he swells presently upon it, God be merciful to
me, am I poisoned, says An apt simile
he? If thou fillest thy self, and art puffed up, it is an argument thy
prosperity is poisoned, there is the curse of God in it: Had not you rather have
the coursest diet that is wholesome, than the daintiest dish with poison in it?
Is it not better to have the Russet Coat that is not dangerous, than a Velvet
Coat that has the Plague in it? Thy condition, if thou knew it, it may be
was a great deal better before. Oh that any Considerations might prick the
bladders of men's spirits that are so puffed up with outward prosperity; Thou art
les, filled with spiritual good than 5.
before, That that is substance thou have lost, and thou art filled with wind.
Ere long what thou have must be taken 6.
away; And perhaps the right to what thou daest enjoy, it is but the right that
a Malefactor has to his supper, before the 7.
day of his execution; The evil of any one sin is a greater evil than all thy
prosperity is a good; If it does but occasion 8.
any one sin to thee, it does bring more evil upon thee than all the filling
thou have is good unto thee: Thou art filled, but oftentimes it falls out so,
that the 9.
very time for God to let out his wrath upon wicked men, it is when they are
mostfilled. We have a notable Scripture for that in the 20. of Job, 22, and 23.
Verses: In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straights: Job, 20.
22, 23. noted
It is an excellent phrase, they think they have sufficient now to live of
themselves, but in the fullness of their sufficiency they shall be in straits.
and in verse. 23. When he is about to fill his belly God shall cast the fury of
his wrath upon him. And in Psalm. 78. 29, 30. So they did eat and were filled,
for he gave them their hearts desire, they were not estranged from their hosts,
but while the meat was yet in their months, the wrath of God came upon them and
slew the f^^test of them, says the text. Oh there is no cause of lifting up thy
heart because of thy fullness that thou; have for when thou art fullest then is
the time of Gods hottest wrath to be let out upon thee, it does but prepare
thee for slaughter: How much better is it for the Beast to feed upon the Common
and live, then to be brought into fat Pasture and prepared for the Butcher?
When thou were Simile
feeding upon the Common, thou were in a way of preservation, but now thou art
come into the fat pasture it is to prepare thee for slaughter, be not exalted
in thine own heart because of thy fullness. And it may be God 10
has respect to others in thy fullness, it is not in regard to thee. And
hereafter thou may perhaps curse the time 11
that ever such an estate befell thee, curse the time for thy fullness: Perhaps
upon thy sick bed thou may lie and wish, Oh that I had kept my shop still,
and been in my low condition still, I had gone out of the world with a great
deal less guiltiness than now I am like to go out of the world withal, Oh be
not exalted because thou art full. -- Therefore have they forgotten me. Text


Proud men forget God, Psalm. 10. 4. the wicked Expos.
through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, They have
forgotten what need they had once of 1.
of me, They have forgotten what cries they sent up to me, what moans they made
before me, They have forgotten 2.
how gloriously I wrought for the helping of them, They have forgotten all
their Engagements to me, They 3. 4. 5.
have forgotten to acknowledge me, or sanctify my Name in all the good they do
enjoy, Oh this is a sore and a great evil, and yet an ordinary evil, as soon as
we have our turns served, God is minded no more, Psalm. 78. 42. They remembered
not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the Enemy; they remembered
it not: Oh! it should have been in their memory, to have Sanctified the Name of
God in their great deliverance; but when they were delivered they remembered it
not. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear you, and you shall
glorify me says God. We call upon God in the time of trouble, and God hears
us, and delivers us, but the latter part is forgotten; And they do it soon too,
in Psalm. 106. 13. They soon forgot his works, says the text, sometimes before
the work is quite accomplished, Oh! the Lord deliver us from this great evil,
shall I say, Deliver us? I may say, Not deliver us from this evil only, but out
of it, for it is upon us already; Oh! the great things that God has don for
this Land with in this six years, never since Joshua's time, or Moses's time was
there a story of Gods wonderful Applied to England.
working for a people, so as the story of this last six years will be if it be
faithfully recorded, and yet though the Lord be going on in his ways and has
not yet finished it, we have forgotten, Oh does it not appear so? what do men
look after? every man his own advantage, and own ends, and seeks to fill
themselves, minding nothing else. And what mighty haughtiness of spirit there
is in many men within this six years, Oh how have we forgotten the Lord, and
forgotten those Instruments that God has made use of for good unto us! God had
more honor from us when there was not the hundredth part done for us as now
there is, now we (as it were) shake our ears, and let God do as he will, we
hope we can do pretty well to shift for our selves; Oh! the Lord deliver this
City out of this, and from this evil of forgetting the Lord when we are
filled: You begin to have more full trading now than formerlie, now the
Country begins to be open, and they repare to the City for all: Oh the Lord
deliver this City from surfeiting by their fullness, and from this of
forgetting the Lord: Oh that we could but say, that the Lord having restored
the trading to the City, having such full trading as now they are like to have,
Oh to sanctify the Name of God more than ever they did; Oh how do you remember
God every time you see Customers come into your A Meditation for Tradesmen in
the City, etc.
Shops, every time you see the Wagons come out of the Country into your
Streets, how do you bless God, and how is God honored among you? Oh that it
were so, it is a sore and grievous evil to forget the Lord, after the Lord has
granted us fullness, it is a horrible ingratitude, as if there were nothing to be
regarded but our selves.

First, It Is against many charges that God gives beforehand to forwarn us of
it. If you read the 6th of Deuteronomy, 1.
11. Verse. and the 8. Chap. 12. Verse. you shall find there how the Lord charges
this people; When you come into the Land, and your houses are full of good
things, and you eat of the good of the Land, beware you forget not the Lord;
beware, and forget not; beware, and forget not, again and again this is
inculcated, showing how prone we are to forget the Lord in our fullness. Oh!
that those of you that providence has brought this morning, would consider of
these Scriptures, now God is beginning to come in with more fullness than
before, Oh beware that you forget not the Lord God in the midst of your
fullness, Oh! let there be as much, or more prayer in your family than there
was in former times, that you may have a sanctified use of the fullness that now
you enjoy; yea, it is worse than beastly, The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass
his Masters crib, but Israel has forgotten me. If the Ox be but fed, he knows
his Owner: Who is it that feeds you? is it not the Lord? and will you forget
him? Oh! this will lose the blessing of all you do enjoy, and your hearts will
grow very wicked beyond what you can imagine, you cannot imagine the evil that
your hearts will grow to, if you forget God in the enjoyment of that estate
that God sets you in.

And it is a sin that God knows not how to pardon: for so 2.
he expresses himself, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? Why is it
that God should say so? as if he should say, Though I be a God of infinite
mercy, yet here is a sin I know not how to pardon, why says he, when I had fed
them to the full, they committed a dultry, and they abused that fullness, Oh!
how shall I pardon thee!

And if ever you have need of God again, how will conscience be stopped? With
what face can you go to God again 3.
to seek for help, if God should bring you low, Conscience will presently say,
You were once empty and God filled you, and what honor had God from you? no,
your hearts were exalted, and you forgot God.

And it is a most foolish thing for you to do so, you depend 4.
upon God in the midst of all your fullness as much as before, every moment you
lie at Gods mercy; though perhaps you are not sensible of it, yet certainly it
is so.

A foolish thing it is then to forget the Lord, Your forgetting 5.
God will make you forget your selves, and just it may be with God to forget
you and to change the ways of his administration toward you; Oh take heed
then of being exalted, and of forgetting the Lord in your fullness.

Truly Brethren, God had rather have his people fall into Note.
any sin almost than into the sin of pride and forgetfulness of him, and
specially that of pride, Therefore you find in Scripture, That God will rather
set the Devil upon his people than to have their hearts exalted; as Paul, lest
he should be lifted up above measure he had a prick in the flesh, the buffeting
of Satan, God had rather see the Devil buffeting of his people than to see the
hearts of them to be exalted.

Yea, he had rather suffer them to fall into any other sin. Note.
Charge your souls then against this, as David in Psalm Psalm 103. 2. Urged.
103. at the beginning, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name; bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits: See what a charge he puts upon his soul, Oh my soul tho^u have
received many benefits from the Lord, and there is this deadness in thee, if
thou be but left to thy self, thou will forget the Lord, and this will be a
sore evil in thee, Oh my soul, forget not all his benefits. Oh that you would
go home and charge your souls not to forget the Lord and all his benefits; let
Husband put Wife in mind with this charge, and Wife the Husband, but especially
your selves in secret, between God and your selves, to charge your souls, not
to forget his benefits.

The more we remember God in the blessings we have, the more sweet will our
blessings be to us. You have a 6.
great many mercies, but when you forget God, you lose the very sweetness of
all your mercies; Oh! when you can see a mercy, and see the God of that
mercy, then it is sweet; when I can see a mercy, and the Fountain from whence
it comes, and whither it tends, then the mercy is sweet; Oh! therefore you
deal foolishlie in forgetting the Lord.

And the more safe you will be; 7.


And the more eminent you will be in grace, Oh what a lovely object is it to
behold a man or woman in the 8.
midest of all outward enjoyments to be Heavenly and Spiritual; I say, the
Graces of such, Oh! they glister like Diamonds, like most precious Pearls
indeed; and therefore remember the Lord in all the good things that you do
enjoy. It follows;

VER. 7.
Therefore I will be unto them as a Lion; as a Leopard, by the way will I
observe them.

There Is most dreadful expressions that here follows: God is exceedingly
provoked with the exaltation of men's hearts, and their forgetfulness of him in
time of their prosperity.

Is this the same God that spoke so of Ephraim heretofore? Is Ephraim my dear
Son? Ephraim my pleasant Child. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? my bowels
are turned within me; ever since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember
him, and my bowels are troubled within me; Is this the Lord that now will be a
Lion, a Leopard, a Bear, a tearing Lion, a wild beast unto Ephraim? What, is
this the God that heretofore carried them as Eagles do their young upon their
wings, and nourished them as the Eagle nourishes her young ones? Is this the
God that was as a Hen to the Chickin, that was as a gracious Father unto them,
to whom this people were as the dearly beloved of Gods Soul, and now God a
Lion, a Leopard, a Bear, a wild Beast to come and tear them? Is this the
merciful God? is this that God that is love and mercy it self thus to appear?
Oh my Brethren, Obs.
how dreadful does sin render God unto his creature! But all this while there is
no change in Gods heart, God is the same in himself as before; the change is in
the Creature. The Sun that softens the Wax, the same Sun hardens the Clay: the
same Infinite blessed Being that does good to his Creature in one condition,
the same Blessed, Infinite, Glorious Being is dreadful to the Creature in
another condition. With the froward, he will show himself froward; Psalm. 18.
and with the upright, upright. Therefore above all does God set himself out in
a most terrible manner here against those men that were in prosperity whose
hearts were exalted and forgot him.

My Brethren, The Lord pities men, yea, sinful men in the Obs.
time of their adversity, but when they are at the height and forget him, Oh
the anger of God is against them now above any men. I Will give you one Scripture
to show how God has regard to men in low conditions; but to tho(...) that are
fatted up in prosperity Gods anger is most against them. Ezekiel; 34. 16. 20. I
will seek that which was lost, I will bring Ezekiel. 34. 16. etc.
again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and
will strengthen that which was sick; but I will destroy the sat and the strong,
I will feed them with judgment, says he. Those that are lost, I Will seek them;
those that are broken, I Will bind them up; those that are sick, I Will heal; but
I Will destroy the fat, and the strong, I will feed them with Judgment. Oh here is
an excellent Scripture for the An observable Scripture.
comforting of the hearts of those that are in an afflicted condition. See how
God regards such: but God has not such regard to fat ones, and strong ones, he
will feed Why God deals roughly with the great and graciously with the grieded
and oppressed. 1.
them with judgment, and destroy them. The care and protection of God is more
over the lost ones, and the broken ones, and the sick ones, than the fat ones,
and the strong ones, they are to be fed with Judgment, I Will be to them as a
Lion; and the reason of this is;

First, Because their hearts are very much hardened in their sin, their sin is
grown to a height.

Secondly, Because there are so many creatures that they have use of more than
others that do cry against 2.
them, Poor people have not so many creatures to cry against them as the rich
have.

Further, They can make friends to avoid the stroke of Justice from men; but
the poor people they are more 3.
punished, therefore God takes them into his hands and deals with them more
severely.

And when Judgment comes upon them it is more observed, and therefore God to
them will be as a Lion. 4.


As a Lion. You have a parallel Scripture in Psalm. 50. 22. I held my tongue, and
ye thought I was like unto you; but consider this ye that forget God, lest I
tear you in pieces, and Why God will be as a Lion to them that forget him. 1.
there be none to deliver: their hearts were exalted, they forgot God,
therefore will I be to them as a Lion.

First, A Lion, is the most terrible creature, Amos, 3. If the Lion roar, the
Beasts tremble. Oh my Brethren, the threats of God should be to us as the
roaring of a Lion, and our hearts should tremble at them.

Secondly, None can take away the prey from a Lion, 2.
Mich. 5. 8. as a young Lion among the flocks of Sheep, who if he go through,
both treads down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver; none can
deliver out of Gods hand.

Thirdly, A Lion is strong and crushes the whole compages 3.
of a man's bones at one crush; Alas man, what is he? In Job, 4. 19. he is
crushed before the Moth, much more before a Lion then; Oh then much more before
the Lord God when he comes to be as a Lion.

Fourthly, It is observed of the Lion, that she will 4.
narrowly mark any one that wounds her, if there were hundreds of men together,
and one did but wound it, or shoot at it, or do any thing to it, she will be
sure to mark that man. Oh! the Lord mark out those that sin against him, and
that wounds his Name, they must not think to escape among others. The Lords eye
is upon them particularly.

And it is observed of the Lion, that she sleeps but little, 5.
and with her eyes open; so the Lord: As he that keeps Israel neither
slumbereth nor sleeps, so he that destroies his enemies does not slumber nor
sleep.

Further, The Lion will fall upon no creature except 6.
it be in hunger, or be provoked: the Lord though his wrath be terrible as a
Lion, yet he is not so ready to fall upon his creature, it must be from some
special end that he has, or some provocation that he has, but then he falls
terribly indeed.

Again, It is observed of the Lion, that if you do but 7
fall down on the ground, and submit and yield, the Lion Salis est prostrasse
Leoni,
does use to pass by, and will not tear and rend where there is an humble
submission to him, whereas other creatures will. Oh thus God is a Lion
terrible, but yet only to those that stand out against him.

And the Naturalists observe of the Lion, that it cannot 8.
endure to be looked asquint upon by any; thus it is with the Lord, the Lord
loves no squint-eyed Christians, I mean none that have by ends of their own,
the Lord loves uprightness in our ways and dealings.

And lastly, They say of the Lion, that it is a great enemy 9
to Apes, and Welves; so is God to Flatterers, and Tyrants. Thus God is
compared a Lion. 1. 2. (...), etc. [sicut pardus in via Assyriorum vulgat. So
Hieron.] Why the Loco^pares himself to a Leopard. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 37.
Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 23. Scalig. Exerc. 208.


Secondly, To a Leopard. And as a Leopard by the way will I observe them.

The Seventy read the words otherwise, By the way of the Assyrian, say they.
And indeed the Hebrew word that is here translated observing, is very near to
that which is Assyrian.

The she Leopard it all one with that they call Panther; And,

First, They say, it is so fierce, that presently it flies in the eyes of a
man. I Will be a Leopard, I Will fly in the very faces of such; Oh! such manifest
much pride in their faces, and I Will fly in their very faces, says God.

Secondly, The Leopard is a very swift creature, Hab. 1. 8. so the Lord will
swiftly come against wicked and ungodly men, as a Leopard, swiftly, and
overtake them.

Thirdly, A Leopard to watch his prey, is very subtle to observe his fit times
and opportunities to fall upon 3.
the prey; so you have it in the text, As a Leopard will I watch them; Oh this
set: out much of the fearful wrath of God against wicked men: you have the
description in Jer. 5. 6. A Leopard shall watch over their Cities. I say
there is much of Gods wrath in this, it is very terrible, the Lord sets his
infinite wisdom on work to watch fit times and opportunities for to let out his
wrath upon ungodly men. I Will watch over them for evil, that we have in another
Scripture threatened; Oh; those are in a sad condition that the Lord watches
over them to do them evil: God watches over his people for good; But such as
when they are fled, exalt themselves, and forget the Lord, God watches over
them for evil; they should be destroyed soon, but says God, I have a fitter
time than now wherein I Will get my self a greater Name, wherein it shall be
worse for them; In due time shall their feet slide; this is the reason why men
live so long in their prosperity, and go on and satisfy their wills, Because
God is watching over them, and his time is not yet come.

Further, It is observed of the Leopard, that when it comes upon its prey, it
leaps upon it suddenly: and so does the Lord to ungodly men, he comes in a
sudden way and leaps upon them; and therefore you must not think that you are
as well because you are in as safe a condition as you were a year since, or
seven years since; It is as well with me (says one) as it has been with me in
all my lifetime; what then? you may be never a whit the further off from
dangers, for the way of God in bringing his wrath, it is sudden many times.

Lastly, It is observed of the Leopard, that sometimes it will sleep a very
long time together, it is said to sleep three days together; but after it
awakes it is more fierce than before: And so the Lord, though sometimes he may
be patient toward sinners, yet when he comes to awake out of his sleep (as he
speaks of himself, Psalm. 78. 65.) he is more terrible.

VER. 8.
I will meet with them as a Bear bereaved of her whelps, and will rent the caul
of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion: the wildbeast shall
tear them.

THE Third Creature is the Bear: I will meet with them as a Bear bereaved of
her whelps, etc. Aelian. lib. 5. cap. 14. Plin. l. 8. c. 36


This Creature (you know) is very fierce and terrible too; therefore we read
in the 2d of Kings, that there were two she Bears came out of the wood and tore
in pieces forty two Children. Prove. 17. 12. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps
meat a man, rather than a fool in his folly: She is fierce at all times, but
above all if she be robbed of her whelps: As it is observed that there is no
Creature loves her young ones more than the Bear, and yet the mo(...) deformed
of any; and an emblem it may be of a man that loves his own deformed fancies,
it is a Note that one Interpreter Note.
has upon it: Oh how will the Lord be in an holy rage, if his Children be
wronged! if you do any hurt to his own Children, that has his Image in them,
when the instinct of Nature is so in this Creature, the Bear, to be in such a
rage when she is robbed of such ugly things as her whelps are. 2 Samuel 17. 8.
says Hushai to Absalom, Thou know thy father and his men, that they be
mighty men, and they be chafed in their fury, as a Bear robbed of her whelps in
the field. Thus the Scripture often discribes exceeding fierceness, and rage,
to the fierceness of a Bear bereaved of her whelps, therefore says he here, I
will rend the very caul of their bearts, and there will I devour them like a
Lion. Here Verse. y. (...) Verse. S. (...)
he mentions the Lion the second time: The word in your Books is the same, but
in the Original it is somewhat different.

It is observed of the Lion when he comes upon the prey (because it is named
here the second time) that it The Lyon's property.
rends the body asunder, and loves to suck the blood and the fat that is about
the heart, and as for other parts of the body, except it be in very great
hunger, it leaves them for other beasts to prey upon, but the heart, and the
blood and the fat that is about the heart that the Lion loves to suck: and
therefore says God here, I will rent the caul of their heart, and there will I
devour like a Lion.

Luther has an excellent Note upon this, says he, The Lord here will do as a
Lion does, he more immediately Luthers Observation on the place.
will strike out their hearts, and punish them with spiritual Plagues and
Judgments, and as for their estates and bodies he will leave them to other
beasts and they shall plague them and punish them that way: they had a film
upon their hearts (says he) and instructions could not get to their hearts;
but God will tear that caul, will tear that film from off their hearts that
kept off instructions. Oh! let us take heed of this film of our hearts that
keeps out the Word of God, take heed of that for ever, for God has ways to
tear this film from off thy heart.

As I remember Bernard says concerning his Brother, when he gave him many good
instructions and admonitions, and his brother was a Soldier and did not mind
Bernard his speech to his Brother.
them; he puts his fingers to his sides, and says he, Oh! one day a speer
shall make way to this heart for instructions and admonitions to enter. So I
may say to such whose hearts have a film upon them, that whatsoever the
Preacher says, it cannot get in, God may justly come and tear the film from
off thy heart that keeps out the Instructions of God. And Arias Montanus has a
Arias Montan.
Note further upon this, of sending the Plague upon their hearts, and to leave
their estates and comforts to the Assyrians. And the wild Beasts shall tear
them.

Why? Did he not name wild beasts enough before? There was the Lion, and the
Leopard, and the Bear, and Expos.
the Lion again, and yet he comes over again with wild Beasts; as if he should
say, if there by any terror, any dreadfulness in any wild Beasts whatsoever,
there is that in my wrath, if you escape one wild beast another shall tear you,
and that is the reason that the Bear is added to The Bear,
the Lion and the Leopard, because the Bear runs up a tree so much, which the
others do not; and now he comes to all wild Beasts, put them all together and
my wrath is as fierce as them. And this is one excellent meditation from hence,
That put all the dreadfulness of all Obs.
creatures in the world together, and all that, it is in the wrath of God. As
put all the good things that are in all creatures together, all this is in the
Love and Mercy of God; so put al things that any way may bring any torments or
tortor to us, and the quintessence of all this is in Gods wrath, The wild
Beasts shall tear them.

Lyra thinks that this Prophecy was fulfilled when they were carried captive,
and in their journey many Lyra.
died, and so they were cast into fields and devoured by wild Beasts: and it is
likely it may be fulfilled in part so: as usually when Soldiers carry an Enemy
captive, Why if they be sick, let them die, and if they die, throw them into a
ditch, there is all they care for them: and so it was with this people, that the
Lord though he knew them in the wilderness, and his protection was over them,
yet now to forget them, and lets them be carried into captivity and cast to
wild beasts, and so their carcasses was torn.

And some think that the expression of Gods wrath by these Beasts, has
reference to the four Monarchies, Other Interpreters upon the place.
which God would make use of to be very terrible to his Saints. In Dan. 7. you
shall find the four Monarchies of the world, the Babylonian, the Persian, the
Grecian, and Roman Monarchies set forth in the same manner, as here the holy
Ghost sets out the wrath of God against Israel; for the truth is, Those things
that we have here in Hosea were to set forth Gods ways to his people in
aftertimes, not only when they were to be carried captive. In Dan. 7. 3. there
appeared four great Beasts, the first li(...) Lion, by which was signified the
Babylonish The Text parelleld with Dan. 7, 3.
Empire, the second like a Bear, by that the Persian, the third like a Leopard,
and that is the Grecian, for Alexander was as a Leopard, exceeding swift, all
his exploits he did in twelve years: he was but thirty three years old when he
died.

And moreover, they observe of the Leopard (which has the name from a Panther)
that it smells exceedingly, Panthera, hinc Leopardus. Arist. Histor. Animal.
lib. 9. cap. 6.
the very body of it smells sweet above all Beasts, and so it does invite the
Beasts to it; and so it was said of Alexanders body, that it had a sweet smell
with it: And then the fourth being the Roman Empire, mark how that is set out,
just as Gods sets out his wrath, he does not Note.
name any particular Beast, but the wild Beast, this is dreadful, terrible, and
strong, exceedingly, and it had great iron teeth, it devoured. and broke in
pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it, and it was diverse from all the beasts that was before it, and it had ten horns: you know now that that was
divided into ten Sleid. de 4. Imperijs lib. 3.
Kingdoms, or ten sorts of Civil Governments at several times.

This is the Roman Empire, the power of whom Antichrist was to have, by both
whom the Lord would exercise his people, and be very terrible to his people,
especially those people of his that were Apostatizing people, that would
worship him according to their own ways, God would be thus terrible to them
where ever they lived, under any of the former Empires, they should have God
either as a Lion, a Leopard, a Bear, or like this dreadful Creature at the last
unto them.

Oh but you will say, Why do you speak thus? Or it Object.
may be people would speak thus to the Prophet, Oh why do you speak of God in
this terrible manner? Is not our God a gracious God, and a merciful God? why
then will you render God thus terrible?

Why says the Prophet, then comes in, Answ.


VER. 9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.

OH! do not find fault with the dreadfulness of God, that God appears thus
dreadful to you, and do not you blame the Ministers of God that they do render
Expos.
God in this dreadful manner before you; though it is true, that God appears in
a way ready to destroy you, bu(...) the Lord yet is infinite holy, and blessed,
and a God of mercy and goodness in himself, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, thou may thank thy self for all this (...) many of you when you hear
the terrors of God set before God to be preached as Terrible.
you, perhaps your hearts rise against them, and your spirits do exceedingly
distaste such things as those are, and why do Ministers make God appear to be so
terrible to people, when as he is such a merciful and gracious God? Oh! rather
lay thine hand upon thine own heart and say, God indeed is thus gracious and
merciful, but it is through my wickedness that makes God appear so terrible, the
judgments of God are called, strange things, it is because that God has not
such delight in the execution of wrath, in appearing like a Lion, a Leopard,
and a Bear; It Is that that pleases the heart of God to appear as a Father to do
good to his people, Oh! but thou have destroyed thy self.

And this is a main point indeed, that sinful people should charge themselves
with all the evil that does befall Obs.
them, they destroy themselves, Oh! this it is that will be the aggravation of
men's judgments another day, that they are the cause of all the evils they
suffer. You may think to put it off to God and say, Oh how dreadful is Gods
Justice! but God knows how to put off all upon your selves, and the destruction
of sinners will appear to be from themselves, and God will clear it up to all
the World, before Men and Angels, and will clear it up unto their Consciences:
The damned in Hell shall not be able to speak against Gods Justice at all, but
they shall be forced to charge themselves with all the evil that is upon them:
Oh! it was through this wretched, and vile, wicked heart of mine, God was not
wanting to me in any means of good, but I had a rebellious heart, and I have
brought all this evil upon my self, I have destroyed my self. O Israel, thou
have destroyed thy self.

Destroyed himself! did not God in the words imme(...) Expos.
(...) before say, that he would meet him as a Bear that is bereaved of her
Whelps, and would rend the Caul of their hearts, and would be as a Lion to
them, and a Leopard? and yet O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self!

Though God execute severe wrath, and makes use of instruments of wrath against
a people, yet their destruction is to be attributed Obs.
to themselves, Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, thou may thank thy
self for all this.

The reading of the words I find to be somewhat different from what you have
them in your books, Calvin Perdidt te Israel. Calv.
and many others read it. It has destroyed thee, Israel.

And in the old English Translation, wherein Beza's [the Geneva] Notes are,
there it is, One has destroyed them, so the word may be read, so as it must be
made up with somewhat else;

Either One has destroyed them, or It has destroyed them, or Somewhat has
destroyed them; as if God should say, it is not I that have destroyed them, but
as if somewhat else had done it.

Tremelius makes it up thus, Thy King has destroyed thee. For so the words
will bear, to read it to be made up Perdidit te Rex tuus. Trem.
with what the text and the dependence of other passages in the Prophet may
help us to, has destroyed us (so are the words) has; what has? why your King
has dedestroyed you, says Tremelius? Says the Hebrews, (most Vitulus tuus.
Rabb.
of them) your Calf has destroyed you, your Idols have destroyed you. Aben
Ezra, your fained comforts has destroyed you. And Drusius he reads it
Interogatively, Who Consolatio fictitia. Ab. Ezr. Corrupit te. Drus.
has destroyed thee? Your fullness, of which verse. 6. or your own heart and
wickedness has destroyed you. The Greek thus, (...)? Who shall give help to
the corruption of Israel? so that though the words be read so diversely, yet
that wherein most agree, it comes to the same effect as you have them in your
books, Your own wickedness has destroyed you, your s(...) ungodly, Idelatrous
living, forsaking God and his (...) putting confidence in an arm of flesh, that
has destroyed thee. In Me is Thine Help.

Those words are somewhat different in the Original from what you have in your
Books; for there are two Inn's, In Me, In thy help, so it is in the Hebrew. And
you shall observe it, that in your Books [Is] has another (...)
character, which notes that it is not directly according to the Original, In
Me, in thy help.

Now (in me) says Learned Drusius upon the text, I Ego in auxiliotuo, and
auxiliu^tuum est in me. Drus.
am in thy help, and thy help is in me, therefore there is two Inn's, In me, In
thy help, that is, I am in thine help, and thine help is in me; so in a way of
elegancie he expresses it: And it seems to be according to the intention of the
holy Ghost, Whatsoever help thou have, I am in it, and Expos.
thy help it is in me, In me is thy help.

And Pareus he read it, Against thy help, and so supplies Pareus. Quod in me in
auxiliatorem rebellasti.
the word, Thou have rebelled against thy help, Oh thou have destroyed thy
help; Why? Because thou have rebelled against thy help: And the words in the
Original will bear this, to be read, against thy help.

But the other more full, according to the general stream of Inerpreters, and
according to the words, Thy help is wholly in me, and I am wholly in thy help.

Thou have destroyed thy self, but thy help is wholly in me. That shall suffice
for the reading of the words.

Now for the several Truths that are to be here held forth to us out of the
words.

First this, Men would fain put off from themselves to God Obs. 1.
what evil is upon them. Men naturally are loath to charge themselves with the
evil that coms upon them, It Is their ill-hap, their ill-fortune, their
ill-lock; or they could not help (...) they did what they could, and so think
to (...)ll to God; it is for want of means, for want of this or that thing that
God did deny to them, it is because God put them into such and such a condition,
but never come to charge themselves: but the Propet speaks here in a
compassionat way, Oh Israel (says he) never stand charging it upon God, thou
have destroyed thy self.

Secondly, God knows how to turn all the evil upon our Obs. 2
selves, God knows how to right himself; Though we may think to lessen our evil
by putting it upon God, God will turn it all upon our own heads, and make it
out to all the world that we were the cause of all the evils that were upon us,
both temporal evils, and all the evil that shall come upon those that shall
perish eternally, it will be One work of the day of Judment.
one of the great works at the day of Judgment, To make it out to men and
Angels, that all the misery that comes upon the damned it is from themselves,
and their Consciences will acknowledge it, and God will be cleared before all; it
will be found that the cause of man's perdition it is not the Decree of God,
Gods Decree it damns none, 1 Gods Decree damns none. What it is.
It is their Sin that damns them, not the Decree. The Decree of Reprobation it
is but the leaving of men to be dealt withal in a way of Justice: whereas says
God, here is a company I am resolved to magnify my Grace upon to all eternity,
The Decree of Election.
Whatsoever comes between to hinder it, I am resolved that these shall be the
subjects for me to exercise my Grace on toal eternity, that is Election: But
there are others that I will have to a way and course of Justice, they shall have
what they earn, and no otherwise; so that the Decree is not the cause of men's
damnation, their sin comes in between that and their damnation, so that they
destroy themselv(...).

Secondly, It Is not the infusion of any evil into them. You 2.
will say, (...)n comes in between Decree and Damnation: But how comes sin in?
Certainly not by any Infusion from God, (...)t comes in by man himself, man
himself is the author o(...).

Thirdly, It is not by any coaction. You will say, Though 3.
sin is in men for the cause of it, yet men cannot help it, man cannot but sin.
Now to that; First, God made man in such a condition, that he might not have
sinned, and though there be a necessity, that man fallen cannot but sin, yet it
excuses not this necessity, He sins as freely as if he could do otherwise. Men,
though it is true, through Note.
their fall they cannot do that that is good, they cannot but sin, Eyes full of
Adultry that cannot cease from sin, as the Apostle says of some, yet they sin
as freely as if they had power to keep from sin, It Is that that pleases their
wills, it is that that is suitable unto them, It Is true, that the Saints in
Heaven they cannot but glorify God, but yet they glorify God with freedom
too, they are so set in an estate of glory, as they cannot sin, but yet they
honor God freely, that is, They do that that is suitable to their own spirits in
the honoring of God; if so be that there be a necessity of sinning from man's
fall. Yea, 2. From a judicial act of God in giving men over to sin, yet that is
but in a way of punishment for former sins, and they bring this upon
themselves, so still they destroy themselves. Every sinner that perishes,
murders himself. And all that are damned eternally, they all of them are Self
murderers, this is a grievous thing, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self.
The more there is of Self in men's destruction, the more grievous is their
condition; It would make our hearts to pity any Fowl that should be shot with
an Arrow that was feathered from her own body: all the Judgments of God, all
the Arrows of the Almighty that come against sinners, they are a it were
feathered by that that comes from sinners themselves, they are the cause of
their own evils: The moreself in sinners destruction the more hard is our
condition.

As First, When men do so bring misery pon themselves Wherein Self appears in
sin. 1.
without any temptation, the less temptation, the more self in any thing, and
some destroy themselves so, it comes merely from themselves without any
temptation.

Secondly, When men's sins are plotted sins, contrived 2.
sins, (...)he more plotting and contriving about sin, the more art thou the
Author of thine own evil or destruction.

Thirdly, When men sin, and yet are warned beforehand 3.
of their sin, they are told beforehand of the evil yet still are wilful in it,
and will go on in it, they may thank themselves for their destruction.

Fourthly, When men notwithstanding they are often 4.
stopped in the way of their sin, and though God does many times come in the way
of his providence, and in his Word to stop them in their way of sin, and yet
still they will go on, thank thy self if thou be undone.

Fifthly, The more means they have to the contrary, 5.
the more enlightenings they have, the more drawings of the holy Ghost they
have to draw them from their sin, and yet still will go on.

Sixthly, When men's sins are of that nature, that 6.
they do not only deserve their destruction, but they do work their
destruction; all sins deserves it, but some sins works it: as drunkenness works
diseases in men's bodies, brings them to Poxes, and Fevers, and so they destroy
them, their very sin destroies them: and so some others might be named.

Seventhly, When men shall presume to venture further 7.
in any danger than they can help themselves out of, they think they will go
but so far, and so far, and so they venture further than they can help
themselves out of; they destroy themselves.

Now this evil of Self destruction is so much the more An Aggravation of
selfdestruction.
grievous, when men destroy themselves in things that they most bless
themselves in, in things that they do most seek themselves in, they most
glorify themselves in, I mean, in which they do most glory, and in which they
do promise to themselves greater good, if this proves to be their destruction,
it is so much the more grievous.

Oh! it is a sad thing to be a self-destroyer, for what 1.
pity can there be? Who will pity a man or woman that is the cause of all their
own evil, wilfully brings it upon themselves? You will say, Thank your selves,
who will pity you? Oh! this will be the condition of all that perish; Neither
God, nor Angels, nor Saints shall pity them: neither the Father out of whose
loins they came Note.
shall pity them, nor the Mother out of whose body, for they shall see that
they have undone themselves.

And besides, Oh the extreme vexation that there will be in men's spirits, when
they shall be convinced of this, 2.
when the Lord shall present to them all the means they have had, and all the
mercies they have enjoyed, so that their consciences shall fly in their faces
and tell them, Oh you may thank your selves for this, it was that wretched heart
of thine that thou have so talked of, I told you of this before, Oh! that
pride, and that hypocrisy, and that Self seeking, and that falsness of thine
has brought thee to all this. Oh this will be an eternal vexation, it will be
the matter for the worm to gnaw upon in Hell hereafter, Oh! that we have
destroyed our selves!

And besides, God will revenge this upon men: for no man has the power over
himself; thou destroyest one 3.
of Gods creatures in being a self-murderer, thou shall be punished for
destroying thy self. Because they have not the dispose of themselves, they are
Gods Creatures; And here it is a greater sin for a man to murder, Himself, than
his Father or Mother. It was a Speech of Austin that way, Austin.
It Is a greater sin than paracide, to be a self-murderer, and the reason he
gives is this, For says he, the nearer any one is to one, the greater is the
sin of murdering that one; As Note.
it is a greater sin for me to murder a kinsman than a stranger, It Is a greater
sin to murder a brother than a kinsman more remote, than yet higher, a greater
sin for me to murder a father then a brother, but then it is a greater sin for
me to murder my self than my father, Why? For I am nearer my self than my
father: and so the (...)is greater for any one to lay violent hands upon ones
self, than upon another: You think it a horrid thing if the Devil should come
with a temptation, Go and take a halter and hang up your mother that bore you,
or take a knife and cut your fathers throat; but when you are tempted to murder
your selves it is a greater sin. Self-murder it is a great evil, and yet all
people in the world that perish are self murderers, when we do but hear of a
man that hangs or drowns himself, we think it is a very sad thing; now when you
look upon wicked men going on in the ways of sin and destruction, look upon
them as so many men running to drown themselves, and plunge themselves into the
bottomless gulf, and as so many men cutting their own throats, and hanging
themselves, for certainly so they do.

Then learn we to charge our selves of all the evil that is upon Applic. 1. To
Persons
us, do not put it off, neither to God nor the Devil so much, but charge our
selves still, for certainly we cause more evil to our selves than all the Devils
in Hell can do, All the Devils in Hell could not undo us, if we did not undo
our selves; we are ready to charge it upon wicked Note.
men, or temptations of the Devil, and if not so, then upon God; for so you do,
when any man or woman thinks to excuse his sin thus, God knows I do what I can;
that is as much as if you should say, for my part I am free of any evil that
comes upon me, if I perish I am free, I do what I can, and it is because God
does not give me grace, thus you put it from your selves to God: Men's Excuses.
No, learn to charge your selves of evil; a tender heart will take even that
which is the Devils to himself, and a carnal heart will put off that which is
from himself to the Devil: Observe the difference between one that has a
tender spirit, and another; when any temptation of the Devil comes, that are
indeed the Devils rather than his own, he presently charges his own heart, Oh!
what a wretched vile heart have I! when as it may not be it, but mere
suggestions and temptations of the Devil and not the steam and filth of his
heart, but he does judge his heart from those temptations, and thinks it is
nothing but the uncleanness and filthiness of his heart: but you shall have
another man that has a most filthy wicked heart, and there comes most
abominable steams which break forth into filthy diseases, and though it comes
altogether from himself, yet says he, Oh the temptations of the Devil does
lead me aside, and I cannot tell how to resist him, it is from temptations,
it is from thy self, from that wicked unclean heart of thine, and were there no
Devils in Hell at all, thou have the seeds of all sin in thy heart, it is from
thy uncleanness.

Oh! Let Us learn to be afraid of our selves, and to pray to God to be delivered
from our selves, Better to be given 2.
up to the Devil than to ones self. You know the incestuous person was
delivered up to Satan, but it was for the destruction 1 Cor. 5.
of the flesh, and the saving of his soul; but when one is given up to himself,
it is for the damning of his soul: then, that is no way for to save ones self to
be given up to himself: Thou have destroyed thy self.

And my Brethren, we have cause to think of this point 2. Applied to England.
very seriously, in another notion, in respect of the Kingdom and Nation;
certainly if ever this Kingdom be destroyed, it must needs be written for the
Generations to come, Here Is a Kingdom, a Nation that has destroyed its self.
Certainly we cannot say it is from God, if we perish, what God will do with us
we know not, but truly, this we may plainly see, That if God leaves us but a
little Note.
more to our selves, we are in a very fair way to destroy our selves, and that
after God has wrought so for us, God has wrought like a God for us, but we,
how do we deal for our selves! like men shall we say? Oh no, like brute-beasts,
if men, mad men, men that are appointed to destruction. If we be destroyed, it
will be the saddest story that ever was in the world against a people, if so
be that at length we should perish after God has done so much for us, truly
now God has wrought like a God to deliver us from our common Enemies, God had
need to Note.
work as much for us like a God to deliver us from our selves: great has the
works of God been in deli^vering of us from the rage of those that we thought
intended to destroy us, and surely did: Well, now God has done such works, if
God should say, Well, I have done my work, I have delivered you from those you
were afraid of, and now I will leave you to your selves, Oh! we had cause to
fall upon our faces, and say, O Lord, do not so, for it had been better that
they had destroyed us: For if Note.
thou should leave us to our selves, our destruction would be a more bitter
destruction. Do not we see how fast we run toward destruction, being but a
little left to our selves, what a perverse spirit is there now among our
selves? We say sometimes of the Prelates, Oh the hand of God is against them;
how they brought themselves into a snare? Now they may stand and look upon us,
and even laugh almost at us, and say, Well, let them alone, as we speak of
some, Give them line enough and they will quickly hang themselves, Let them
alone and they will fall out one with another, and destroy one another, they
will quickly Note
ruin themselves if they be let alone. Oh we have as much experience of the
vanity of men's hearts, and the folly, and pride, and hypocrisy, and
stoutness, and frowardness of men's hearts, as ever there was experience since
the world began. Who could ever have thought this five or six years ago? if
this could have been presented as it were in a Map unto us, Oh you shall be in
great dangers, you shall have mighty enemies rise and ready to swallow you up,
but I will appear and work for you, I will put forth my glory, the right hand
of my power and excellency shall appear for you, and when all this is done,
You shall undo your selves, and out of your own selves Note.
shall be your ruin, even from those that you trusted in much, and those that
you much applauded, they shall be cause of the A Prophecy.
evil, yea, And even you that now think your hearts are so right, and have
said, Oh! If God would but deliver us, how Note.
we would magnify his Name! you shall be the cause of the evil of the Kingdom.
Had any said so of some, that we have cause to have our hearts shake within us
when we think (as the Prophet did of Hazael) you shall do thus and thus, they
would have been ready to answer you, What, are we dogs? are we dead dogs that
we should do such things? Well, the Lord deliver us from our selves. In Me is
Thy Help.

We can easily destroy our selves, but can we save our selves? A Child can
break a Glass that all the men in the Country cannot make it up again. Every
fool may Simile
do mischief to himself, yea, and to others, but can he help? it is God only
that is the help of his People, it is not means that help, but God; yea, it is
that that God does much glory in, To be accounted the cause of all good; he
would have all evil cast upon men, but al good from Himself, even present good,
and eternal good he would have attributed to himself. Inde sequitur,
Praedestinationem, Vocationem, and Gratiam; non esse ex praevijs
praedestinatorum meritis; sed ex Deo praedestinanter, vocanter, gratia sua
praedestinatos praevenicute; haec enim sunt AVXILIVM Dei. Cornel a Lapide in
loc.


In the reading of this Scripture, I find a very strange Expression of one
Commenting upon it, that one would think had some knowledge of the freeness of
Gods Grace and Goodness, and yet a Jesuit. [In me is thy help] Hence it follows
(says he) That Predestination, Vocation, and Grace, do not come from the
foresight of the Merits of those that are Predestined, but from Gods
Predestinating, Calling, Preventing with his Grace: These things are the help
of God: even from the mouth of a Jesuit we have this, acknowledging sometimes
in their Writings, and when they are serious, that neither Predestination, nor
Vocation, nor Grace comes from any forefight of what man would do, but only
from Gods Predistinating, Calling, Preventing with his Grace, and this is the
help of God, all good it is in God, both for the present, and our eternal good.

It was a speech of Augustine, God does many good things Multa bona facit Deus
in homine, quae non facit homo; nul^la facit homo, quae Deus non facit, us
faciat homo. August.
in a man that a man does not himself, but there are other things that God
works in man; but (says he) Though he works them (...) him, and man does them,
yet it is God that does them. This point we must not speak at large to, but
pase it presently, for we met with that before in the Prophecy, where it was
said, God was the only Savior. In Me is thy help.

In me] That is, Thy continued help; not only help Expos.
for the present, but whatsoever help thou have continued it is all in God.
Isa. 33. 2. Be thou their Arm every morning, our Salvation also in the time of
trouble; not only their help for the present, but they need still a continued
supply and help every morning. But further; In Me is thine help, though thou
have destroyed thy self.

Observe, There Is no misery that man can bring himself to Obs.
here in this world but there is help in God for it: though thou have destroyed
thy self, yet in me is thine help, there may yet be help in God; As if God
should say, I do glory in it, to be an helper.

It is God glory to help men in misery; let it be ours.

It Is the glory of many men to destroy, to do mischief; Use 1.
but it is the glory of God to be an helper.

Says Luther upon the place, I desire to defend thee, to Cupio te detendere,
te servare, hoc vere esse, Deum esse. Luth. in loc.
preserve thee, this indeed is to be a God says he: To be an helper, God
glories in this, that he is a God for this end, to be an helper. Oh that we
could account it our glory, to be helpful unto others.

Let us also look upon God in this his Glory, and make Use. 2.
him the Object of our Faith in times of distress, let us not lie vexing and
fretting under our misery, b(...) ^ift up our eyes to God that is the helper,
let no want of means, no unworthiness in us cause our hearts to sink, those
despairing temptations that says to us, There is no help in God, they are very
sinful at any time, let the condition be never so bad.

You will say, I am a wretched creature, I have undone my self. Quest.


Well, though thou have, yet such kind of thoughts as Answ.
these, to say, There is no help in God, they are wicked and sinful. God
accounts it his glory to help men even when they have destroyed themselves.
There is a time indeed when there will be no help for sinners; but for the time
in this world, we may say as Shechaniah, in Ezra, 10. 2 Yet now there is hope
in Israel, concerning this thing. Oh A useful Scripture.
make use of that Scripture when thou see thy self sink down even to the very
gulf, Oh yet there is hope in the God of Israel for this very thing. Suppose my
condition be worse I think than any in the world, yet you know, it has not
been known what God has laid up for them that love him, there is help in God.

Yea, But whether he will help or no?

Do but carry it now in this notion, That there is help Quest.
in God, and he accounts it his Glory to be an Helper; he accounts Answ. 1
it not his Glory to be a Destroyer so much, no, that is his strange work, but
to be an Helper, that is his great Glory.

And again, Even at that time when men are most undone, 2.
then is the time for God to help. Thou have destroyed thy self; in me is thine
help. Oh! come and return, yet there may be help for thee, though thou have
destroyed thy self. Thou have destroyed thy self, in Me thy help.

It may be in a way of aggravation of their sin and Expos.
stubbornness, Why do not thou come in to me? have not I always been a help
to thee in all times of straights and distresses? You are in great misery; now
I am the same that ever I was, yet there is help enough in me: from whence the
Note is this:

Those that heretofore have seen help in God, and yet if now Obs.
their misery grows upon them, and they sink yet lower and lower, they had need
examine themselves thoroughly: Surely they have shut the door against themselves
for help, for God is never weary of doing good, his arm is not shortened, as
in Isa. 59. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God. I
beseech you mark but this, there is a great difference between God and man in
this thing of Helping. Men that are very kind sometimes and helpful, yet at
other times they will be very surly and harsh toward those that they have been
very helpful to in former times, and that not from any cause without, but
meerlie from the temper of their own hearts, and the change that there is in
their own spirits; not because those that they have been kind to are worse now
than before, no, but because of a froward, surly, harsh humor that is risen up
in themselves: you shall see such a difference in men that have been very
sweet, loving, and helpful to you at some times, but come to them at other
times, and you shall find them dogged, and surly, and harsh, and you cannot
tell what has provoked them; no, it is nothing but from a surly distemper
that is risen in their hearts. Oh! thus it is with men, but it is not so with
God. Thou have destroyed thy self, but in Me is thy help; it is still, I have
been thy helper all thy days, and still am the same God ready to do good unto
thee, and to help thee.

And then the last thing that I would note is this: The Obs.
more God has been helpful to any, the greater aggravation will it be to their
destruction, if they be destroyed at last. Thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help, I have been a help always, I am ready to help and to do good,
and yet thou art undone; Oh to be destroyed when God is at hand to help, to
perish when there is a Fountain just before us, as Hagar; this will be sad
indeed. Oh to perish in the midst of means, and in the midst of mercies, Oh
what an aggravation will it be to men's sins! another day when they are past the
time of mercy to help, but then to think, Oh! but how gracious was God to me
while I lived, at such and such a time!

And so concerning our selves again, from this, In me is thine help. It will be
the aggravation of our misery, if Applied to England.
we should yet perish. Oh my Brethren, Consider of it, What, shall all the
great stories, and notable famous stories that we have told of Gods mighty
working in helping us, shall they be of no other use but to aggravate our
miseries at last? It would be a sad thing. But to proceed.

VER. 10.
I will be thy King: Where is any other that may save thee in all thy Cities?
and thy Judges of whom thou said, Give me a King and Princes.

FIRST, To speak a little to the words as you have 1. Reading.
them in your books, for the words will bear them so in the Original. And yet I
shall show you another reading by and by that is as suitable to the Original
text as this. I will be thy King.

What ever you do contrive, plot, keep never such a stir, fret, vex, and rage,
I will govern you for all that, Expos.
I will be your King, and will do that which beseems me as the great King of
Heaven and Earth, I will not be born down by you with all your boisterousness,
I will govern you, (...) will have mine own ends, do what you can, things shall
not go as you will, but they shall go as I will have them; you would cast off
my Authority, but I will maintain it, I will be your King.

This is a sad condition to a people when God rules over them Obs.
in spite of their heart. And yet God does do so, many times God rules over
people in spite of their hearts, whether they will or no; while they are
plotting and striving for themselves this way, and that way, God is bringing
about his own ends in their ruin, The Lord is King, be the people never so
unquiet, (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 99. 1.) It Is not thy fretting and
wilfulness that will hinder the course of Gods ordering things in the world, he
will be King at last do what thou can, while thou and thousand thousands of
such as thou art shall perish eternally, God will be King; Oh it is infinitely
better for thee to fall down before the Lord, and say, Lord, thou shall be our
King, thou art above us, thou have power over us, thou shall be our King for
ever; It Is just with God always to say thus, I will be King: But certainly God
has not made such a distance between man and man that any A caution concerning
earthly kings.
man should say so, that whatsoever injustice he does, whatsoever misery he
brings people into, yet I will be thy King, I will have mine own ends, mine own
will. The Bonds between Kings and States certainly is See Bucer in Matthew. 17.
ver ult. Cuncta supremo Magistratus concedenda proper conscientiam: i. e. The
Supreme Magistrate is to be submitted to in all things, but matters of
conscience; he speaks of private men, not of those who by Laws are appointed
to be a screen between the Prince and People, such as Calvin's Instit. Lib. 4.
cap. 20. Sect. 31. says the 3. Estates in Parliament are.
mutual. But further thus: I will be their King.

I will not cast off all care of them, I will not leave them to the mercy, or
rather to the cruelty of others, 2.
but let them come and return to me, and I will deal with them as a King to
defend them, to govern them, to do good to them.

That God should be King over a people it is his Mercy, and it is man's felicity;
this should be our prayer, Lord, give us not up to be ruled by our lusts, but
do thou rule over us, and Lord give us not up to be ruled by the lusts of
wicked men, of unjust and cruel men to rule over us, but do thou reign over us,
Let the Kingdoms of the earth be the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign
for evermore.

But there is another reading of the words, and that is thus. You that have
books of the old-Translation, 2. Reading.
where Beza's (the Geneva) Notes are, you shall find the reading thus, I am,
and there is a stop, where is your King that should save your City? and I find
most Interpreters go so.

So the Septuagint Translation, Where is your King (say (...), i. e. ubi est
Rex isle tuus. (...) i. e. (...) ubi Rex tuus nunc? Chald. ubi est Rex tuus?
Vulg. (So Hierom. none of these read (...) Heb. (...)
they?) and the Chaldae Paraphrase, Where is your King that should save you in
all your Cities? The Chaldae Paraphrase, the Septuagint, and very many
Interpreters reads it so, it is so translated in the old Translation, and
according to the Original, I will be, (there may be a stop) your King; Where is
he that should save you in your Cities? Yea, and many Learned men in speaking
of this text in their Comments upon it, say they, it is but a transposition of
the letters which is ordinarily in the Hebrew tongue, and though the word that
is (I will be) it is as much as (where) upon a transposition of the letter, but
though we do not make the transposition of the letter in the first words (I
will be) but take them as they are there. But if you make a stop there, I will
be, your King; where is he that shall save you in your Cities? The sense comes
to one.

As if he should say, I am the same God that ever I was, but where is your King
that should save you in your Cities? Expos.
Oh the words read so, may pierce the hearts of some, if ever they have had any
acquaintance with God, and known what communion with God has mean heretofore,
to hear but these words, for God to say, I am, I am the same God that ever you
knew me to be, that ever you found me to be, but where is your King that should
save you? and if you read it as here, I will be, and there make the stop, so
Pareus: I will be (says he) Pareus in lo^
and so refers it, then I will be (what he had said before) as a Lion, a
Leopard, and as a Bear bereaved of her Whelps; and then, Where is your King
that should save you?

This is Gods Name, in Exodus 3. 14. I am that I am, or, I will be what I will
be; so says God here, I am Lord, I will be; but then where is your King? where
is your King that should save you in your City, and your judges, of whom you
said, Give us a King and Princes? My Brethren, I am no Prophet, and have not
the spirit of a Prophet that could prophecy of things before, or could order
Scripture when it should be preached of, and when not, I am you see in an
ordinary course and way, and meeting with this Scripture, am bound (according
to my ability) to demonstrate unto you wherein the force of it lies. I hope
your consciences shall be witness that there shall not be the least straining of
it, but to give you the story of the thing, and the temper of the people at
this time; it appears plainly that there was three things that they The
Confidences of the Ten Tribes: 1 King. 2 City. 3 Nobles.
much rested upon: say they, Let the Prophet say what he will, we have the King
for us, and the City for us, and the Nobles for us, put King, and City, and
Nobles together, and who can prevail? says God, Where Is your King that should
save you in your Cities? and your Judges, of whom ye said, Give us a King and
Princes, and Nobles. There Is these three put together. If our King come to the
Cities he will have a party there, and there will be strength in the City,
and we know the Cities are able to command all the Country, and Kingdom,
there is the Militia, and a numerous company of men, and there is riches in the
Cities, and therefore the King together with them, and then having the Nobles
of the Land, and the Princes, we are sure in a safe condition, and yet in the
midst of this he asks them, by way if derision and insultation.

For so it is, Where is your King that should save you in your Cities? The
Notes from the words are these:

First, Those things that carnal hearts rest upon will vanish; Obs. 1.
Where are they, says God, what is become of them? you would encourage one
another and say, Come, we shall have a day yet, for we have this strength, and
the King and Nobles for us: Where are they? those things that carnal hearts
rest upon will vanish and come to nothing.

Yea, Secondly, God loves to insult over men in their carnal Obs. 2
confidences; For so, he does not say here, Your King shall not save you, nor
your Cities shall not save you, nor your Princes, and Nobles shall not save you;
but, where are they? in a kind of Irony; God loves to insult over the carnal
confidences of men. And we find in Scripture many such kind of Insultings over
men: in Deuteronomy. 32. 37. Where are your Gods that should deliver you? And in Is.
19. 12. Where are thy Wisemen? What, we have got Statesmen, men known in
State Affairs, we have them with us. But where are they, says God? Thus the
Lord insults over men that put their confidence in the flesh, and especially
when they have been confident in their own ways, forsaking God, and so
bringing themselves to misery; when they have brought themselves to misery by
forsaking the ways of God, now God insults, now where are these things that
you put such confidence in?

And truly, even the Saints, so be it they do it in an holy humble way, they
may have some kind of insulting over ungodly men, only because they have so
much flesh in them, there is danger, therefore they had need keep their hearts
very low: But if they do it in the strength of God; we have it in Scripture,
That the Virgin, Daughter of Zion shall laugh at them, and laugh them to scorn.
Only keep your hearts (I say) low, and you may come to see the Glory of God;
even insult in this, That God has heard your Prayer, and has been with his
People, and that the Enemy has had so much power and strength in the flesh,
and yet how the Lord has disappointed them.

And then further, This is the great confusion to carnal Obs. 3.
hearts, when they shall be asked, Where Is their Confidence, and their
Boasting; and they shall be found speechless? when this shall be asked them,
Where Is your bravery, and pride and stoutness of your hearts? and they shall be
able to say nothing; Oh! this will be a great confusion and shame upon them.
Certainly ere long it will be so to all carnal hearts that make their boast in
the pomp and glory of the world, there shall be a confounding.

Where? Asked them, Where Is all your Bravery, and Pride, and Rage? I say, this
confounding [Where] will be asked to every wicked and ungodly man: What will
they be able to say then? In Judge. 9. 28. we read of one Gaal the son of Ebed,
who said, Who is Abimelech? but in verse. 38. when Abimelech came with strength
against him, Zebal said to him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidest,
Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? When men are in their pride and
bravery, then they scorn at God and men, they little regard any thing that is
said to them; but when God brings them down low, then wheretis that mouth of
thine that did so boast and speak so proudly, as heretofore it did?

My brethren, let us learn from hence therefore, To seek Use.
after, and rest upon those things which we may be able always to give an
account of where they are, if it should be asked us; the Saints, if it should
be asked them, Where is their God? they can give an account, It Is the God of
Heaven that we have trusted in, it is the God that is in the highest Heavens,
and in the hearts of the Saints, we can tell where our God is: It is just with
God that wicked men should be insulted over, because they insult over the
Saints; so if God do but seem to absent himself from his People, they will
presently insult over them, yea, where is your God? where is your Prayers and
Fastings? Have not some of you heard such language many times in this Kingdom?
There Is no such time but the Saints of God can give an Answer to this [Where]
they can tell where their Fastings and Prayers are: but the wicked are not able
to tell what is become of their Confidences and boastings.

Therefore, O you Saints of God, never be afraid of evil men, for ere long it
will be demanded of them, where Use. 2
their Pomp, and Glory, and Pride is? but they cannot answer. And it follows;
Thy Judges of whom thou said, Give me a King and Princes.

By Judges (though sometimes Kings are meant, as Amos, 2. 3. I will cut off the
Judge out of the midst of thee, he Iudices aliquan do Reges designant, ut Amos,
2. 3. Exscindam Iudicem de medio tui. De Rege Moab loquitur
speaks (says Drusius) of the King of Moab:) we are to understand here their
Nobles and Great men upon whom they relied, for so they are called in
Scripture, Judges: they had indeed Judges before that time, when they said,
Give us a King and Princes; they had Judges, but they were of meaner rank in
comparison of those they had after, they had Judges that by Gods appointment
governed them, but they were too mean for them; no, they must have a KING, they
must have PRINCES, they must have such JUDGES that are Kings and Princes, Great
men, for these that they had to rule over them, they were but of their own
rank, and this would not satisfy them, but they must have such as were great
ones, above them: those were but ordinary men, what were they but the Commons
of the same rank with other men; and raised up but a little while ago from the
ordinary Note.
way and rank of men? and why should not we be ruled and governed by them? No,
we must have a King, and Nobles, and they must govern us, Give us a King and
Princes. God had been much with these Judges, read but the story of the
Judges, and you shall find that God had ever more appeared with them, I do not
remember any one of the Judge, but ever prevailed when God raised him up: but
now this people they regard them not, why? because they were but meaner men,
they were but men of their own rank, though God did assist them so exceedingly.

Oh my Brethren, this is the ordinary guize of carnal hearts, Obs.
Though God be much with men, yet if they be but of a low rank, carnal hearts
regards them not; let them do never so great services, and be never so
instrumental for the Kingdom, even those men that have had their estates
preserved by them, that have had their Liberties and all kept by them, and by a
mighty Spirit that God has put into them, yet when the work is over, they look
upon them but as mean ordinary men, men of a common rank, and so let them go;
they after all the great things that God has done by them, still their
thoughts and minds are upon others that are above them, and Princes, and
Nobles, such men, they rely more upon men in whom they see outward pomp and
glory; then upon those that have the presence of God never so much with them,
and they regard them more, and they do think that they shall receive more good
by them, and their hearts are more toward them if they have outward pomp and
glory, than toward such men that are in a meaner condition though there be
never so much of the presence of God with them: Oh we see that, that which has
been is still to this very day. -- Of whom thou said, Give us a King and
Princes.

Where did they say so? they said so in 1 Samuel 8. 5. there say they to Samuel,
Come, give us a King that may reign over us; indeed the word Princes, I do not
(...)here, but here the holy Ghost ads Princes, and give us Princes too; but
that must of necessity be supposed, for if there If a King, then Nobles.
be a King, a King must have his Court and Nobles about him, and must be as a
fountain of honor, and must confer honor, and have great men about him; so that
though Princes be not named there, yet the holy Ghost supplies them as a thing
that must of necessity be understood, Come, let us be Governed by a King and
great ones that are about him. But you will ask me,

What Is the reason that nothing would satisfy them but a King Why the
Israelites would have a King, and Princes.
and Nobles?

There are these Seven REASONS that may be given for it, nothing would satisfy
them but a King only.

First, Consider their extreme earnestness about it, if you read 1 Samuel 8. you
will find that they were almost mad upon it, a King they must have, and would
have. Oh! it was very grievous to Samuel's spirit, he told them their great
sin, and the Lord said, They have rejected me, and not thee. Samuel told them
what God said, and God bad Samuel go and tell them what a King they should
have, that he would oppress them extremely, they shall have Arbitrary
Government come in to the full, he will take away your servants and children,
and do with them what he pleases, you will be brought to be slaves to him, any
Parasite at Court may easily get your estates, you shall be accounted an
offender for a word, and Fined what they please, you shall be in most miserable
bondage if you have him. But now you shall find afterward, after Samuel had
told them all this; Nay say they, but let us have a King for all this, they
answered him nothing: If any one should come and reason, Why do you desire a
King so much? what shall you get by it? do not you think that he will have your
Estates and all you have at his dispose, and your Liberties? no man now could
deny this, they did not deny the (...) word that Samuel said, but they will
hold their conclusion, Nay, but we must have a King say they. What Is the matter
that should make them thus?

First, Somewhat even for novelty sake; they had other 1
kind of Government before, but now they would have somewhat more, Men's spirits
are very much given to change, Note
though they can give no account in the world for the thing.

But Secondly, There might be some distrust in them, in 2.
their former Judges, because they were men of meaner rank (as I told you) they
might think that they should not be able to help them, Oh say they, Let us have
a King that shall go before us in our Wars. Though they had never so much
experience of the Judges, yet they thought there would be more good if they had
great ones, and they were afraid that these men of a lower, meaner rank would
fail them at last.

And then a Third reason is, That they might be like other 3.
Nations, because they loved pomp, What say they, Shall we see our neighbor
Nations to be governed by those that have great pomp and glory, and shall we be
governed by men that were but Tradesmen a while ago? No, they would be like
other Nations.

Fourthly, It is like they had some oppressions upon them 4.
even from the former Judges; though most of them were good, yet certainly
there cannot be a Government of Men but there will be some cause at one time or
other for some to complain: Take the best Government that can be in the Note.
world, yet seeing it is a Government of men, by men, there will be some cause
or other to complain at some time or other. Now this is the peevishness of men's
hearts, that if there be but any condition wherein they suffer, they do nothing
but complain of their suffering, and therefore would fain have a new way; and
never think of the inconveniences and sufferings that would come in by that new
way; Oh! they would be rid of these that now they were under, and would have a
King, these men angered them, these men laid some taxes upon them that they were
not pleased withal, now so be it they might be rid of them, they cared not what
they bring upon themselves, and therefore they would have a King, not minding
what sufferings they should bring upon themselves in another kind.

And then Fifthly, A King they would have out of a spirit of opposition against
that way that God had set; God 5.
was in a way of governing of them, and their hearts was against that way of
God, a mere spirit of opposition, though they would give no reason why they
might not be as well that way as another: but it was Gods way, And there is an
opposition in the heart of man to any thing that Note.
has God in it; the more any thing has of God in it, and the more God rules
in a way, the more opposite are the hearts of evil men.

And then a Sixth Reason is this, They had some hopes that they should have
some more liberty for their lusts. Now 6.
having such a way of Government as they had there was more inspection over
them, and they could not so easily corrupt them, but now in the Government of
one man over them, if they can but make a friend to him they may do what they
list, they might brave it over all their other neighbors, if they would be but
willing to be a slave to him, they might make all their neighbors slaves to
them, they had a great deal more hopes of liberty for their lusts it is like
this way than the other.

And then lastly, Many of them had hopes to get preferment 7.
this way: let us have a King and Princes, and we shall get preferments in the
Court, and Places this way, and therefore this is the best way, we will not be
satisfied with any other way but this, we live in a mean low condition without
this, but we shall get preferments this way, therefore give us a King.

But now that is observable, Though they thought they had agreed deal of Reason
for themselves, yet after they had once smarted, and they found indeed that
there was that oppression upon them after they had a King and these Princes
more than ever they were under in their lives, now was a time that Hosea could
speak freely to them, and say in the Name of God, Where is your King, and those
men that you were so earnest for? what good have you got? For it is observable
though they were never so eager upon having a King, yet if you read the story
in Samuel, when God did but thunder from Heaven, Oh! then we have sinned; and
when they were under oppression, then Hosea could speak freely and plainly to
them, Where is your King? and where are these men?

Men will not hear so long as they do not suffer; If men be Obs.
once set upon a way, and have their Estates about them, and countenance from
great ones, speak what you will against their way, they will not hear you; but
let these men smart for their way, and find by experience the evil of it, then
you may speak to them and say, Do you think now that it was wisely done, that
that you were so eager upon? do you think you dealt well for your selves? Oh
then they will be ready to say, I confess I did not think so seriously of
those things before, I looked only upon that, that appeared for the present,
and now after-wit is bought, although it be dear, I see cause now to repent of
what I have done.

My Brethren, Surely Kings and Nobles are great blessings of God when they are
good: you see I have not strained in the least thing, but held forth to you
what the scope of the place is; Let none go away and say, that I enveighed
against Kings, or Nobles, certainly in themselves they are great blessings of
God, and we must acknowledge it fitting to have a difference between man and man.

It Is a slander that is upon a sort of people. As if they would have all things
to lie Level, and one to have as much horer as the other; A slander noed by the
Author.
God forbid we should have such a thought: Let us give honor to those whom God
would have honored, and never envy nor grutch at their honor, if God pleases to
send those that are good, I say, they may be great Instruments of great
blessings of God to us. But now mark the very next words that follow in the
Eleventh Verse, They would have a King.

VER. 11.
I gave them a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

THEY were ready to say, Why do you thus blame us for our eager desire? Did
not God approve Cohaerance
of it? God himself was content we should have one, God himself chose our first
King, Saul, and he appointed Samuel to anoint him. And if you understand it of
the other King Jeroboam, for so Interpreters go, they might say, and Jeroboam
also; Did not God foretell by the Prophet, that Jeroboam should have ten Tribes?
and did not the Man of God tell us that this was from the Lord? and therefore
why should you so much upbraid us about our Kings? it is the mind and will og
God that we should have them.

The answer of the Prophet is: It Is true, God did give you a King, and God did
appoint Samuel to anoint him, and God did foretell that Jeroboam should be King
over the ten Tribes: Yea, but it was in his anger, he gave you one indeed, but
it was in his anger, you were so set upon it, that you would have one, if you
will, take him says God, and take him with all that shall follow after, so
that it was (as one speaks) rather from an angry God than from a God that was
entreated by them in a Abirato, potius quam ab exorato Deo.
way of Prayer.

There are many exceeding useful Observations here, which time will not give
leave to go through all, even from the first part. I gave them a King in mine
Anger.

Saul and Jeroboam was given in anger, those primarily, as a punishment of
their sin: Saul was given as a punishment of their sin in rejecting Samuel, and
in their disobedience to Samuel, and the way of Government that they had then.
And Jeroboam was given as a punishment of their sin of Idolatry, that was
committed in Solomon's time, [as also of their Rebellion and Apostacie] And yet
it is said, that God did it.

The First Note may be this: That God may have a hand Obs. 1.
in things wherein men sin exceedingly. They sinned in geting a King, they sinned
exceedingly in setting up Jeroboam, and yet God has such a hand in it, as he
says he, gave them these things. I remember Mr Calvin has an excellent Note
upon this very Scripture. And I rather name it, because the Adversaries would
cast that aspersion on him, That he held that God was the author of sin. Says
he, Ex hoc loco discimus Deum sic exercere sua judicia utquicquid mali est,
debeat hominibus ascribi: Deus videtur hoc totum dirigere sua providentia,
discamus admirars sobrie, arcana Dei judicia, neque imitemur impuros istos
canes qui obga: niunt, quia non pessuat agnoscere quomodo Deus utatur etiam
improbis hominibus, quia hoc non percipuint, concludunt, Dominum esse causa
peccait. Calls. in loc.
From this place we learn, That God does so exercise his judgments, that
whatsoever evil there is, it is to be ascribed to men; whatsoever good, to
himself: God seems to direct this work wholly to his own Providence: from hence
let us learn soberly to admire the secret Judgments of God; neither let us
imitate those impure dogs; Impure dogs, what are they that do therefore grin
and bark at God, because they cannot understand how God does use wicked men;
Because they understand not this, they conclude that God is the cause of sin.
He calls them the impure dogs, because they understand not how God does work in
making use of wicked men, that God is the author and cause of sin. His spirit
was was much against this, and therefore it was an extreme slander upon him, as
if he should hold such an opinion. That Is the first. God may have an hand in
things wherein men sin extremely, and yet he remain holy.

Secondly, Things that are very evil, yet may (...)esent Obs. 2.
success. It was a very evil thing for them to desire a King at this time, and
likewise for the People to rend from the house of David, yet both of them had
success according to their own desire.

Let us learn for ever not to judge of the goodness of a thing by Success no
note of a good cause.
the success of it. Say some, I Will warrant you we will have this; and if they
get what they desire, they think God approves of it: They may desire a thing,
and be set upon it, and though much be said to the contrary, yet they may drive
on their designs, and prosper in it: But this is no argument that God owns it
as good, never judge of things by success.

And then the Third point, and that will require some time indeed to speak to,
and that is, That Gods gifts are Obs. 3.
not always in love. I gave them a King says he, but in mine anger. Gods
gifts are not always in love; no, they are in anger many times: Read but the
11. of Numbers, 18. 20. you shall find there of God giving people their
desires. He lets them have them, but how? Say thou unto the People, Sanctify
your selves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh, for ye have wept in the
ears of the Lord, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? Therefore the Lord
will give you flesh. You have wept and cried, saying, Who shall give us flesh?
The Lord will give you flesh, And, ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor
five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days, but a whole month shall you eat
it, til it comes out at your nostrils; you shall have enough of it, even till
it be loathsome to you: Why? Because you have despised the Lord, which is among
you: The Lord gave them their desires, because they had despised him. So you
are ready to bless your selves in this: I have what I would have, and think
that therefore God regards you, that God gives you what you would desire,
because you have sinned against him; Dando Irascitur, non dando miseretur.
August.
whereas if he were not angry with you, he would not give it. Says Augustine,
God many times in giving is Angry, in denying is Merciful. It is because he is
angry that he gives you such things as-you would have. There Is the same in
Psalm. 78. 29, 30. and so on, There it appears how God gave them flesh according
to their desires, but while the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God came
upon them. It is a most excellent point, if we had time a little to open it, Oh
it might quiet our desires: for that I had thought to have spoken to, how we
might know when a Thing is given in Gods Anger, or in his Love, the several
ways of Gods giving; you may come to know whether a thing be given in Love or
in Anger, by seeing the ways of things, and comparing one thing with another,
you may come to know much of God in it.

But only now let me leave this with you about it, Take heed of immoderate
desires for any worldly thing: To Take heed of immoderate desires.
say, I must, and I will, and I will have it; when ever you find your hearts
strongly rising to a thing that you must needs have, then be afraid, be afraid
of having it, as much as you were of having any thing in your lives; no man or
woman can have any comfort in any thing as coming from Gods Love until they
can first quiet their hearts, and be willing to be at Gods dispose, to be
willing to be without it, that is one main sign of giving in Gods Anger, or in
Love: When as a man or woman finds an eager desire after a thing, Oh it is
very suitable to such and such a purpose; yea, but now if I can go alone and
consider that God is wiser than I, and knows what is best for me; if I can labor
to work my heart to this, Lord, if it be good for me, then I desire it; but if
thou see it would not be good, then Lord, here I am, do with me what seems
good in thine eyes, as David did: Surely nature could not but work strongly,
yet says David, If the Lord has any pleasure in me, he will bring me again 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.
to this City etc. but if he shall say, I have no pleasure in thee, lo, here I
am, let him do what seems him good in his eyes. Yea, this was a thing indeed,
and no question this temper of David's heart in his affliction was the thing
that did so much help him in enlargement to praise God, when he returned to the
Ark and City again: Had David kept a stir, and fretting, and vexing, and what,
must I go from the City of Jerusalem! and how does God deal with me! and I am
resolved though it cost me my life I will return to Jerusalem and take
possession of the City, whatsoever comes of it; perhaps David might have
gotten thither, but there would not have been so much love of God in it, as
when he could give up himself to Gods dispose. And so if this people could have
said thus, It Is true Lord, thou art our King, but we are despised because we
are governed by men of such Note.
mean quality, and the truth is, God had promised them a King also, and
therefore it was not such an evil thing to desire a King, but so eagerly, they
would have him now, if they had been but quiet, and said, Lord, thou tellest us
in thy Word of a King that we shall have, Lord, fulfill this thy Word, and for
the present we are content to submit to thee, as long as thou think fit; now
it may be God would have given them a King, or presently after, and so they
might have had a holy and gracious King; but they must have him now, and so
they had him with the anger of God. You know the story of Rachel, Oh! give me
children or else I die. So she had a child and she died; though it was not in
Gods anger as an Enemy, yet it was a Fatherly anger. Oh! think but of this,
you women that are so desirous of children, or any outward blessing, you that
are desirous of altering your condition. How many in altering their Estate, as
in Marriage, they must needs alter it, and to this party, and such a one they
must needs have, although they beg their bread all their days, and although
Parents against it, and though they cannot see evidences of grace. Now says
God, you shall have it, you shall join together, I, and you shall work your own
misery by this eagerness of your spirit. Oh Brethren, let us learn to be
moderate in our desires, and commit our desires and heart to God. I gave them a
King in mine anger, and took him away Text.
in my wrath.

The last Exercise, there was only these Two or Three Observations named.

First, That God may have a hand in things wherein men do 1.
sin exceedingly.

Secondly, Things that are very evil may have success according 2.
to the hearts of men for a time.

The Third thing was this; That Gods Gifts are not always 3.
in Love.

Now because it is a great Point, there are Two things that I shall desire to do

First, To show to you, How a man may know that what God does give him, it is
in anger and not in love.

And then Secondly, Some CORRALARIES to be drawn from it; but very briefly in
both.

For the First then, How we may come to know a thing to be given by God in
anger rather than in love. It is a very It is hard to convince men when they
have their desires, that it is not in love.
hard thing to convince men, if they have their desires satisfied that it is
rather from anger than love; Men are so well pleased with the satisfying of
their desires that they can very hardly be convinced but that God intends
good to them in it, and therefore you shall find in 1 Samuel 12. 17. that God was
fain to do a great and wonderful work of his to convince this people that, that
which he gave them there (Saul) it was in anger rather than in love, Is it not
Wheat Harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder, and
rain, that you may perceive and see that your wickedness is great which ye have
done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a King. Samuel had before in Chap.
8. told them of their sin in asking a King, but they would not be convinced,
still they must have a King. Now says Samuel, It is Wheat Harvest, and whereas
the people of the Jews were never wont to have rain in Harvest time, it was a
strange and wonderful thing for them to have rain then: But though it be
Harvest-time, yet it shall rain and thunder, and all to the end that you may be
convinced of yourgreat wickedness in asking you a King. They had not only had
their desires granted before this time, but as they thought had some
confirmation Note.
of their desires; for Saul had prospered after he had been a King: but yet for
all that (says he) I will give you an evident demonstration that it is not in
love that you have him, but it was your great wickedness in seeking you a King.
And Samuel called upon the Lord (says the text) and the Lord sent thunder and
rain that day. And then in verse. 19. All the people said to Samuel, Pray for
thy servants unto the Lord thy God that we die not, for we have added unto all
our sins this evil, To ask us a King: Now we do acknowledge it to be a very
great and sore evil indeed, though our King has prospered a while, yet God
shows us now that it is an evil. And by this you may see that it is hard for
men to be convinced when they have according to their hearts desires, that it
is in Anger rather than in Love.

But to give you some Notes whereby you may be helped to come to see, whether
what you have granted by Notes to know whether it be Love or hatred by all that
is before us. 1.
God according to your desires be in anger or love.

As First, When you desire, a gift, rather than God in it; when your desires
are for the Gift rather than the Giver you can have no comfort that there is
love in it. There Is no man that has to deal with another, if he knows that
what he does desire from him, it is not out of love to him, but merely from the
love of the gift, certainly though he may give him for some other ends, yet he
does not give it out of love, Those desires that are not out of love, are not
satisfied from love. Love satisfies no desires that are not raised by love,
love it acts always upon love. Now God knows what the ground of our desires
are, if we desire the Gift rather than the Giver, rather than God in it, (I
say) we can have no comfort that it is from love what we do enjoy. A gracious
heart whatsoever it would have from God, yet this is the main thing in its
desires, Oh! let me have God in it, such is my condition here in this world,
that God appoints that I shall not enjoy him immediately altogether, but I
shall enjoy him through such and such mercies, Oh then that I might have these
mercies that I might enjoy him in them. Certainly any thing that thou have in
way of satisfaction to these desires is out of love; but when thou look no
further than the Creature, thou would have the thing but look not at God
in it, thou can not expect the love of God to be conveyed by it. That Is the
first thing.

Secondly, When our desires are imoderate and violent, then 2.
we have cause to suspect, if God satisfies them, that they are not out of
love, when we are in a hurry in our desires. This was just the case of this
People here; Nay, but let us have a King (say they,) we must needs have him,
whatsoever comes of it, we will have him. When God does use to satisfy the
desires of his People in his love, he does first quiet their hearts, he brings
their hearts into a sweet and Note.
blessed moderation; but when men's hearts are violent, that the thing they
desire they must have, God does many times say, You shall have it then, take
it: but then he speaks not in love, that is very remarkable: The desires of the
People in the 11. of Numbers for Quails, it is a notable Scripture to confirm
our Point here, That God does not always satisfy in love. Read Psalm. 78. 30.
and so on, there you have the same story recorded of their desiring of Quails,
they were mightily violent in their desires. But that is the thing I would
observe there, That the Lord after he had showed that he did not answer their
desires in love, but in wrath, then in verse. 34. after the judgments of God had
come upon them in the satisfying of their desires, that many of them were slain
by God; then says the Text, he called the name of that place,
Kibroth-Hattaavah, because there they buried the people that lusted: that is,
The Sepuleres of the lusts of the desires that they had: God sets a Brand upon
that place, says he, Here are the Graves of the desirers; Oh! the desirers,
they must needs have flesh, and they stood upon their desires, their desires
must be satisfied; And here is the Graves of the desirers says God. Oh
remember, you that lust after evil things, remember when your desires are
immoderate and violent, it is just with God to set a brand by some remarkable
hand of his against you, and say, Here Is the Note.
mark of these desires that were so immoderate, and so violent. That Is the
Second Note.

Thirdly, When God grants unto men their desires, but it is before the due
time: They have what they would have, 3.
Oh! but they have it not in Gods time. Children they long and desire after
green Fruit, but if they could stay but a few weeks or months, one Apple then
would be worth an hundred when they are green; but they cannot Simile.
stay, they must have the Fruit when it is green; They have it, but it breeds
Worms in their bellies and does them no good. So when we have our desires
satisfied before the due time, it is not in love then. Certainly a Mother
intends little good to her Child, though her Child should cry for green Apples
from off the tree, to fill the belly of her Child with those green Apples, No,
it is not the due time; God had promised that Israel should have a King in due
time, that there should come KIngs from the loins of Abraham: And in Deuteronomy. 17.
14. There Is a prophecy of a King, that they should have; yea, but they would
not stay Gods time, and therefore it was not out of love: in Psalm. 106. 13. it
is said there, That those that did so lust, God gave them their lusts in his
wrath, They did not wait for his Counsel. That Is that which is noted Note.
there Oh! we should be willing to wait for Gods Counsel. We would have the
thing presently done: yea but Gods Counsel works one thing after another, and
one thing depends upon another, and we should be willing to wait for his
Counsel; If we will not mind Gods Counsel, but must have our desires satisfied,
and that now; we cannot expect love in them, but it is rather wrath; He gives
unto them in his Anger: and that is the Third Note.

Fourthly, When God grants us what we would have, but 4.
there comes no blessing at all with what we enjoy; he does grant the thing,
but takes away the blessing of the thing, he takes away the comfort of it, the
satisfaction in it, They shall eat, but they shall not be satisfied: So in Psalm.
106. 15. There he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul,
the text says, He filled them according to their desires with flesh, but sent
leanness into their soul; the meaning of the text is this, It is a similitude
transferred from the body to the soul, that as many times men may Psa. 106. 15.
Opened
have a dogs appetite (as the Physitiaus calls it) that is, a mighty greedy
stomach, but they cannot digest what they eat, and so the body is lean; so
here, they had a mighty desire, but as in the body many times there is such
a disease that the meat turns not to nourishment, so in their souls, they had
even that their souls desired, yea, but their souls could not be satisfied,
there was that distemper in the soul as in the body, the body does not thrive
with what it eats when it has such a disease upon it; so though the soul has
what it did desire for the matter of it, yet it had a distemper in it; thus it
could not be satisfied, nor thrive, nor prosper with what it had, Oh he sent
leanness into their soul. How many times are men and women mighty greedy, and
desirous after such and such contents, and think thus, Oh how happy should I be
if I had this and the other thing! it may be God lets you have what you would
here, but when he has let you have it, he snatches away the comfort of it; you
shall have a Well, but it shall have no bottom, you shall not be able to get
out the good and comfort in what you have. And that is the Fourth thing. Surely
God is not in it, for the blessing of God makes rich, and ads no sorrow with
it, no, he brings comfort.

Fifthly, When that which we desire is merely to satisfy our lusts, merely
that we might have our humors and lusts 5.
satisfied, that is all; we do not desire such and such comforts that by them we
may be fitted for the Service of God in our places, not so much because we have
need of them to help us in our work, but because we would have our lusts
satisfied, there is all, we cannot give an account why these and these things
should help us in the work of the Lord, but that we may go on as well without
them: But these and these things are suitable to our lusts: Oh! if God does give
thee any thing to satisfy thy lusts, certainly he gives it in his wrath; as
now, If a man that has a disease in his body, if he has an enemy comes to
him and knows what will feed his disease, the Enemy will give it him that he
might dispatch him the sooner; there is no faithful Physician, nor no loving
friend will give unto any that that will feed their disease, but will take it
from them, and take it from them in love, because it will feed theirdisease.
Oh! the Lord sees men's hearts set upon such and such lusts, and if they have
such and such things granted them their lusts will be fed by them, they shall
have them says God: It Is as dangerous a A dangerous sign of Reprobation.
sign of Reprobation as any thing, to give them that, that shall be most
suitable to their lusts, that shall most harden them. And on the other side, The
greatest love when God shall take that from his children, that he knows will
but feed their lusts, there is many diseases are such that the only way to cure
them, is to keep the Patient in a short diet; though they cry for food, and be
very hungry, yet they must be kept very sparing, why? because the nature of the
disease is such as will draw all nourishment to it self to feed it: and so God
is fain to do with his own people when he sees them sick of such a disease, the
Nature of which will draw all nourishment for the feeding of it.

Sixthly, When men desire that they would have, and are eager upon it, but they
take no great care, whether they do enjoy it 6.
from a reconciled God, or a provoked God, it is all one to them, let me have
it; but whether it comes from God reconciled, or God provoked, they do not much
stand upon that: that is very remarkable here, in Numb. 11. there is this
notable story of Gods satisfying desires in his wrath. If you turn to the
beginning of the Chapter, you shall find that God was very much provoked with
the people here: The people complained, it displeased the Lord, and the Lord
heard it, and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them
and consumed them, and the people cried to Moses, and so the judgment was got
off from them; but then presently after they fell to murmuring before ever any
thing was done to reconcile God and their souls together; you do not read of
any work of humiliation to seek reconciliation with God, between the time that
God did manifest his sore displeasure against them, and the time that God
satisfied them in their desires; no, they looked not upon that, God indeed was
displeased, but it was off now, and for any matter of atonement, or making up
their peace with God, that they looked not at, but let them have their desires,
hence it came to be in wrath the satisfying of their desires.

Does thy conscience tell thee that there has been a Note.
time wherein God has been displeased with thee, the anger of God has burst
out against thee? perhaps thou art in a better condition now than thou wast
before; Oh but tell me, have thou humbled thy soul before God to make up thp
peace with him? has there been a day of atonement between God and thy soul?
has Gods displeasure been out against thee, and now does he come and satisfy
thee in what thou do desire before any thing has been done in falling down
before him and seeking his face, and making peace? thou can not have comfort
in this satisfying of thy desires, but it is rather in wrath than in mercy.

Seventhly, When God regards not our preparation for a mercy, he gives it
whether we be fitted for it yea, or no: no 7.
great matter. And carnal hearts take no great care themselves of it, let me
have it whether my heart be in a fit condition, that is not the thing. It Is your
sin and wickedness not to regard the preparation of your hearts for what you
have; and it is Gods Judgment to give it to you before you be prepared. A
gracious heart when it would have a mercy, it is as careful to get the heart
prepared for the mercy, as to obtain it; Oh! there is such and such things that
indeed would be suitable to me, but is my heart fit for such a deliverance? is
my heart fit for such a mercy as this? when as it is thy care to prepare thy
heart; and when thou art laboring for the mercy, thou art as well laboring to
prepare thy heart for it, surely then when it comes, it must be sweet indeed;
but when there is no preparation before, thou can not know that it is in love.
We little think that we have need of preparation for mercies. If indeed God
should threaten some Note.
judgment, we would think that we had need be prepared; but certaialy there is
as great need for preparation for mercies to be able to make good use of them,
as for afflictions to be able to bear them. And this seventh Note I have
likewise from Numb. 11. 18. And say thou unto this people, Sanctify your
selves against to morrow. There Is a charge that they should sanctify
themselves against to morrow, for God would give them flesh. I do not find that
they did do it, but when God promised to give them sesh^; he bid them sanctify
themselves; as if he should say, If that your desires come before you have
sanctified your selves, it will be in wrath, not in mercy; Oh therefore when as
you are earnest to have your desires satisfied, think thus, The Lord charges
thee to sanctify thy self, Oh! do thou take care of this! do thou make
it to be thy endeavor to sanctify thy self before the mercy comes? then thou
may have comfort in it, and not otherwise.

Eighthly, When we seek greedily to have our desires satisfied, 8.
but rest in the means we use, and seek to be beholding to the creature only
for it, we do not lay the great weight upon prayer: what ever it is, that we
enjoy, and we do not get it by [Before, or sanctified by Prayer after; For thou
preventest me (says David) with thy blessing of goodness Ps. 21, 3 God does so
sometimes to his Saints]
prayer, we cannot know that it is in love. When God intends a mercy from love,
he does first fill the heart with the Spirit of Prayer; when a mercy comes
after much prayer then it is a mercy from love. When the Saints have been
praying, and then God has come in with mercy, Oh then they have gathered
arguments of Gods love to them; This I had because I sought thee; as Hannah did
concerning Samuel, how did she rejoice in Samuel! Oh! this is the child that I
prayed for says Hannah unto Eli: Oh! this is the mercy that I prayed for;
therefore she called her child's name Samuel, one that was sought of God. And so
when we can call every gift we have, we can call it Samuel, that is, a gift
asked of God, here is a gift that is got by prayer; Whatsoever Samuel.
means was used, yet prayer was the chief ingredient, this is an argument of
love. But otherwise we can have no assurance that it is from love: It Is true, a
King was not unlawful for them to desire, because they had such hints in
Scripture; Oh but they did not so much mind them; no, but they come to Samuel,
and say, Come, Give us a King, we do not read that they go to God for it. Such
Note
a great change of their State as that was, one would think should have
required diverse days in seeking of God. It was a mighty change from such a
Government as they had, unto a new kind of Government, and from a Government
that was of Gods own appointment to another Government wherein now they would
suit themselves according to the Nations. And yet we find no days of prayer
for this; and therefore it was in wrath that they had it. Therefore when you
would have any thing, look not so much to come by it according to second
causes, but be much in Prayer, according to the excellency of the thing that
you seek for.

Ninthly, When God gives our desires, but does not give a proportionable
measure of Grace, that so we might make a sanctified 9
use of them: when God gives you the shell, but not the kernel, surely it is
not in love. If your children should ask a Nut of you, and you give them a Nut
that has no Kernel, they will not think (if so be that you knew it) that it is
in any great love. Truly, all the good things that wicked men have, they are
but Shells without Kernels, they are not in love. The Kernel of every Blessing,
it is a Note.
proportionable measure of grace to use it for God. You have a great desire
that God should change your condition, if he should change it, and not give you
a heart fit for that condition, you had better be without that thing; you have
a desire that God should prosper you in such a business, yea, but if he does
not teach you how to abound, you had been better never to have abounded: Now
it is not in love for God to give any success, except he gives a proportionable
measure of Grace according to the success: therefore that is that which you
should all examine, the Lord has altered my condition, and many good things I
have more than before; but what Graces have I more than before? what exercise
of Grace? what work of Grace more than before? Certainly if it be in love it
will be so.

Tenthly, Surely our desires cannot be in love, when God 10.
does not only deny a proportionable measure of Grace (...) there goes a secret
curse with what we have. If so be that (...) man should be very hungry, and
has a mighty desire to satisfy himself, and he falls greedily upon his meat,
and eats it, but as soon as he has eaten it, his body swells Simile.
more and more till it be as big as two bodies, surely he begins to think then
that all is not well, Lord, have mercy upon me (says he) he is afraid that he
is poisoned. So God gives you your desire, and as soon as you have it, you begin
to swell, you are bigger than you were before, your hearts are proud, and you
can look scornfully upon others then, Oh you are poisoned; this is an ill
satisfying of your hunger, you are poisoned surely in this. In Isa. 10. 16. you
have there a notable expression to this purpose, Therefore shall the Lord, the
Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones, leanness; and under his Isa. 10. 16.
Explained.
glory he shall kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire. Even such things
wherein there appears to be a great deal of glory, such things perhaps as when
your desires are satisfied in you can glory in, Oh you glory in such and such a
mercy; such a good thing you have above others; but under this glory there is
a burning kindled, there is a great deal of the wrath of God in it, a secret
curse that goes along with it.

Eleventhly, When we regard the satisfying of our desires so 11.
as we regard not what becoms of others sobeit we have our desires satisfied;
and this is from their example here. Let Us have a King: A King! What shall
become of Samuel then? has not he judged you, and been faithful with you?
What, will you show your selves so ungrateful to him for all the good he has
done to you, as to reject him, and his house, and family? Oh! they cared not
for that; let us have a King, let become of Samuel what will come, and of his
house, what care they? And so when men are greedy in their desires; Let us have
such and such a thing, but care not what becomes of others. That Is another
N(...) of desires not granted in love.

Twelfthly, When God satisfying of our desires, makes way 12.
for some judgment. Now indeed the thing is comfortable that we have, but stay
a while and you shall see there is some judgment making way by that very thing
that you have: and when the judgment is come, afterward you will see how it
made way for it: there are very great judgments many times upon men, that are
made way for by the satisfying of their own desires: God has many ways to
prepare a path for his anger, by giving you your desires many times, there is
nothing more ordinary in experience than this, and therefore we need not stand
upon it; If you will but examine the course of your lives, sometimes you may see
that if God had satisfied your desires in such and such things, it would have
made way for the greatest misery that ever you had in all your lives, and when
God denies sometimes to his People, they can confess, O Lord, I see that had I
had my mind in such a thing which I would have had, I had been undone. And on
the other side, You will find that those things which you account the greatest
mercies to you, do make way for the greatest evils, surely they were not given
in love then.

Thirteenthly, When men are greedy of things, and never 1^.
consider the inconvenients; when they would have their desires satisfied in a
foolish way, never minding what inconveniences may follow in this thing more
than in the other thing, merely looking upon that which is for the present
suitable to them, but never think what inconveniences may follow. Thus it was
here; they would have a King; but Samuel came and told them all the
inconveniences that would follow upon it, how that they Note.
should have this affliction and the other; You that are so desirous of him, if
he comes among you, he will bring you into slavetie, your Estates and your
Children shall be under his power, you will be in slaverie to every Courtier.
Nay but we will have a King for all this, they would needs change the way of
Government, O that we might have a king! And they would be brought more under
Law than before; for indeed in the time of the Judges, if you read that
story, you shall find that the People of Israel were in a great deal of
Liberty then, and they obeyed the Judges in a great measure in a voluntary
way; if you raade the story you shall find but Two Tribes that followed Barach
and Deborah, and so of Jepihthah, and Sampson, those that were willing freely
to offer themselves they followed them; and those of Ephraim they did chide
with the other, and asked them, Why did you not call us to it? as noting that
there was a great deal of freedom in the time of the Judges. Yea, but we will
have a King, and we will all then be tied to the same thing, and be under the
same power, and so there will be a great deal of union that way: when this man
shall not be in this way, and the other shall not be in another way, and men to
have their freedom thus and thus, but al shall come in and join under the same
Law, and so we shall go on in one: Certainly this was their reasoning in their
desire of having a King. Now this kind of union (no question) was very good
among the People; but to have it in this way, That whereas the People were
governed in such a way before as stood with a great deal of Liberty; It Is
true, they shall have a kind of union, but they do not consider what
inconveniences there will be in their being thus chained together. Prisoners
that are chained at a Post, they are altogether all the day long: But would An
apt*
you have such a kind of union, to be united with such chains? Consider that
with the union there may come a slavery upon you. But they did not consider of
any such things, no matter say they, Come, let us be all joined in one, and let
the same Law be upon every one. But now, how this would bring them under
bondage and slavery in those things they would be loath to be brought under in,
in that they considered not at all.

Fourteenthly, When men seek to have their desires sarisfied merely because
they love change. We cannot have any comfort that God does it out of love, when
it is out of a foolish spirit that loves novelty. They, though they had bin
long enough under that kind of Government, and in a mere kind of novelty, not
knowing what might come of such a change, but a change they would have. And so
people though there be never so much good in a way, yet out of a novelty they
would fain have a change: And if God grant them a change when they have no
other ground but that for it, it is a sign that there is wrath in it, and not
love.

Further, When it is through impatiency, and want of heart to submit to God in
a former condition. It Is ill when it is 15.
through a mere novelty, but when it is through impatiency then it is like to be
in wrath, and not in mercy, if your condition be changed, God has put you in a
lower and mean condition, it is true, it is lawful for you to desire a change,
yea, but if you desire it because you cannot submit to Gods hand, then it is a
sign that it is in wrath, but when you have brought your hearts to this, Lord
here I am, dispose of me as thou please, I am content to lie under thy hand,
but Lord, I look up to thee for mercy; Consider I am a poor weak Creature, and
it is fit that thou should have thy will, and not I mine: then if God make a
change, you may have comfort that it is in mercy: but if you have it through
impatiencie, you can have no comfort at all in it. It was just so here, they
could not bear the hand of God that was upon them, any present trouble that
they had upon them, and so thought to help themselves by having a King, and God
gave them one, but it was in his anger.

Further, When our desires of further mercies makes us forget the former
mercies, and makes us unthankful for former 16
mercies; they would have a King that might go before them, and fight for them.
Fight for them! Did not God fight for them before? Oh wonderful and glorious
Battles they had when they were under their Judges, when they had Samuel to
direct them, they never had more glorious Victories afterward than then: Nay,
you shall find in the whole Story of the Judges, that they did always prevail,
and their Judges generally were good, and guided them in Gods ways; but the
Kings did not so; For the Kings of Israel were none of them good, from the
beginning of them to the end. Oh unthankful Note.
wretches that they are, so eager to have another condition, never minding nor
blessing God for what they had, forgetful of all the good that ever they had.
Samuel could appeal to them, Whose Ox, or Ass have I taken? he judged
righteously in his judgment. But they forget all Gods goodness and mercy
toward them, and must now be in another condition. Oh! consider of this you
that desire new conditions, be not you unthankful for what you have had, if you
be so eager to have more so as to forget what you have had, if God should send
you more your case is like to be worse than now it is: If one should go and
take meat to eat before he has digested what he eat before, he has filled his
stomach, but there comes new dishes to the Table that pleases his palate, and
he falls upon that and eats more and more, but that does not nourish him, but
turns to evil humors Simile.
and so does him hurt; but if he would stay till he has digested what he has
eaten before, then he might eat and have good nourishment. And you that would
fain have more and more, have you digested what you have had? are you thankful
for what you have had? has God had the glory of what you have had before? then
if God gives you any thing you may have comfort to your souls that it comes out
of love.

Further, When men desire new things out of distrust of 17.
God, and make such conclusions of unbeleef; Surely if God should not grant
such and such things unto them then they are lost and undone, and there is no
way in the world to help them, and their desires are put on by distrust:
Whereas (my Brethren) Gracious desires are put Note.
on by faith, it is the prayer of Faith that does ^ood, it is Faith that does
inflame gracious desires that are sent up to God, they are sent up by the
strength of Faith, and not the strength of Unbelief: It is the strength of
Unbelief that makes the desires of people so strong as they are, as thus; These
people desired a King? Why? because they could not trust God to have but only
Judges as they had before. Samuel was an old man and his sons were naught, and
they see themselves in a hard condition; yea, but now seeing God had nor spoken
to them about a new Government, they should have had it from God, if they had
it at all, God should choose them one; but they thought that they must have one
to go before them in their Battles, or else their Battles would miscarry, and
they saw the Princes of the earth, they went before their Subjects in their
Battles, and therefore they would be like unto them, and durst not trust God in
that way that they were in before: and therefore it was in wrath that God gave
them their desires.

Yet further, If when God changes our condition, we bring the sins of our old
condition into our new, we can have no 18
comfort then that it is out of love; our care should be when our condition is
changed, Oh but what were the fins of my former condition? what were the sins
of my afflicted, my low condition? let me take heed that I do not bring those
corruptions into my new condition.

And then lastly, If we seek to attain our desires by unlawful means, certainly
that is cursed; If God does let us prosper 19.
in ways that are unlawful in themselves, we cannot believe that what we enjoy
comes out of love, but out of wrath.

I was the willinger to enlarge this Point because of the great usefulness of
it.

Now then by way of Corallary, by all that has Corallaries from the former
Notes.
been said.

First, Learn we then from hence, To take-heed that we quiet 1.
our selves in our desires; be not too earnest in your desires; remember that
Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 6. Now these things were our ensamples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. It has reference even
to their lusting for their Quails, it was called lusting after evil things;
though the things themselves were good, yet because of the way of their
lusting, it made them evil to them: these are for our ensample, because we
should not lust so as they lusted. Oh! when you read but that 11. of Numb. and
the 78. Psalm. and there find how they lusted after evil things, and how the
wrath of God came upon them when they had their desires satisfied, let these be
ensamples for us that we take heed of lusting so. And so when we read of their
desires so after a King, and what they met withal when they had him, (I say) it
should teach us so far to moderate our desires, as to labor to regulate them by
the Word of God, and not be headie in them, but to order them according to the
mind of God.

And then the Second is this, Let us by all that has been 2.
said learn, to prepare our hearts for what we have, and to seek proportionable
grace for any thing that we do desire. Treasure up this lesson; when thou
would have a mercy from God, Oh seek proportionable grace, and prepare for
the mercy.

Thirdly, learn this Lesson, Be not too much exalted when 3.
thou have thy desires satisfied Me thinks this Point might be as a prick, to
prick the bladders of the pride of men's hearts. Oh! take heed though you have
prospered according to your desires; Saul prospered a great while, and yet it
was in wrath. Certainly there is no great matter to be expected from such things
as we may have in Gods wrath, and therefore no cause to be exalted.

Fourthly, Learn from hence, Never to draw any arguments 4.
of Gods love, by satisfying your desires in outward things. It is a vain
conceit of people to think thus, God loves me, why? because I have desired such
and such things, and God has given them to me. If a man were to go and choose a
Wife, if he knew her face were painted, would Simile
he conclude, Surely here is one of an excellent complexion? No, he would rather
suspect it; truly the argument is as good, That this woman's complexion and the
constitution of her body is whole and good, as that argument, that my condition
is good because God satisfies me in my desires.

Fifthly, draw this consequence likewise, Learn never to envy at any men that
have their lusts satisfied; there is little 5.
cause that you should envy them. If you should see a man that loves Wine, and
you knew it were poisoned. Similies.
And a man that has a Satin Suit, and you know it has 1. 2.
the Plague in it, there were no cause of envying such a man; a Leather Suit
were a great deal better. God satisfies men many times, but it is in wrath, and
to prepare them for slaughter.

Sixthly, Learn from hence, To be content to wait, and 6.
to be denied of your desires. Oh! this is a point of very great use, to teach
us patience when God denies us; be patient and content when God denies you your
desires, for you do not know what God may aim at in it.

Seventhly, Learn from hence, Not to rest in what you enjoy, 7
but to seek to know the principle from whence it comes. And this I take to be
as special a difference between a Carnal heart, and a Gracious heart as any I
know. A Carnal A special difference between a Carnal and a Gracious heart.
heart thinks this: If I have the thing, I care not for any more: but a
Gracious heart looks at the principle from whence it comes, he loves to look at
the root and principle of all. A Gardener that owes the Flowers regards the
root more than the flower a great deal: but a stranger Simile.
is mo^e pleased with the Flower than with the Root. So Carnal hearts look only
at Flowers; but gracious hearts look at the Root: I have such and such a thing,
but have I an evidence of Gods love? Look how high the head of the Fountain is,
so high the Water will go, and no higher; Water will ascend as high as the
place was from whence it did descend. And so every mercy we have will carry us
as high as from whence it came: If Note.
from common general bounty, it carries us to God but it came in a general way;
but if it comes in a special love in Christ, it carries us to God in Christ.

Eighthly, Learn hence, To seek those gifts that God never 8.
grants to any but in love. There are some things that are of such a noble and
excellent nature, as God does never grant to any but in love, they are precious
things indeed; And this one Consideration does show the difference An essential
difference between Spiritual and Temporal blessings.
between Spiritual blessings, and Temporal blessings as much as any one thing I
know. Temporal blessings though they are in themselves good, and have many
sweet accomodations with them, yet they are of such a low nature, as many times
they come to men, and come out of Gods wrath, they may stand with wrath, yea,
they may flow from wrath. But come to Spiritual blessings, the Graces of Gods
Spirit, come to those Spiritual blessings wherewith we are blessed in Jesus
Christ, and these are of such a nature as they can never com but from love, and
out of love.

From this point you see, That a little Grace is more worth than the enjoyment
of all the world: God may give a man Note.
the Empire of all the world, and he may do it in wrath, and tend to the
furtherance of wrath; but now, if you have but the least dram of Grace, if
you have but any spiritual knowledge of God in Christ; This is eternal life,
Joh. 17. 3.
to know thee, and thy Son whom thou have sent into the world: If thou, have
any Faith, Oh! this is Precious Faith: If thou have any knowledge, Oh it is the
Divine Nature, it comes from the infinite Ocean of eternal love and will carry
thee to the infinite Ocian of love; Oh! prize Grace, and seek after Grace.

You whose hearts have been so eager and desirous after The point urged.
outward things, turn now the stream of your desires; Oh I have been eager
after such and such things; if I have them, yet I may have the wrath of God
with them and what good will they do me then? Oh! but I hear that there are
such and such things to be had that I can never have them but in love, they are
the privileges that come to the Saints in Jesus Christ.

Ninthly, Oh bless God, you that know and find that what you have, it is in
love. You are to bless God for what 9.
you have; but in that he has given you your desires, and given them out of
love too, here God blesses his blessings, and your blessings should be double,
trible, seven, an hundred fold: Oh that the Lord has delivered me from such an
affliction, and I find it is in love; as Hezekiah could say, when he was
delivered from his sickness, In love to my soul have thou delivered me from the
pit Isa. 39.
of corruption: So I make no question but there is many of the people of God,
even many of you that are before him this day, that are able to say, Well, upon
these arguments that I have heard this day upon this point thus opened, I can
say to the glory of God, Out of love to my soul has he delivered me out of
such an affliction, from such a sickness; out of love to my soul has he
granted me such a mercy: I had been praying and crying to him for such and such
mercies, and out of love to my soul has he granted them to me. Oh! you may go
away Encouragement.
with comfort in what you have, if it be but a very little that God has given
you; Oh the Lord has given you a good portion, your lot is fallen into a good
ground, you have a goodly inheritance, Certainly you have a child's portion,
and go away and be satisfied in it.

And now my Brethren, though this part for the practical part of it is the
chief: I confess I have not yet come upon that that is held forth in the very
words, and that is about giving of Governors in his wrath; I only have spoken
to the Point hitherto, as it concerns the giving of our desires whatsoever it
be: But now for the particulars, as the specification of their desires, That
God had given them a King in his wrath. That I confess is a point that I think
there may be much of the mind of God known in it, and a point that will require
some time in opening it. And it will be hard to speak of such a point as this
is without very great deliberation, and to have full scope when at any time I
speak of it; and therefore I do not intend at this time to meddle with this
point of Gods giving Kings in wrath, I shall rather defer it to the next day.
Only one Note further, and that is this;

A hint of a meditation upon Gods giving our desires in his wrath; when men by
the violence and strength of their spirits do get their desires from God though
in wrath, it has hinted to me this Meditation which may be of very great use
to you.

Many men they do get from their consciences those things they have a mind to
have, as they get from God that they have a mind to have; many men are very
violent in their desires, and would fain have God grant them such and such
things, at length, though it be a thing that is very displeasing to God, says
God, let them have it. Just so it is in regard of conscience, for conscience is
Gods Vicegerent in the soul of man. Now there are many men that are very
desirons of such things as their consciences at first are very much against:
Oh! they would fain have such and such things: says conscience, you may not,
you will sin against God, you will would me, and bring sorrow and affliction to
your selves; this makes them at a stand, and they are very much grieved at it
that conscience will not give them leave, and it may be they have so much
enlightening in their consciences as they dare not take it without the leave of
conscience, and although they may restrain for a while, yet still their lusts
are very violent, and they would fain have their consciences to yield to them,
they labor and struggle what they can with conscience, and they seek to find
out some evasions and distinctions whereby they may satisfy conscience, either
to lay conscience asleep, so that it may not trouble them, or at length to
satisfy conscience so far as conscience may be content that they should have
their desires satisfied, Now their lusts when they are grown hot send up such
streams into their understandings as hinders the work of conscience, that Note.
conscience begins to be more dull in the work of it, and is not so quick in
the apprehensions of it, nor in the exercise of it as before; and at length
after much ado, when they have tired and wearied themselves, and tired
conscience, they at length do obtain even of their very consciences to do such
things as they have a mind to, so that now Note.
their consciences begins to say to them, Seeing you have such a strong and
earnest desire, do it; Now upon this they eagerly fall upon it, and they bless
themselves in this, and think they have gotten a great Victory that they have
prevailed over their consciences, that their consciences has given them leave
to do such a thing; it may be these men will say, If I thought it were against
conscience, if conscience did tell me that it ought not to be done, I would not
do it for a world. Yea, but friend, how do you get leave of your conscience to
do it? There was a time that conscience was against it; how came you to get
leave of your conscience? was it not through the violence of your spirits? You
would needs have it, you were set upon it that you must have your liberty, and
preterment, your ease, and content, and you must not suffer such and such
things, and by this violence of your spirits you come to prevail with your
consciences: Now conscience lets you go one but do not you think that
conscience will tear you for this another day: for all you have prevailed with
your conscience so as it does not acuse you of such and such an evil way, but
lets you go on; do not you think to hear of it another day? Oh yes, certainly
conscience being Gods Vicegerent, will do as God will do in this case, When
men get their desires of God, why says God, let them have them, but do not you
think that God will call them to an account for it? So it is here; as men shall
hereafter pay full dearly for those things that God suffers them here to have;
so many men and women will pay full dearly for those things that conscience
gives them now liberty to enjoy: though you have liberty yet you have got it
in a forced way from conscience, and conscience will have another reckoning
with you hereafter: you know how it was with Balaam, he had a mind to go to
curse the people, it was because of his preferment, and though God did deny him
once, yet he would ask again, and he would not be satisfied till God said at
length, Go; Yea, but God met him in the way, and had like to have destroyed him
for all that. Just so do many men with their consciences, it may be they see
some preferment that they may get such a way, and their consciences for the
present have some tenderness, but they will ask their consciences, and their
consciences says no, but then they will ask again, and again, and, as I say,
God said to Balaam at length, Go, but he said it to him in anger, and met him
in the way and had like to have destroyed him; and so though conscience may do
so, yet conscience will one day come out with a drawn Sword against thee, and
it may be thy destruction.

Notes prepared by the Author for another Sermon on Hosea 13. 11 which (being
prevented by the Lords taking him to himself) he Preached not:
I gave them a King in my wrath, etc.
KIngs and Princes sometimes are given to a people in anger. Text. Obs. 4.
Job. 34. 30. That the Hyyocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared. It is
in anger if an Hypocrite reign. Psalm. 109. 6. Set thou a wicked man over him,
and let Satan stand at his right hand. Dan. 8. 23. In the latter time when the
transgressions are come to the full, a King of fierce countenance, and
understanding dark sentences shall arise; and his power shall be mighty, he
shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper. So it was said of the
Agrigentinis Phalaris, Marius Romany. Cur Domine eu^ ficisti Imperatorum?
Agrigentines, That Phalaris was given to them as a plague, and Marius to the
Romans. Resp. Quoniam non inveni pesorem.
Anastasius Nicenus, Quest. 15. in script. speaks of one in the time of
Phocas, pleading with God and saying, Wherefore Lord have thou made Phocas
Emperor? the Answer from Heaven was: Because I could not find a worse. He tells
also of the Bishop of Thebais, being proud because advanced: Had these words
spoken to him: Wherefore miserable man art thou proud? Thou were not made
Bishop because thou wast worthy, but because the City deserved such a Bishop.

But it may be demanded: When are Kings and Princes given in anger? I answer;
Quest.


1. When men are eager upon them, The men of Shechem Answ. When Governors are
given in Anger.
were eager upon Abimelech, Judge. 9. 6. They had him, but in wrath; for verse.
23. God sent an evil spirit between the men of Shechem and Abimelech. And what
the issue was we know.

2. When Kings and Princes are desired out of an opposition to what God would
have them to be under as here in the text: so Sam. 8. 10. 19.

3. When such are given as was Saul and Jeroboam. For explication of this
observe,

1. What Saul was.
First, He was Tyrannical, 1 Samuel 8. 11. Psalm. 18. SAUL A description of him.
with the Title.

Secondly, A bold venturous man, to do things of his own head in Gods Worship,
1 Samuel 13. 9. he sacrificed before Samuel came.

Thirdly, Hypocritical, 1 Samuel 15. 13. he blessed Samuel, and pretended he had
performed the Commandment of the Lord; whereas he had rebelled against it,
verse. 22, 23.

Fourthly, A rash spirit, 1 Samuel 14. 24. Cursed (says he) be the man that eats
any food till evening: when as first, it was an hindrance to the execution, as
verse. 29, 30. and again, all the people heard not, and namely his son Jonathan,
upon whom he had like to have executed the curse, if the people had not rescued
him.

Fifthly, Hardly convinced, 1 Samuel 15. 20. He stands in the defense of himself
against Samuel the Prophet.

Sixthly, Greedy of gain, 1 Samuel 15. 19. Samuel charges him, with flying upon
the spoil.

Seventhly, Regarding the people more than the Commandment of God, 1 Samuel 15.
24. I feared the people, says he, and obeyed their voice.

Eighthly, Seeking his vain honor, 1 Samuel 15. 30. I have sinned, yet honor me
now I pray thee before the Elders of my people, and before Israel.

Ninthly, Gods Spirit leaves him, 1 Samuel 16. 14. The Spirit of the Lord
departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him.

Tenthly, A poor low spirit to help himself when God was departed, 1 Samuel 16.
17. when he was troubled with the evil spirit, he was fain to except of the
poor help that Music could afford him.

Eleventhly, Subtle and crafty, Psalm. 57. 6. David says (speaking of Saul)
That he had prepared a net for his feet, and dug a pit, so Psalm. 142. 3.

Twelfthly, Proud and haughty, Psalm. 59. 12. For the sin of their mouth, and
for the words of their lips, let them be taken in their pride. Viz Can the Son
of Jesse give you fields and Vinyards, 1 Samuel 22. 7.

13ly Given to Cursing, Psalm. 53. 12. Cursing, and lying they speak.

14ly Envious. 1 Samuel 18 8, 9. When they had sung in the dance, Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands: The Text says, Saul was very
wroth, and the thing displeased him; and Saul eyed David from that day and
forward.

15ly Hating the Saints. 1 Samuel 18. 11. Saul cast his Javeling at David, and
said, I will smite David to the wall. And verse. 13. He removed him from him.
And 1 Samuel 17. 1. Saul spoke to all his servants, that they should kill David.
And verse. 17. he calls him his Enemy, saying to Michel, Why have thou sent away
mine Enemy?

16ly Cruel. 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19. He caused to be slain 85 Priests; and smote the
City of Nob (the City of the Priests) men, women and children, sucklings, oxen,
asses, sheep, with the edge of the sword. Psalm. 7. 2. David prays for help,
lest he (Saul) tear my soul (says he) like a Lion, renting it in pieces etc.
And Psalm. 57 4. He says, My soul is among Lions, men that are set on fire,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

17ly Treacherous: Pretends a Benefit, intends a mischief: 1 Samuel 18. 17. And
Saul said to David, Behold, my elder daughter Merob, her will I give thee to
wife, only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lords battles: for Saul said,
Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the band of the Philistims be upon him.

18ly. False of his word: ver. 19. But it came to pass at the time when Merab
Saul's daughter should have been given to David, that she was given to Adriel
the Meholathite to wife. 1 Samuel 26. 21. Return my son David for I will do thee
no harm, yet chap. 27. 1. David was so pursued by him, that he fled to Achish
King of Gath. Psalm. 59. 12. Lying they speak.

19ly. He regards not oaths, 1. Sam. 19. 6. And Saul swear: as the Lord lives
he shall not be slain: yet, ver. 10. 11. he would have smitten him to the wall
with his Javalin, and missing that, he sent messengers to murder him in his
house.

20ly. Stout against his conscience, and all means that God used to reclaim
him. 1 Samuel 24. 17. 18. 19. 20. Thou art more righteous then I, etc I know well
that thou shall surely be King and that the Kingdom of Israel shall be
established in thine hand, etc. Hence David Psalm. 59. praying against Saul, as
appears in the title of the Psalm, ver. 5. says, Be not merciful to wicked
transgressors.

21ly Preferring base men, and rejecting the good, Psa. 59. 7. David was his
enemy, but Doeg a mighty man with him.

22ly. Cares not for his own Laws to satisfy his humors, 1 Samuel 28. 9. where
having suppressed wizards and witches, yet he seeks to them and promises
immunity to them.

23ly. He is unwearied in his malice, never rests, but follows David, as one
hunts a partridge from place to place, if disappointed one way, he tryes
another: sends to David's house, then to Naioth, then to Keilah, then to Ziph,
then to Engedi, to Hachilah, Saul sought him every day 1 Samuel 23. 14. Psalm. 7.
14. Behold be travelleth with mischief, etc.

24ly. One that could not be overcome by kindness, love, faithfulness, not
taking advantage, etc. 1. Sam. 24. 4. etc. chap. 26. 8. 9.

25ly. Vexed because he could not have his mind, Psa. 57. 14, 15. They return
and grin like a dog, vexed to lose his morsel.

26ly. Desperate forsaking of God, and going to the Devil for counsel, 1 Samuel
28. 7. and afterward wilfully kills himself.

2. What Jeroboam was.
1. One that seemed to be much for the good of the people, Jeroboam: A
description of him.
but when he had power in his own hands, then none more fierce then himself, 1
King. 11. 27. He cared not for the people. Hos. 13. 1.

2. One whose carriage was very taking, he was diligent industrious and
valiant, a man fit for rule. 1 Kin. Omniam consensu capax Imperij nisi
imperasses.
11. 28. but when he had got power into his own hands, there was nothing but
imperious domineering, Tacitus says of Galba, That al men judged him fit for
rule, til he did come to it.

3 Subjecting of Religion unto Policy, 1 King. 12. 26. And Jeroboam said, Now
shall the Kingdom return to the House of David, if this people go up to do
Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem: Whereupon the King took
Counsel, and made two Calves of Gold, etc.

4. False, pretending one thing, and meaning another, 1 King. 12. 28. He said
unto the people, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy Gods
O Israel which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

5. Idolatrous, ibid. and 1 King. 14. 9. But thou have done evil above all that
were before thee for thou have gone and made thee other gods and molten Images
etc.

6. He was a conscience oppressor, He laid snares for those that went up to
Jerusalem to worship, as was noted, Hos. 9. 8.

7. A scorner, Hos. 7. 5. He stretched out his hand with scorners.

8. Subtle, 1 King. 12. 31. He ordained such a feast as was at Jerusalem, made
an house of high places, and Priests that all might be furnished like the
worship at Jerusalem.

9. Intemperate, Hos 7 5. In the day of our King, the Princes have made him
sick with bottles of Wine etc.

10 Despising the true Ministers of God and loving a base Clergy, 1 King. 12.
31. Made Priests of the lowest of the People.

11 Enraged against the Servants of God, and God himself when opposed, 1 King.
13. 4. And it came to pass when King Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of
God, which cried against the Altar in Bethel, that he put forth his hand from
the Altar saying, Lay hold on him.

12 Extreme stout, notwithstanding such a hand of God upon him, verse. 33. After
this Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the people
Priests for the high places.

13 Slighting God and his Worship, 1 King. 14. 9. Thou have cast me behind thy
back.

14 He did evil above all that were before him, 1 Kings, 14. 9.

15. He trusted to his many men and policy, not regarding what is said to him
about fighting against God, 1 Chronicles. 13. 8. 12, 13.

16. Though conquered before Gods Servants, who relied on the Lord, 1 Chronicles.
13. 18. so as he lost five hundred thousand men at one time, yet he continued
in his evil.

17. For his own ends he would make use of Gods Prophets, 1 King. 14.

18. A man of a base spirit; God threatens he will take him away as man takes
away dung, 1 King. 14. 10.

19. His family was such, as, except in one little child, there was no good at
all found in it, 1 King. 14. 13.

20. He made Israel to sin. The common Epethite the Scripture gives him.

21. He ruined the Kingdom by his sin: 1 King. 14. 16. He shall give Israel up,
because of the sins of Jeroboam.

Yet for all this he continued his reign two and twenty How long he reigned.
years. 1 King. 14. 20.

Seeing Governors are sometimes given in wrath, let us pray that they be given
to us in love: But it follows, Use.
I took them away in my displeasure. (...)


As if he should say, though they were evil, yet I took Expos.
them away, to make way for worse.

Whence note, Oppressors are taken away, and greater Oppressors Obs. 1.
came in their room.

Cavlin, thus, I will take away this Kingdom from you which Expos. Calvin.
I see to be an occasion of blindness to you: for if it remain, I shall be no
body with you, nor will my word be of any Authority.

Obs. 2. What God gives in anger never prospers. Obs. 2. Use.


Expect not therefore help from those men or things that God gives in wrath.

Sometimes God accepts of repentance when it is unfeigned, Caution.
as in David's taking Bathshebah to wife of whom he had Solomon, etc. Viz. if
the thing it self be good.

What God gives in anger cannot hold long with us, [Caut. Obs. 3.
yet this Kingdom of Israel continued twenty years.]

Those things that begin ill, prosper not usually. (Initium Obs. 4.
maledictum finis maledictus, Calvin in loc.) The beginning is accursed, and so
is the end. Thus many businesses beginning in anger end in wrath; this Kingdom
of Israel is an example of this from the beginning to the end. [But yet here
also that holds the Author noted above verse 9. that no condition is so bad but
there is help in God for it, and if so be that the continuance in it be not
with sin, or the thing a sin in it self.]

When men have enjoyed their desires in wrath a while, God Obs. 5.
rends them in fury from them, this is terrible indeed, for as it was given in
indignation: All the while it was enjoyed it was abused, Psalm. 78 30, 31. While
the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came out against them.

But yet we must here Note the difference that Pareus Caution. Paenae piorum
ira, impiorum furor, Pareus.
observes, That these calamities upon what God gives in displeasure, are indeed
wrath to his own people, but in fury to his enemies.

When God takes away what he gave in wrath it is more Obs. 6.
wrath [ofti(...)]

But here are two Questions. 1. How we may know Quest. 1.
when God takes away and not in wrath?

First: When the comfort or creature he takes from us, Answ. When God takes
away, and not in wrath.
began to draw the heart from God, and now he seasonably takes it away with a
sanctified use. 2. When we can bless God and be thankful. 3. When God makes it
up in himself, and in the comforts of his Spirit.

When does God take away in wrath? Quest. 2. Answ. 1 When God takes away in
wrath. 2. 3.


First, When it is given in anger.

Secondly, When he takes them away by violence in some terrible manner. Psalm.
58. 9. Before your pots can feel the thorns he shall take them away as with a
whirl wind, both living, and in his wrath. Psalm. 52. 5. God shall destroy thee
for ever, he shall take thee away and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and
root thee out of the Land of the living. Lam. 2. 6. He has violently taken
away his Tabernacle. As a man that is angry snatches away what he had given.

Thirdly, When we have most need of the comfort of it, Zeph. 2. 4. I will drive
out Ashdod at noon day, [when [Tempus sane incommodissimum, iter aliquo
facientibus in aestate and in locu calidioribus. Drus. in l.
they should have taken the benefit of their houses for shelter, and their meat
for refreshment.]

Fourthly, When we murmur and complain inordinately of our affliction.

Fifthly, When we shift and shark out for succor.

Sixthly, When there is nothing but bitterness, and only evil in the removal.

Seventhly, When one evil makes way to another evil and none sanctified. Psalm.
78. 50. He made way to his anger.

Eighthly, When it carries with it the marks of special Note.
sins. yea, when as the sin it self deprive us of a mercy; a when in emperance
takes away health; ambition brings into disgrace; glottonie takes away the
stomach; greediness takes away (...)ches. Romans 11. 27. This is my Covenant with
them when I shall take away their sins.

Ninthly, When it happens according to those misgiving Note.
thoughts we have had, and yet would not take warning.

Tenthly, When it brings sin into remembrance, Job, 13. 26. Thou make me to
possess the sins of my youth. 1 King. 17. 18. Art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son?

Wherefore seeing this is so fearful, let us pray with Use.
David, Psalm 6. 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in
thy heavy displeasure.

Again note, that our sin may bring us to this: That Obs. 7.
whether we have our desires, or whether they be taken away, yet still all may
be wrath.

Change of oppressing Government by foreign Power, is a sign Obs. 8.
of wrath.

Gods hand in a business excuses not man's sin; he can make Obs. 9.
use of man's sin to the furtherance of his ends, and yet be innocent.

Lastly, We must not judge by success; of which above. Obs. 10.


Thus far the Authors Notes.

The Supervisor to the READER.
THE Author was prevented by several providence, from preaching the fore going
Sermon for some months together, insomuch as himself wondered what purpose God
had in it; till at last God visited him by sickness, whereof he fell on sleep
in the Lord: His Disease was thought to be Infection, but without any sore,
yea, and (as the Gentlewoman his wife has related) without any spots or
tokens; only there was a black settling of blood on one side of his back, which
she supposed might have come with a Fall from a Horse which he had taken not
long before. This is mentioned by occasion of some contrary reports concerning
his death. About the time of his imediate dissolution be lift up his eyes, and
was heard to speak these words, I come, I come, I come: and so gave up the
ghost.

It had been much to be wished that the Author had been more concise and brief
in some Amplifications which, though they were al exceeding useful, yet they
have deprived us of his Preaching and completing both the former Sermon, and
the rest of the Prophecy. But God was pleased (for our sin no doubt) to
deprive us of that Mediator like Instrument between the divided Godly Parties
of this Nation, and of the further mind of the Holy Ghost which be had revealed
to this his Servant, touching the Scope and Use of this Prophecy in these
days.

God took him away in the strength of his Parts and Graces, that he might not
lose in the reputation of his Ministry or Piety, as some have before their
Solve senescentem mature sanus Equum, ne peccet ad extremum videndus and ilia
ducat. Horat. Jer. 57. (...)
death.

Also; though we cannot affirm, as one of Josiah, That he was taken away (Ne
malitia mutaret intellectum ipsius) lest the evil of the time should have
wrought upon his temper: yet we may say, as another does, He was taken away
from the evil to come.

Moreover: It is not an unuseful Note, that the Preface to the -- Esse
praeterea alios, qui prius multas adire gentes etc. quae priusquam assequantur
aut sibi satisfacia^t and in his quicquem tentandum esse putent, vel senio, vel
nimiis and intempestivis studiis conficiantur, vel sero nimis incipientes,
nihil ad justum finem perducant -- ut Ecclesiae carendum sit non tam
praecellentium quam mediocrium ingeniorum fructibus, etc.
Tigurine Bible has, whereof the inference is, That whilst in some weighty
point we labor for great exactness and preparation, we are either disabled by
our diligence, or prevented by our tardiness and delay, whereas moderat
preparation seasonably applied, might be more useful to the Church, than such
exactness so deferred. Which is not spoken to reflect any thing on our reverend
Author, but to admonish others, ut maturens.

Now among other arguments (good Reader) to commend this Excellent piece: This
is one, That it has been brought to thy hand, through several Elements, having
been in danger, part of it to be rotted in the Earth where it was buried, part
of it to be consumed in the Fire, wherewith much of the Town where it was The
Original was with the Superoisor in Colchester when besieged and much of the
Town burnt.
flamed part of it to be lost in by holes where it was hidden in the midst of
Enemies. Make special use therefore of what is come (as it were) through fire
unto thee for that end, (to use the Prefacers words before Mr Cartwright's
Answer to the Rhem. Test.) And if thou find that fruit the Supervisor did in
preparing it for thee, thou will not repent thy pains or penny.

Farewell.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth CHAPTERS of the
Prophecy of HOSEA.
A
Abuse ABuse of Instruments of Deliverence, a great evil Page 399 Affliction
None of the Saints worse for affliction 453 Afflictions sometimes deepest when
greatest Mercy is intended 231 Affliction, see Difference
Afflicted We may be sorely afflicted in doing Gods Commands 227 Aggravation
The aggravation of provoking God 403 An aggravation of self destruction 513
Alteration Alteration of Government causes Trembling 422 Anceston Ancestors,
see Mean condition, Free Grace Anger Anger, see Difference The Effects of Anger
151
Apostats Apostats, see Folly Apostats to return again 340
Apostasy Apostasy see Language, Punishment, Steps Apostasy brings a reproach
on Gods ways. 408
Arabian Arabian, why taken for a Thief. 310 Aright. How to conceive aright of
God 274 Armies Gods Armies 271 Astrologer Astrologer, see Chaldean Awaking
Saints need awaking before Reformation 185
B
Baal-zephon Baal zephon, what 30 Baptism Baptism, see Church. Base Base
spirits most insolent 415 Beast Beast, see Mark Beginning The Beginning of
Superstition, Ceremonies, and Popery 437 Bethel Bethel, see Jacob Bitterness
Bitterness, see England Blessing What Is the blessing in a married condition 392
Blessing, see Peace Bonds Gods Bonds, what? 30 Blows To be forced by blows, is
to be drawn like a beast 57
C
Canaanite Canaanite, Why it signifies a Merchant 310 Carnal It Is mercy to be
taken off from carnal props 104 Carnal heart, see Difference A sore sign of a
carnal heart 326
Cause The cause of corruption in Gods Worship 439 Caution A Caution concerning
Earthly Kings 523 Chief The Chief work of the Ministry 177 Chaldean Chaldean,
why taken from an Astrologer 310 Child Child, see Israel A Child's great
disobedience
Children How we may know whether God loved us when we were children 10 Christ
God has an eye to Christ in all he does 19 Christians Christians, see Love.
Church The Church one in Faith, Spirit, Baptism, and visible Government 13
Comfort Comfort, see Lives. Comfort of a dying person 130 Common Comforts,
common to Hypocrites 433
Command Command, see Promise. Company Company heats, whether it be go^d or
evil 164 Confident Young beginners not to be too confident 33 Confident men sink
lowest if disappointed 201
Confidences The confidences of the ten Tribes 525 Congregation Congregation,
see Posture. Conduct Gods Conduct of his people through the Wilderness 450
Conscience The conflict of conscience and corruption 122 Conscience oppression,
the most grievous 98
Convince Convince, see Ministers. It Is hard to convince men, when they have
their desires that it is not in love 539
Conviction Conviction, see Parents. Convert A true Convert, what? 333 Cords
Cords of a man, what? 43 Correction Correction, see Parents. Covenant Covenant,
see Jews. Covetousness Covetousness, hard to be convinced 331
D
Day Day of Judgment, see Mercy. Dangerous A dangerous sign of Reprobation 544
Deceiptful dealers Deceiptful dealers, see Excuses Decree Decree, what it is?
511 The Decree of Election ibid. Gods Decree damns none ib.
Devils The Devils Stratagem 175 An obstinate sinner worse than the Devil 109
Deliverance Deliverance from oppression a great mercy 92 Difference Difference
between Spiritual, and Temporal blessings 557 Difference between a carnal, and
gracious heart 329 556 Difference between the Churches and Gods Excommunication
436 Difference between God and man in point of anger 169 Difference in the
Saints from others in time of affliction. 308 Difference of Gods working for
his people and for others 399
Disappointed Disappointed, see Conceited, and Confident. Disobedience
Disobedient, see Child. Drawn To be drawn by the Word, is to be drawn like
(...) man 57 Doctrine Doctrine, see False. Drowsy A Drowsy spirit, a great
evil 133 Duty Duty, see Ministers. Dying Dying, see Comfort.
E
East Wind The East wind, why hurtful 202 Effects Effects, see Anger. Effectual
Effectual preaching, what. 349 Elect Elect, see Thoughts Election Election, see
Decree. Element God the Element of Love 85 England Gods ancient love to Engl. 6
England, the first Nation that embraced the Christian Religion ibid. God
remembers the kindness of England's youth ibid. Public love gone out of
England 72 Gods special love to England. Englands sin 93 Procession weeks in
England 355 Englands bitterness aggravated 407 England, see Instances
Encouragement Encouragement to says and prayer 151 Error Men's error in
judging others. 213 Evil Evil of licenciousness after deliverance 94 Men excuse
their evil by their good 214 Evil of deceit in Trading 315 Evil, see Suspense,
Drowsy, Company.
Excellency Excellency of the Name JEHOVAH 293 Excellency of Gods saving 449
Exalted We should not be exalted by prosperity, and why? 462 Excommunication
Excommunication, see Difference Excuses Excuses of deceiptful dealers. 319 Men's
excuses 515

F
Faith Faith, see Church, Encouragement, Root. Faculties Faculties, see Love.
Families Families, see Imperiousness False False, see Increase. Fill Men fill
themselves with sensual things 445 Forced Forced, see Blows, Wives. Folly Folly
of Apostats 307 Form A form of answering to Gods call 128 Forgiveness Healing
with forgiveness a sweet Mercy 95 Free, see Grace. Free grace of God to our
Ancesters 222 Fruit To understand the Scriptures is a fruit of love 20 Fruit,
see Way.

G
Gift, see Ministry God Gods great design is to magnify free grace 25 God
deals gently with his people 53 Gods great design in the Gospel 70 God deals
roughly with the great, and graciously with the grieved and oppressed. 500 God
will be a Lion to them that forget him ibid. Why God compares himself to a
Leopard 502 God is to be preached as terrible 508 God, see Christ, England,
Know, Trembling, Help, Healer, Merciful.
Godly heart Godly heart, see Difference Good Good, see London, Company. Good
Cause Good Cause, see Success. Goods Goods ill got, the third Heir enjoys not
319 Government Government, see Church Guides Guides, their changeableness 31
Guiding Why the soul needs Guiding. 32
H
Hear Hear, see Reverence Healing Healing, see Forgiveness Healer God will be
acknowledged the Healer of his people 40 Help God delights to Help men in
misery 519 High minded Why the rich are apt to be high minded 459 Honor Honor
of our inferiors must be preserved 55 God has little honor in the world 132
Hope Hope, see Wind Host Host, see People. Humbles What humbles most
effectually 287 Hurtful Hurtful, see East Wind.
I
Jacob What God spoke to Jacob at Bethel 264 Jacob's mean condition 356 Jacob's
flying into Syria 358 Why Jacob is sent away so meanly 359 Jacob has the
blessing renewed at his going away 359 Why Jacob served seven years for Rachel
394
Jehovah Jehovah, what it infer's 273 Jehovah, what it should mind us of 274
Jehovah, what terror is in the Name 291 Jehovah, what Consolation in the Name
292 Jehovah, see Excellency
Jews One of Gods special Covenants with the Jews 427 Ill-got Ill-got, see
Goods Image Image, see Wrath Imitate Imitate God in resisting temptations to
sin 149 Immoderate Immoderat desires to be taken heed of 537 Imperiousness The
Imperiousness of some in their families 416 Increase Whence such Increase of
false Doctrine 205 Increasing, see Lies
Inferiors Inferiors, see Honor Ingratitude Ingratitude, see Perverse spirit
Insolent Insolent, see Bass Israel What a child Israel was 3 Wherein Gods Love
to Israel stood 4 Israel, see Mercy
Instances Instances of the working of Gods heart toward England 148
Instruments Instruments, see Abuse Iron Iron Tools unfit to build God's
Tabernacle 343 Israelites Why the Israelites would have a King and Princes 530
Judgment It may prove a Judgment to invent a way to satisfy Conscience 211
Judgment, when to be Executed 300
Judging Judging, see Error.
K
Kingdom Kingdom, see Troubles. King King, see Israelites Kings Kings, see
Caution. Kissing Against kissing the Book in Swearing 443 Know What it is to
know God 447
L
Labor Labor, see Prevailing Language The Language of the sin of Apostasy 409
Law Saints not under the Law 11 Liberty What use we should make of Liberty 96
Licentiousness Licentiousness, see Evils Lives Lives, how to complete the
comfort of them 10 Leopard Leopard, see God Lion The Lions property 504 Lion,
see God
Little A little of Spiritual things serves men's turns 455 London Gods mercy to
London all this War 114 London's good is to be labored for 115
Love Gods Love does not find, but make the person lovely 8 Love commands all
the souls faculties 64 The Love of Christians formerly, compared with our
divisions 72 Love, see Persons, Children, Fruit, England. Love, see Superiors,
Convince, Notes, Magistrates. Love, see Servants, Sanctifies, Overcomes. Love,
see Relations, Element
Lies Several ways of increasing Lies. 206
M
Magistrates Magistrates must deal by Reason rather than by Violence. 51
Magistrates should govern by Love 76
Mark The Mark of the Beast 313
Marriage Marriage founded on consent. 391 Married condition Married condition,
see Blessing Mean condition The mean condition as well as the greatness of our
Ancestors is to be regarded 392 The mean condition of Moses 396
Meditation A Meditation for passionate spirits 464 A Meditation ser Tradesmen
in London 469
Merchant Merchant, see Canaanite. Mercy Gods mercy toward Israel is a Type
of his ways with his people 8 Mercy, when to be shown 299 Mercy, see Carnal
props, London, Plea. Affliction. Merciful hearts nearest to God. 173
Ministers. Ministers pattern 35 Ministers must convince, not scare men 51 It Is
Ministers duty to open Gods Love 66 Ministers should be wary in using tartness
150
Ministry The Ministry a magnificent gift 346 Why men profit no more by the
Ministry 345 In choosing our habitation we should have regard to a good Ministry
347
Monopoliz: To monopolize Commodities is oppression 313
N
Necessary Necessary, see Truth. New New Officers, see Pride. Notes Notes to
know whether it he Love or Hatred by all that is before us 540 Note of
Peprobation 3^^

O
Obstinate Obstinate, see Devil. Oppression Oppression of others after
deliverance from oppression, is a great evil 97 Oppression, see Deliverance,
Monopolize. Oppression, see Conscience, Trading, Evil. Opression, see
Under-trades-men.
Overcome Gods Love overcomes all unworthiness 84 Outward Outward Comforts, see
Thoughts.
P
Pardon Pardon, see Restitution Parents Parents and Masters, must use more
conviction than correction 52 Particular Particular persons should remember
Gods ancient Love. 7 Particulars affect most 294
Passionate Passionate spirits, see Meditation Peace A blessing for them that
hastens peace 112 People Gods People are his Host 272 Perseverance
Perseverance, why more frequent under the Gospel than under the Law 69 Perverse
A perverse spirit the punishment of ingratitude 401 Piety Piety raises the
heart more than Pride 126 Plea The plea of Justice and Mercy 140 Popery Popery,
see Beginning. Posture The posture of a Congregation. 417 Prayer Prayer, see
Encouragement. Priests Priests, see Vanity. Preserve Preserve, see Honor
Prevailing Prevailing recompenceth all our labor in seeking 242 Pride Notes of
pride in some new Officers 461 Privilege Privilege, see Saints Procession
Procession, see England. Profit Profit, see Ministry. Promise No command in the
Gospel without a promise 91 Prosperity Many Saints worse for prosperity 453
Prosperity, see Exalted
Proud Proud men, see Vanity Providence Things accidental are under providence
18 Provoke How we should provoke one another 464 Provoking Provoking God, see
Aggravation Provoking sins expressed 465
Punishment The punishment of Apostacy. 409
R
Reason Reasons of Jacob's taking his brother by the heel 219 Reason, see
Magistrates, Use
Relations The love of all Relations in Gods Love 85 Religion Religion, see
England Reformation Reformation, see Awaking. Recreation Times for Recreation
to be allowed to Servants 101 Repentance Repentance, a Gospel Grace, not of the
Law 66 Reproach Reproach, see Apostasy Reprobation Reprobation, see Note,
Dangerous sign Restitution Why no pardon without Restitution 320 Scripture for
Restitution: 321
Repute Repute not to be trusted 421 Reverence We are with Reverence to hear
the Lord speak 416 Rich Rich, see High-minded Root What Is the immediate Root of
Faith 177 Rule Rule for matter of Meditation. 7 The general Rule of Worship.
437

S
Saints Privilege of Israel refer to the Saints 11 Saints, see Law, Affliction,
Prosperity.
Satan Satan's great design 71 Sanctify Gods Love sanctifies all things 84
Scare, see Ministers
Scripture What the Scripture presses much 297 Scripture, see Restitution.
Self. Wherein self appears in sin 512 Self destruction, see Aggravation.
Sensual Sensual things, see Fill. Servants Servants should love one another 76
Servants, see Recreation.
Sign Sign, see Carnal heart. Similitude Similitudes what, and how to be used
350 Sin. Sin, see Imitate Sinner A sinners duty 340 Soul Soul, see Guiding
Spirit Gods Spirit grieved only by the Saints 89 Spirit, see Church Gods Spirit
bitter to some 406
Slaves Gods Sons, slaves for a time. 14 Slavery God has his time to call his
sons out of Slavery ibid. Spiritual Spiritual things, see Little. State The
State of the Saints is very secure 154 Steps The steps of Apostasy 432 Stout
The Character of a stout heart 107 Stratagem Stratagem, see Devils. Success.
Success no note of a good Cause 536 Superiors Superiors should win by Love. 74
Superstition Superstition, see Beginning. Suspense Suspense, a cause of great
evil 123 Swearing, see Kissing the Book.
Sword For the Sword to be in a City, a sad thing 113
T
Tartness, see Ministers. Terror, see Jehovah. Terrible, see God. Their, see
Arabian. Thoughts Gods Thoughts from eternity concerning his Elect 79 What
thoughts we should have of outward comforts 456
Time, see Slavery. Tools, see Iron. Trading Oppression in Taading a great evil
313 Tradesmen Under- Tradesmen to oppress, is wicked 314 Tradesmen, see
Meditation.
Trembling Trembling due to God 416 Trembling, see Alteration. Tribes, see
Confidences.
Troubles Great troubles at the raising of Christ's Kingdom 184 Truths Truths
not necessary to be imposed 98
V
Vanity The vanity of proudmen 445 Priests may be vanity that seem to be much
for God. 352
Vindicate How the Saints are to vindicate Reproaches 410 Violence, see
Magistrates.
Use The use of Reason in Religion 440
W
Wait How we are to wait on God. 303 Why we should wait 304
Way To be guided in our way is a fruit of Love 32 The way to Uniformity 70 A
way of Holy Revenge 108 Gods ways not our ways 118
Weeping Weeping not suitable to a high Spirit 247 Wilderness Wilderness, see
Conduct Wind Creature-hopes are but wind. 202 Wives Wives or Husbands not to
be forced on Children 390
Word Word, see Drawn Work Work, see Chief One Work of the day of Judgment 511
World World, see Honor Worship Worship, see Rule, Corruption Wrath Proneness
to wrath not Gods Image. 150
Y
Young Young, see Confident
Z
Zeal All men should show Zeal (...)r God
FINIS.

