A Brief RELATION Discovering Plainly the true Causes why the great Level of
FENNS In the several Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington,
Northhampton, and Lincoln Shires; BEING Three hundred and seven thousand Acres
of Low-Lands, have been drowned, and made unfruitful for many years past. AND
As briefly how they may be drained, and preserved from Inundation in the times
to come.

Humbly presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
By Andrews Burrell, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
GReat and Honorable works ought to be directed by great and Honorable
Counsels; And therefore to the intent this noble Enterprise may not be
undervalued (as it is by some) I humbly inform this Honorable Court, that
besides sundry attempts made by diverse Noble men, who desired to improve the
great level of Fenns; the undertaking was so well esteemed by King JAMES, that
He really intended to take it into His own care; the diversion of His Royal
intention is unknown. After him the Late Earl of Bedford and his friends
adventured great sums of money to recover them; But before their works were
finished, they were circumvented and outed of all their intendments. The last
undertaking was attempted by the Kings Majesty that now is; but the greatest
part of His money being misspent, and all his intended works misled by Sir
Cornelius Vermuden's mystical design, His now Majesty has declined His
undertaking also, so that it is like to return to the now Earl of BEDFORD and
his friends.

This Noble Enterprise being thus misguided, lies now before your grave
Wisdoms, expecting direction from this Honorable Assembly, and wanting a
better friend to petition for them, (there being an Order made by the
Honorable Committee for the Fens, the twenty five of February last, that all
men whom it may concern may offer any other design; In regard a perfect
design concerns the preservation of many men's estates, which also may be
ruined, impaired, or cast into eminent danger.) I am humbly bold to inform
you, that unless this Honorable Court command the now intended works to be
published to the several Counties (as was once intended by the Honorable
Committee) so that the Countries approbation, or exceptions may be valued (or
at the least heard.) And that before the works begin, equal compositions may
be made with all those whose Lands shall be impaired, endangered, or taken
from them: many men may be ruined in their just Estates. There are two Reasons
that make me earnest in this cause: The one is the former ill designing, and
ill mannaging of the works, wherein Wilfulness and Ignorance (in the Kings
Name) overruled the Countries. The other concerns my self, first, in taking
a great part of my own Land (and some of that which I Farm) from me, without
satisfaction, composition, or leave to cut it; and which is much worse, by
bringing all the rest of my Inheritance, and leas't Lands (which together are
not less than three thousand Acres) into eminent danger of drowning, by
cutting my old firm Banck, and exposing my Lands to be defended from the
common waters by a hollow counterfeit Banck, made of so light a composition,
that it will both burn and swim.

And here I beseech you give me leave to tell you, that for want of Justice in
ENGLAND, and Peace in IRELAND, my aged Mother; my self and four Brethren,
have within a few years lost nine hundred and sixty pounds per annum: which
when time will give me leave, I hope to prove before this Honorable
Parliament; which makes me the more earnestly implore your aid in this my
great necessity.

To conclude, if this Noble Enterprise by your Honorable pains, be well
designed, and so prosecuted; The Improvement will not only return a sufficient
satisfaction to the adventurers, but the Commonwealth will sweetly relish the
great Improvement which will follow. But because it is not safe to be over
large in great promises, I will say no more; but GOD grant the Fenns may in due
time be made VVinter grounds, not impairing any private man's estate. So Prays

Your Honors humble Supplyant, Andrews Burrell.

A BRIEF RELATION Of the true Causes why the FENNS In Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, and Lincoln Shires, have been drowned.
AND As briefly how they may be drained, and preserved from Inundation.
BEfore I declare the Reasons why those Low Lands are subject to drowning; I
conceive it is fit to discover to them that do not know those Countries, in
what condition the Fens were before they were drowned: How they are seated, and
how they are drowned.

Mr. Cambden in his Brittania, folio 449. referres his Readers to William of
Malmesbury, who reports the Lordship of Thorney in his time to be so
fruitful and fragrant, that for delight it resembled Heaven it self.

That Lordship is indeed a large and rich piece of Land, consisting of eighteen
thousand Acres, or thereabouts, and pertains to the Earls of Bedford.

But having lost the beauty lately mentioned (nay to be plain) being quite
lost, and perpetually drowned, save only one Hillocke where the Abbey
stands, was the cause that induced the late Earl to undertake the drayning
of the great Level. In which service, by reason of my employment under his
Lordship in the year 1635. In deepning Wisbeach River, I discovered a stony
bottom, upon which there was found lying at several distances seven boats,
which for many years had lain buried eight foot under the bottom of the
River, as it was before the late Earls undertaking. And it is very likely,
that when Thorney flourished, Neene did run as deep as that bottom.

After this discovery, it was intended by the late Earl that the River Neene
should have been enlarged and deepned from Wisbeach to Stanground (by the tract
of Mourton Leame) as now it is from Wisbeach to Guyherne. And I am very
confident that if Neene were made a hundred foot broad, and so deep as it is
in Wisbeach Town, from Wisbeach to Stanground, Thorney Fens in a few years
would be as fruitful and rich as ever they were in Malmesburies time, whose
story is,

That they represented a very Paradise, for that in pleasure and delight, it
resembled Heaven it self, in the very Marshes bearing trees, that for their
straight tallnesse, and the same without knots, strive to touch the Stars: A
Plain is there as even as the sea, which with green grass allureth the eye;
so smooth and level, that if any walk along the fields they shall find
nothing to stumble at; there is not the least parcel of ground that lies
waste and void there. Here shall you find the Earth rising some where for
Apple trees: there shall you have a field set with Vines, which either creep
upon the ground, or mount on high upon poles to support them: A mutual strife
there is between Nature and Husbandry, that what the one forgets, the other
might supply and produce: What will be said of the fair and beautiful
buildings, etc.

This great Level of Low-Lands, whereof Thorney is a part, is almost compassed
about with high Lands, and lies betwixt the high Lands and the Sea. The
superficies thereof being generally as high as the superficies of the Sea in
ordinary Tides, commonly called Neape Tides; But four or five foot lower than
the superficies of the Sea, when the Sea is at the highest, which is in the
Spring Tides, whereof some do very much exceed others, being ruled by the
winds: Such Tides do happen twenty or thirty days in the course of a year;
some years more than the most, and some years less than the least, as the
stormy winds do force the Spring Tides into the Bay, which is betwixt Burnham
in Norfolk, and Winthorp in Lincolnshire; whereby it is apparent that the
Rivers which are in the Fens cannot empty themselves into the Sea, but at such
times as the Sea floods are returned out of the Rivers to the place from whence
they came; By reason whereof the Fens are often drowned, two, three, or four
foot deep, according as the floods are greater or less.

Betwixt the Fens and the Sea there is much good Land that is improved and
defended by substantial Banks made of Clay and Silt, which do preserve them
from being drowned by the Sea on the one side, and the high land waters on the
other: The common Fens being at the least five foot higher than some of those
lands; so that the Sea comes not near the Fens by six miles, or thereabouts.

The fresh water Rivers which do pass through this Level, are principally
Owse and Neene: the rest are but branches that do fall into Owse at their
several distances.

The nearest way that any part of the River Owse does run from the high land to
the Sea, is thirty six miles, but the greatest part of it runs fifty six
miles, or thereabouts.

The River Neene runs through this Level before it falls into the Sea,
twenty miles, or thereabouts. So much for the situation and condition of the
Fens.

The reasons why the Fens are drowned, are principally six.
FIrst, because the superficies of the Fens lies lower than the superficies of
the Sea, when the Spring Tides are at the highest.

Secondly, because the high land floods must of necessity pass through that
great Level of low Lands, having very little descent to enforce a stream from
the high Lands to the Sea, but at such times as the Sea floods by retiring
themselves do leave the Rivers empty, which many times is not above eight
hours in twenty four.

A third reason is, the Rivers through which the high Land waters should pass,
are not large enough to convey them to the Sea, nor are they armed with
sufficient banks to keep the Sea and Land floods from dilating themselves over
the face of the whole Level; and it is a hard question, whether the Sea or the
Land floods are the most potent enemies to the Fenns; but this is most
certain, that when the Sea floods and the Land floods meet, as they often
times do, half way betwixt the high Lands and the Sea, in that very place
like two powerful enemies joining in one, they do overrun the Level, and
drown it from one end unto the other.

A fourth reason why the Fenns are drowned, is occasioned by the Sea floods,
the violence whereof makes so loud a noise at the first coming into the River
Owse, that it is often times heard by those that are two miles from it; and after
the eager is past, for the space of four hours there follows a mighty flood
stream that runs into the Country near forty miles; which waters returning
more slowly, must of necessity have more time to empty themselves then was
spent in receiving them; for those waters which the Sea forces into the Rivers,
must all return before the high Country waters can possibly be admitted to
pass. The disadvantage is very plain, the high Land waters coming from
betwixt the hills are continually running into the Fens, and the Sea floods are
continually interrupting and repelling them where they should pass out of the
Fens into the Sea, and will not suffer them to run above four hours in
twelve: which is one chief cause why the Fens near Ely are so often drowned.

A fifth reason is the ill disposition of the Sea in those parts, which being
troubled by stormy winds, do carry such abundance of Silt or Sand into the
Rivers in the Summer season, that for want of a fresh water stream to wash
them back into the Sea, the Rivers are choked and lost; which Silt or Sands
soon after the Spring Tides are past do lie dry, and presently gain a
firmness, so that men and horses travel upon them; and in the beginning of
Winter they do much hinder the stream of the high land waters as they pass
to the Sea, until by many land floods they are removed and washed into the Sea
from whence they came; but it is so long before that can be effected, in regard
the high Land floods compared with the Sea floods, are very weak, that when it
is done it is too late for the Country, being seldom wrought before the end of
Winter: The dryer the Summer is, the more the Rivers are filled and choked with
Silt and Sand against Winter; and it is commonly seen, that after much drought
there falls much Rain, which oftentimes occasioneth the greatest Inundations.

The sixth and last reason why the Fens are often drowned, is because there is
no Land Eayes to receive the surplussage of the waters which proceed from Rain
and Snow falling upon the high Lands adjacent to the Fens, and to carry them
into those Rivers or Draines which are next unto them.

Now I have briefly shown the true causes why and how the great Level of Fens
are drowned; I will particularly declare what works must be made to draine and
preserve those low Lands from Inundation, so that the greatest part of them may
be made Culturable grounds.
TO remove the first and second causes of Inundation, there must be a descent
gained from the high Lands to the Sea, which is a work of a double consequence,
and indeed it is one of the greatest works which is to be effected. The waters
in the Fens may be fitly compared to the beam of a pair of Skales when it
hangs Level, which being raised at one end does at the same instant settle
as much at the other; Such a contrivement must be made of the fall that is to be
gained betwixt the high Lands and the Sea; the one half must be gained by
raising the waters next the high Lands by Banks of a convenient height, and by
settling of the waters in that part of the Rivers that is next unto the Sea,
which latter work must be wrougt by mending and enlarging of the old Rivers and
Draines where they are crooked, and where they are too narrow, or too shallow,
and by placing of Sluices to repel the Sea floods.

To remove the third impediment, it is necessary that every River and Rivolet
should be enlarged to such a breadth and depth as may convey the greatest
Winter floods the nearest way from the high Land to the Sea, and on either side
of them to have a continued Bank able to keep the high Land waters from
spreading over the superficies of the Fens; the Rivers being so perfected,
there must be many Draines opened which are now lost, and some new made for
the leading of the waters to the next adjacent River. There must be also many
division Dikes which will lead the Rain waters into the neighboring Draines.
The particulars will in this place take up too much time, I will therefore
leave them to the Design it self.

There must be a large Sluice placed upon the outfall of Owse that may be able
to repel the Sea-floods, and keep up the high Land waters in dry Summers; of
which kind there is already one upon the River Neene, built by the late Earl
of Bedford: at which time had Neene been enlarged to a sufficient breadth and
depth, from the Sluice to Peterborough, and the Banks continued and maintained
on both sides at the same height that the Southside Banks were once made,
having a Sasse placed at Stanground, as was intended, to keep all Neene to
Wisbeach, the petty draines and division-dikes being also made, That side of
the Fenns will be perfectly drained; but as it is, there is but a part of that
work perfected. The making of Sluices is very chargeable, and so difficult, that
every Bank-maker does not understand how to place them nor make them; but the
advantage which they bring, being well built, cures the fourth and fifth
inconvenience, and indeed is very material to the perfect draining of the
Fenns.

The last work is a great work, and will cost much money: It is the making of
so many Land Eayes as may receive the surplussage of the waters which do fall
upon the high Lands that are next the Fenns, and convey them to the next River,
rivolet, or draine, so that they may not offend the neighboring Fenns.

Having acquainted you with the situation and condition of the great Level,
and briefly declared how they may be preserved from Inundation, I am humbly
bold to present my design unto this Honorable Court, therein expressing every
particular work, together with the total charge and time when the works may be
perfected.
TO enlarge Wisbeach River from the Sluice to Guihern, so that it may be twenty
foot broader than now it is from the top to the bottom, and to take up the two
ten foot Banks which do lie hid under water, on each side of the River one; and
to leave a foreland of thirty foot broad on the south side from the brink
upwards, being in all six measured miles, whereof there is one mile half
wrought by Sir Cornelius, at the rate of forty shillings the Rod, is, three
thousand five hundred and twenty pounds.

To purchase diverse Lands and Tenements which do stand upon the brink of
Wisbeach River, and must be removed before the River can be enlarged, with the
extraordinary charge of carting the earth out of the Town, may cost twelve
hundred pounds.

To make a wharfe of Brick fourteen foot high, four foot thick in the bottom,
and two foot thick on the top, from Elm sluice to the Town bridge, being an
hundred and twenty rods; the stuff, workmanship and earth work at the rate of
seven pounds the rod, will cost eight hundred and forty pounds.

To make a Cart bridge in Wisbeach Town in the same place where the old bridge
did stand, may cost two hundred and fifty pounds.

To remove the Bank which is now on the south side of Mourton Leame, so far
back, that there may be thirty foot foreland betwixt the new Bank and the
brink of the Leame, being ten miles in length, at three shillings four pence
the rod, it will cost six hundred and forty pounds.

To make Mourton Leame an hundred foot broad from Guihern to Stanground, it
must be enlarged fifty six foot on the north side to the same depth which the
south side now has, which was six foot when it was wrought, being twelve miles
in length at twenty four shillings the rod, will cost four thousand six
hundred and eight pounds.

To make the old and new works as deep as the bottom of Wisbeach River, being
three foot and a half, and with that manure to heighten the Banks on either
side of the Leame leaving thirty foot foreland to each Bank at forty shillings
the rod, it will cost seven thousand six hundred and eighty pounds.

To Pile the dike Ends, Swamps and low Lands which break off the Banks in many
places, and convey by Boat so much earth thither as will make the Banks as high
there as they will be elsewhere, which may be Eight foot, may cost three
hundred pounds.

To make an Indike on the southside of the south bank twenty five foot broad at
Guihern, and fifteen foot broad at Witelsey high Lands, six foot deep at
Guiherne, and five foot deep at Witelsey, at twelve shillings the rod, will
cost one thousand nine hundred and twenty pounds.

To make an Indike on the north side of the north Bank twenty foot broad at
Guihern, and fifteen foot broad at Stanground, six foot deep at Guihern and
five foot deep at Stanground, at ten shillings the rod, it will cost one
thousand nine hundred and twenty pounds.

To make the twenty five foot draine which is on the north side of the Leame,
two foot deeper than now it is, will cost three shillings the rod, which is
five hundred seventy six pounds.

To make two Cart Bridges over Mourton Leame near Witelsey Town, each of them
to have two peers and no more, may cost three hundred and sixty pounds.

To make new doors for the Sasse at Stanground, with Spring doors in them
that may open on a sudden; and that for the safety of the Country in times of
danger, some part of the extreme floods may be turned into Witelsey Meare, and
the other adjacent Meares, which being empty, will receive a great water
without prejudice to any, may cost fourscore pounds.

To place a Brick Sasse on South Eay Draine near Guyherne Cross twenty foot
broad, the bottom to lie even with the bottom of Wisbeach River, with spring
doors, that may open on a sudden to receive some part of a great flood in
times of danger, the draines being empty; this Sasse may cost one thousand
four hundred pounds.

The like Sasse to be placed on Bevill Leame, that in times of danger some part
of the great floods may be turned into March River: it may cost one thousand
four hundred pounds.

To make South Eay twenty five foot broad, and three foot deeper than now it
is, being twelve miles in length, at eight shillings the rod, it will cost one
thousand five hundred thirty six pounds.

To make Cats Water twenty foot broad, and six foot deep, being nine miles in
length, at eight shillings the rod, it will cost one thousand one hundred fifty
two pounds.

To open the Shire Draine, and to continue it from Hills Sluice to the South
East corner of Sutton Marsh, being a mile and a quarter, at twenty shillings
the rod, is six hundred pounds

To make a Brick Sluice twenty foot broad, with two pair of doors to keep out
the Sea, and one pair to keep up the fresh Waters, to be placed at the South
East corner of Satton Marsh, in regard it must stand very deep on a Sandy
foundation: It may cost two thousand four hundred pounds.

To bring the many crooked Channels which are in the Washes into one straight
Channel, is a work that must be first wrought with the Spade, and after that
is accomplished, there must be many Jetties made with Piles, Stones, and
Brushwood, to keep the Channel straight from the lower end of Wisbeach River
to the Sea Deep, being a work of great consequence, it may cost four thousand
pound.

Bedford River.
TO make Bedford River five foot broader on either side, and three foot deeper
than now it is, and to cast all the manure which now lies upon the forelands,
with that which will be taken out of the bottom of the River upon the Banks,
being twenty one miles and a half in length, at thirty five shillings the rod,
it will cost twelve thousand and forty pounds.

To pile the Dike ends and Swamps, which else will not be able to support the
Banks when more weight shall be laid upon them, and to convey by Boat so much
earth thither as will make the defective places as high as the Banks are
generally else where, may cost four hundred pound.

To make the two Indikes ten foot broader on the Fen side, and four foot
deeper then now they are, and to cast all the manure that comes out of them
upon the Bank, at ten shillings the rod, for each Indike, it will cost six
thousand eight hundred and fourscore pound.

To make two Brick Sluices at the outfall of the two Indikes, that each of them
may have sixteen foot waterway, with a pair of doors to keep out the Sea
floods, and a pair of doors to keep up the fresh waters, may cost two
thousand four hundred pounds.

To make two Bridges of four foot broad over Bedford River, one at Welney, and
the other at Maney, and to make a Cart Bridge at Mepell, may cost two hundred
and forty pounds.

To make the West water twenty five foot broad and six foot deep from Erith to
Plantwater, being nineteen miles in length, at twelve shillings the rod, it
will cost three thousand six hundred forty eight pounds.

To make a Sasse in the Northbank of Bedford River twenty foot broad, to be
placed in the room of a little Sluice at the entrance of the West water, being
within half a mile of Erith: It must have two pair of doors against the
water in Bedford River, that Boats may pass at all times, and may cost one
thousand four hundred pounds.

To make Elm Leame forty foot broad and six foot deeper than now it is from
Wisbeach River to March Stream, will mend the outfall of VVisbeach River, and
maintain the Navigation from VVisbeach to Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and
Huntington Shires. The work is six miles in length, and will be very
chargeable for the space of a mile, and may therefore cost five and forty
shillings the rod, one with another, which is four thousand three hundred and
twenty pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse twenty foot broad, where Elm Leame falls into Wisbeach
River, with two pair of doors to keep out Neene, and one pair of doors to
keep up the back water, may cost one thousand eight hundred pounds.

To make two Cart bridges and one foot bridge over Elm Leame, being made of
Oken timber with Brick Pieres, may cost three hundred and forty pounds.

To make Witelsey Meare Draine two foot deeper than now it is from Guyherne to
the Meare, being thirteen miles in length at four shillings the rod, it will
cost eight hundred thirty two pounds.

To make two Cart Bridges over Witelsey Meare Draine right against Witelsey
high Lands, may cost eighty pounds.

These general works, together with a Land Eaye from Peterborough to the
Cross near Crowland and the division-dikes, will be sufficient for that part
of the Level which lies on the north side of Bedford River, being much about
one half of the Level; Provided always that the River Welland be kept to its
proper outfall, which may be effected by mending the new Bank that the late
Earl of Bedford caused to be made from Waldram Hall to Crowland, and by
maintaining the Queens Bank at a sufficient height from Crowland to Spalding,
which at this time is much settled and in great decay.

The River of Owse.
TO make a Bank of six foot high on either side of the River Owse, from Erith
to Southery Ferry, on the South and East side, and to Salters Load on the North
and West side, leaving twenty foot foreland between the Banks and the River.
These Banks are to be made of the manure which rises out of the Indikes, being
twenty foot broad, and six foot deep: either of these Banks will be twenty
eight miles in length, and being for the most part Silt, will cost ten
shillings the rod, which is eight thousand nine hundred and sixty pounds.

To make a Bank on either side of the River Grant from Harimer to Clay Hive,
six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland between the Banks and the River.
These Banks are to be made of the manure which rises out of the twenty foot
Indike, six foot deep, being ten miles in length, at ten shillings the rod,
will cost three thousand two hundred pounds.

To take up the Hards or Shoulds which are in the River Grant, betwixt Harimer
and Cambridge, being Gravel, Sand, or Chalk, and nine in number, whereof some
are long and some are short, is a work that must be performed by a water
Engine, which may cost two thousand four hundred pounds.

To maintain the Navigation from Lyn to Cambridge, there must be a Brick Sasse
made at Harimer two and twenty foot broad, with four pair of doors, so that
the Boats may pass at all times, which may cost sixteen hundred pounds.

To make another Brick Sasse at Harimer on the West side of the great Sasse,
sixteen foot broad for the waters of the two Indikes of Owse and Grant, with
two pair of doors to keep out Owse, and one pair of doors to keep up the
water in Summer, may cost twelve hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse near Breame, sixteen foot broad, with two pair of
doors to keep out Owse, and one other pair to keep up the water in the
Summer, to be placed at the outfall of the Indike, which will be between Erith
and Breame, on the North side of Owse, may cost twelve hundred pound.

To make Grunty Fen Draine twenty foot broad at the outfall, and ten foot broad
at the head, and six foot deep, being two miles in length, and a great part of
that very deep work, it may cost ten shillings the rod, which is three
hundred and twenty pounds.

To make the new Draine which is between Little-port Chair and Turbesey, ten
foot broader on either side, and four foot deeper than now it is, leaving
twenty foot foreland between the River and the Banks; and to cast the manure
which comes out of the River upon the Banks on either side, being three miles
and a half in length, at forty five shillings the rod, will cost two thousand
five hundred and twenty pounds.

To make a Sasse twenty four foot broad, at Little-port Chair, at the lower
end of the last work, for the preservation of the Navigation from Lyn to
Cambridge, may cost two thousand and two hundred pounds.

To make two Indikes of fifteen foot broad and six foot deep, the manure to be
cast upon the maine Banks, may cost six shillings the rod, is six hundred
seventy two pounds.

To make two Brick Sluices of ten foot broad at the ends of the two last
Indikes, may cost six hundred pounds.

To make a Bank on either side of Milnall River from Prickwillow to Milnall,
six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland between the River and the Banks,
being eleven miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, will cost three
thousand five hundred and twenty pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse twenty foot broad, with four pair of doors, so that
Boats may pass at all times, and to place it at the Lower end of Milnall
River, may cost eighteen hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse for the North West Indike of Milnall River, and the
South Indike of Grant, sixteen foot broad, with two pair of doors to keep
out Owse, and two other pair of doors to keep up the water in the Summer,
may cost twelve hundred pounds.

To make a Dam cross the River of Owse at Turbesey to be piled and wrought to
the same height that the Banks are else where, may cost three hundred pounds.

To make a Bank on either side of Brandon River, from Priests Houses to
Brandon, six foot high, leaving twenty foot foreland between the Bank and the
River, being twenty miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, may cost six
thousand four hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse at the outfall of Brandon River, twenty four foot
broad, with four pair of doors, so that the Boats may pass at all times,
may cost two thousand two hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse for the West Indike of Brandon River, and the South
Indike of Owse, from Milnall Sasse to Brandon Sasse, sixteen foot broad, having
two pair of doors to keep out Owse, and two other pair to keep up the water
in the Summer time, may cost fifteen hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse at Southery Ferry for the Indike which will be on the
East side of Brandon River, and also for the Indike which will be on the East
side of Owse, from Brandon Sasse to Southery Ferry, sixteen foot broad, with
two pair of doors to keep out Owse, and two other pair of doors to keep up
the water in the Summer time, it may cost fifteen hundred pounds.

To remove the Banks of Feltwell Cut, so that there may be twenty foot foreland
on either side, and to make the Draine two foot deeper than now it is, being
five miles in length, at eight shillings the rod, it will cost six hundred and
forty pound.

To make an Indike of ten foot broad, and five foot deep on either side of
Feltwell Cut, and to cast all the manure to the two Banks, at three shillings
the rod, it will cost four hundred and fourscore pounds.

To make two Brick Sluices at the outfall of the two Indikes, six foot broad,
with one pair of doors to keep out Owse, and one other pair to keep up the
water in the Summer time, may cost four hundred pounds.

To make a Bank of six foot high on either side of Stoke River, from the River
Owse to Stoke Bridge, leaving twenty foot foreland between the River and the
Banks, being ten miles in length, at ten shillings the rod, it will cost three
thousand two hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sasse at the outfall of Stoke River, twenty foot broad, having
four pair of doors, so that the Boats may pass at all times, may cost
eighteen hundred pounds.

To make a Brick Sluice and a Brick Sasse upon the River Owse near Mandlin
Falls, that may have one hundred sixty foot water-way, with double doors in
every Arch to keep out the Sea floods, and Land doors to keep up the fresh
waters; and those Land doors must have Spring doors in them to discharge the
fresh waters on a sudden, for the better maintaining and preserving of the
Channel from the Sluice to the Sea. The Sluice, the Sluce-pit, and the casting
of water, together with the cutting of a new River to and from the Sluice, and
making of a Dam in the old River, may cost one and twenty thousand pounds.

To make so many Land Eayes as may convey the downfall of all the high Land
waters into their proper streams, so that they may not drown those Fens which
are next them, may be a work of one hundred and five miles in length,
considering one place with another, they may cost ten shillings the rod, which
is sixteen thousand and eight hundred pounds.

The purchasing of Several, through which many of the Draines are to be made,
may cost six thousand pounds.

To make Horse-mills, Tun-mills, Wheele-barrowes, Storehouses, and work
houses, and to buy Spars, Deals, Nails, Ginropes, and such like materials
which will be used in this work, may cost four thousand five hundred pounds.

The making of division Draines may cost five thousand pounds.

The Sallary of Officers employed in this work may in four years amount to
four thousand pounds.

It is known to Builders that after great care and examination of their
intended charge, there will be some Nails omitted. For which reason, if you
please, you may cast the odd money into this estimate, and reckon the total
charge to be one hundred and fourscore thousand pounds: and that with this
caution, that the Springs of the years must not be lost for want of money.

The works above mentioned cannot be performed in less time than four
complete Summers.

The placing of a great Sluice upon the River Owse near Lyn, together with
those other works which are here designed under the title of that River, will
draine all the Fenns that are on the Southside of Bedford River, so that the
greatest part of them will be culturable grounds; and peradventure it will
spare the charge of those Banks which are intended to be made on either side
of the River Owse, from Salters Load to Little-port. But the making of that
Sluice is a work of so great a consequence, that of my self I dare not
absolutely resolve it. It is true that the Fens are drowned by the high Land
waters only; yet an I have said before, the Sea floods are as Potent an Enemy
to the Fenns as the Land floods are. In confideration whereof, my conclusion is,
That the making of a Sluice upon the River Owse, near Lyn, to keep out the Sea
floods, will undoubtedly prevent and remove one half of that cause which
occasioneth the drowning of that great and rich Level.

The objections that will be made against the making of that Sluice will be
three: And under favor of this Honorable Court, I conceive they will be weak
in comparison of the great benefit which that work will produce by keeping out
the Sea floods.

The first objection is, the greatness of the charge.

The second is, the hazard in placing of it.

The third is, the oppositions that Cambridge and Lyn will make against it, in
regard of their Navigation, which consists principally of three parts. The
first and greatest is, whether the repulsing of the Sea floods will impair Lyn
Haven or not. The second is, that for want of a flood Stream, the Keeles must
of necessity make less speed in their passage from Lyn to Cambridge. The third
and last objection will be, Some loss of time by staying the Keeles at the
Sluice, in regard they must take their turns in passing through it; which I
humbly leave to the grave consideration of this Honorable Court.


Being serious for the Fens, these objections were once struck out; for it is
not a question whether this be the best way to Drain the Fens or not. These
doubts therefore were only inserted in regard of Lyn Haven, and the Navigation
from Lyn to Cambridge (as is said before.) But being awful of what I present
to this Great Council, I durst not omit them: And now having with all care and
diligence finished my Design, I earnestly implore your Noble acceptance,
humbly entreating you to hear all, choose the best, and God grant the Kingdom
may flourish in your Honorable Resolves.

FINIS.

