IRENICVM, TO THE LOVERS OF Truth and Peace.

HEART-DIVISIONS OPENED In the Causes and Evils of them: WITH Cautions that we
may not be hurt by them, And Endeavors to heal them.

By JEREMIAH BURROUGHES.

Opinionum varietas and Opinantium unitas non sunt (...).

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT DAVVLMAN. MDCLIII.

To the Reader.
WHether the fiery trial of contention, or of persecution be greater, is hard
to determine; God has wrought to free us from the one, we have brought upon
our selves the other. Every man is angry that others are not of his mind; we
have been so divided, that it is the infinite mercy of God that our enemies
have not come in at our breaches, and divided all among themselves, before this
time. Were our divisions only between the good and bad, they were not so
grievous. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. de Diloct.
Chrysostom says, It is better to be hated for Christ, then to be beloved for
him. How much better then is it to be hated for Christ, then to be beloved for
sin? The reason he gives of that strange assertion of his, is, If thou be
loved for God, it is an honor to thee, and thou art a debtour for that honor;
If thou be hated for him, God is a debtour to thee, he owes honor to thee,
for so he is pleased to be to his poor servants. But our divisions have been
and still are between good men, even Gods Diamonds do cut one another; good men
cause afflictions to good men; every man is plotting, working, winding for
himself. Every man strives like Apelles and Protogenes who shall draw the
subtilest line to attain his own ends, but few strive who shall draw the
straightest, who shall in the most direct course work himself and all his
ways to God and public Good. Who can meddle with this fire that is kindled
among us, and not burn his fingers? A man's good affections happily may be
approved, but his prudence will be questioned. But what I find Luther writes
in an Epistle to his friend Nicolas Gerbelius in the like case, shall satisfy
me, Cupio ego inveniri Christi and Ecclesiae suae fidelis, si prudens esse non
potuerim minister: I desire howsoever to be a faithful Minister of Christ and
his Church, if I cannot be a prudent one. The standing in the gap is more
dangerous and troublesome then the getting behind the hedge, there you may be
more secure, and under the wind, but it is best to be there where God looks
for a man. Plutarch in the life of Pelopi^as.
That which Pelopidas said to his wife taking her leave of him as he was going
out of his house to the Wars, is a speech worthy of all men in public
place: She comes weeping to him, and prays him to look well to himself; he
answers her, My good wife, it is for private soldiers to be careful of
themselves, not for those in public place, they must have an eye to save
other men lives. It may be when you are going about a work that has hazard and
trouble in it, your wives or some friends of yours will with great affection
desire you, beseech you, to have a care of your selves, that you bring not your
selves into trouble or danger, oh take heed of that, rather never meddle, let
others do that work if they will; you should answer, It is for private men to
take care of themselves, but men in public places are called to look to the
public, that it suffers not through their neglect

Some come into the gap, not to make it up, but to keep it open, yea to make it
wider; the Lord deliver me from such a spirit: God knows I had rather die, then
be a cause of so great an evil. What this endeavor of mine may work in men's
hearts, God knows. If it meet with a son of peace, I hope it will speak
peace, it will establish peace in such a heart: if with a son of strife it may
work ad modum recipientis. That which is intended to be an Irenicum, may prove
to be a Polemicum, a bone of contention.

Those things which God himself ordaines for union (the Sacraments) are by
man's corruption made the occasion of the greatest contention in the Christian
world. No marvel then that what comes from man's sincerest intentions and best
endeavors be turned quite cross.

Like enough these leaves may meet with some boisterous Reader, that may beat
them one against another, that may pry and pick to find that in them which is
not, looking thorough the contradictions of his own spirit he may think he
sees the like here. Let the lines be never so straight, yet he will wrest and
pull them what he can to make them lie cross. I am so far from being
sollicitous that they are so indeed, that the special thing I desire of thee
is the laying one thing to another, the comparing one thing with another.
Remember what the subject is, Divisions, Differences. I have in it to deal
with various spirits, opinions, ways: remember the scope is to seek the
composing of them what I can. If you see me now near to the one side, and by
and by near to the other, which yet are very wide from one another, be not
rash to judge, that I am off my center; read on, and see what the issue may
come to.

This path of mine has been upon sharp stones, cutting shells, and pricking
thorns; yet thorough the help of the shoe of the preparation of the Gospel
of peace, I do not find my feet cut.

Peace is precious to me, I feel the sweetness of it; I am willing to do what
I can to honor it. The public jarres, contentions, disturbances abroad in
Church and Commonwealth are very grievous. They say there are in the world
such things in Families also. I have brought here some water: if my line had
been longer, my bucket had been fuller. You have here what I delivered: some
things are added, especially quotations of Authors and Histories. When they
grow to be many I think them fitter for the Press then the Pulpit. I was the
more willing these things should come forth to public view, because otherwise
what other men apprehended to be my mind, would be put into their own words,
and so rendered in an evil appearance. But will Printing help? The boldness of
this age is such, as not only to make a man's words sound otherwise then when
they came from him, and so traduce him; but confidently to aver that there
are such things written in such Books, of such men, which never yet came into
their thoughts, much less into their pen. With what boldness has it been
said and printed again and again, that I in that Book entitled, The glorious
name of God, The Lord of Hosts, did call the Earl of Essex the Lord of Hosts.
Surely the sight of these men is extramittendo, not intramittendo, they send
forth species of their own dyed with the evil of their hearts, and then they
say they find them in such a book. No man can find that name given by me to
him. I indeed endeavored to encourage him in his work, because the Lord had
made him the Lord of our Hosts, which is no more then the Lord of our Armies.
The utmost that ever was said or writ comes but to this, that God had put a
name upon him that came near to his, but never mentioned without some
difference from it. An abuse in this kind, though not altogether so high, I
have had from the Anti-Apologist; he quotes many places in my Lectures upon
Hosea, he sets down the pages, wherein he says, I have contrary to what is in
the Apology preached for that way you call Independent. Would any man but
think, when he sees the Book named in Print, the Lecture, the very page
mentioned, but that the thing is true, it is to be found there? But to this day
it has never come to my ears that ever any man has found such things there
but himself. Are those the places? Let moderate and quiet spirited men look
into them, and they shall find nothing there but what the generality of
Presbyteriall Brethren, yea I think I may say every one, who is not either
Prelaticall or very violent, will acknowledge to be truth, and if so, I am
free. But we shall have another time for this. At this time I would gladly that
this Treatise might meet with no spirit exasperated, but in calmnesse and
quietness, let what is here be examined. That God that can create the fruit of
the lips to be peace, can make the fruit of the pen to be so. My aims are
peace, which I shall never cease endeavoring and praying for, who am

Thy friend, glad of any opportunity for thy good, JEREMIAH BURROUGHES.

HEART-DIVISIONS The Evil of our Times.
HOSEA 10. 2. Their Heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty.
CHAP. I.
The Text opened, and sutablenesse of it to our Times, showed.
NO marvail though Israel be charged, ver. 1. to be an empty vine, seeing their
heart is divided. Heart-division will cause emptiness of good, both in men's
spirits, and in Church and State. The least dividing of the heart, in any one
part from another, if it be but by the prick of a pin, is deadly; a great gash
in the head is curable. There may be much difference in men's opinions without
any great hurt, if this difference gets not to the heart; but if once it gets
in there, the danger is great; Now shall they be found faulty, Now shall they
be guilty; or as some, Nunc delinquent, Now they will offend; as if
Heart-division contracted the greatest guilt, and by it men were the greatest
Delinquents of any. (...)
The word signifies also to perish, to be made desolate, so Arius Montanus,
Desolabuntur. Heart-division is a desolating sin, by the judgment of God upon
them for it, they shall be convinced in their own consciences, and in the sight
of all men, that they were guilty; that by such a sin as this, they had bound
themselves over to the justice of God, and those desolating evils that came
upon them, were the righteous judgments of God upon them for those divisions
that were amongst them. Men will not be convinced of their sin, till Gods
judgment is upon them for it; and then their consciences will, and others
shall see that God is righteous, and they are vile and sinful before him, even
in such things that before they pleaded for, or at least could not be brought
to own their own guiltiness in. When thunder and rain came upon the men of
Israel in their wheat Harvest, and they were afraid they should dye, 1 Samuel 12.
18, 19. then they could say, We have added unto all our sins this evil to
ask us a King.

The Lord convince us of, and humble us for the sinfulness of our divisions by
his word, that desolating judgments be not upon us to convince and humble us.

Their heart is divided. This Heart-division is either from God, or from one
another.

Their heart is divided between God and their Idols; They would not cast off
the worship of God wholly, that was too much; they loved their Idols, but they
must not have all: to divide between God and them they thought was fair. Their
hearts were also divided one from another; and just it is with God, that those
who divide from him, should divide one from another. 2 King. 15. you may see
what woeful divisions there were amonst them, King against people, and people
against King, Civil Wars. Their King comes upon one of their own Towns, and
smites it, and rips up all the women that were with Child in it, and all
because they opened not to him. O the rage and cruelty of men of proud spirits,
when they get power into their hands! for then their pride swells, being blown
up with the flatteries of such as are about them: As if they were such gods
upon earth, as they might do whatsoever they pleased, and the lives, estates,
liberties, comforts of all must lie under their feet, and must submit to their
lusts and humors. You shall find further in the whole Chapter, there was
nothing but conspiring, mischieving, and murdering one another. In their
Church State there was nothing but factions and rents one from another; some
were for the true worship, some for the false. And amongst the false
worshippers there were divisions too: Some were for the calves that Jeroboam
set up at Dan and Bethel; some were for Baal: great contention there was
between these. You know the story of Jehu an Idolater, yet destroying the
worshippers of Baal and his Idols.

The Jews of old understood this Text of these Heart-divisions amongst
themselves, as well as of their divisions from God, which appears by a notable
tradition of theirs, St. Jerome in his Comment upon these words, relates:
whereas (says he) the Scripture, 2 King. 17. tells us, that Hoshea was the last
King of Israel, and in his time Israel was carried captive; yet verse. 2. It is
said, He did not evil in the sight of the Lord, as the Kings of Israel that
were before him. Now the Jews put this Question, Why was not Israel carried
captive with their King, when they had the worst King, but rather when things
seemed to go something better then before? God yet chooses this time.

The Answer they give, is, Because in former times the people might pretend,
they could not tell how to help what they did amiss in the matter of Worship;
Indeed they worshipped the Calves, but they were forced to it by the tyranny of
their Kings, it should be the loss of all they had if they did not: but (say
they) in the days of Hoshea there was more liberty given then before. Now those
who would, might go up to Jerusalem to worship, and that they say is the
reason of that expression, that Hoshea did not evil as other Kings had done;
but when they came to have more liberty, they fell to wrangling amongst
themselves, (which is an usual concomitant of liberty) now their division rose
high, some would to up to Jerusalem to worship, others would not; those that
went up, cried out of those who went not; and those who went not, vilified
those who went. Now their hearts are thus divided, now shall they be found
guilty. The desolating judgment must now come. This is the time for their
captivity. Now he gives them up to the Enemy. God was exceedingly provoked
with their contentions one against another at this time. What? (says God) when
I was in some way of favor toward them, when I took off (in great part) the
yoke of bondage that was upon them, that sore oppression that was before, none
of them (a while since) dared go to Jerusalem to worship, and now their
Governors are more moderate, their oppressing Courts are down, there is more
liberty in the Land for my true worship, and do they now fall out, contemn,
divide, wrangle one with another? let them go into captivity, let the enemy
come in upon them, my soul takes no delight in such a crooked perverse
Generation as this is.

Our condition seems to parallel with theirs very much, we lately were under
sore and cruel bondage, nothing was more dangerous then the worshipping God in
his own way, we were under hard Taskmasters, oppressing, undoing Courts; The
Lord has in a great measure delivered us, it is the unthankfulness, the
sinful distemper of men's spirits that makes them say, what is done? it is as
ill with us as ever it was; No, we have much ease, such liberties, as were our
forefathers raised out of their graves to see, they would admire Gods
goodness, and bless him with meltings of heart; but we spend that strength in
siding, wrangling, contending, quarrelling, vexing, opposing one another, that
we should spend in magnifying, blessing and praising the Name of God for that
mercy we enjoy. We are a divided people, whose hearts are divided, and heads
too, and hands too; peace and unity seems to be flown from us, and a spirit of
contention and division is come upon us: King and Subjects are divided, Parl.
is divided, Assembly is divided, Armies are divided, Church is divided, and
State is divided, City is divided, Country is divided, Towns are divided,
Families divided, godly people are divided, Ministers almost every where are
divided; yea, and what heart almost is there at this time but is divided in it
self? the thoughts, the counsels, contrivances, endeavors, ways of men, almost
of all men, how are they divided? O blessed Savior! are these the times thou
speak of, wherein five should be in one house divided, three against two,
and two against three; the father against the son, and the son against the
father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother?
Oh woe to us! we find it so amongst us, and yet there is found no healing; we
are broken, and there is no binding up: It is with us as it was with Ezekiel. 2.
6. Briars and thorns are with us, and we dwell among Scorpions. O Lord, what is
this thy curse at this time upon England? Briars and thorns shall it bring
forth: We are rending and tearing, and devouring one another, while the
adversary stands before us ready to devour us: Ephraim is against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim. A fire is come out from Abimilech, and devours the
men of Sechem; and fire comes from the men of Sechem, and devours Abimilech;
yea, there is a fire kindled in our own bowels, it rises from our selves.
Ezekiel. 19. 14. Fire is gone ont of a rod of her branches, which has devoured
her fruit, so that she has no strong rod to be a Seepter to rule, this is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. This is amongst us at this day,
and how long it shall continue, God only knows.

What this people were in their divided condition, that we are; and what does
this threaten, but that we should be as they a while after this were? namely, a
people given up to the rage and fury of the Enemy, which the Lord forbid.

There is a great outcry of our divisions, and while we cry out against them,
we still increase them; we are angry with men rather, because they are divided
from our selves, then because they are divided from the truth; we are angry
because every man is not of our own mind, and does not as we do. There was a
great deal of do in Luthers time about the seamless coat of Christ.
Granvillian the Emperors Deputy in a Speech he made to the Citizens of Worms,
Sleid. Com. lib. 13.
beseeches them for the death of Christ, and for all loves, that they would
amend our Lords coat, which is rent and torn on every side. When Luther
labored to bring Reformation to the Rule, they bad him take heed that he did
not rend the seamless coat of Christ; and because they talked so much of the
tunica inconsutilis, they were called the Inconsutilistae, the seamelesse men:
And what a stir has there been in outcries against men that would not yield
to every thing that was enjoined? O they rent the seamlesse Coat of Christ. I
remember Musculus in a Tract he has De Schismate, has a witty and pious note
upon this, The Soldiers (says he) would not divide the seamelesse coat of
Christ; but what made them to be so careful of it? was it out of respect to
Christ, that they were so unwilling it should be divided? No, but out of
respect to their own advantage, every one hoping it might fall to his share,
therefore say they, Let us cast lots for it; so, says he, men would not have
Christ's coat divided, they would have no division in the Church; but what do
they aim at? their own advantage, that they might enjoy quietly their own
ease, honor, and means, that they might have none to contradict them, but that
the stream may run smoothly and wholly with them, what a fine brave thing were
this? And because they see they cannot do this while their ways are looked
into and crossed, therefore they make such an outcry against the dividing the
seamlesse coat of Christ.

But certainly, till our hearts be otherwise then yet they are, all our
outcries will not serve our ends, the stilling our divisings. Did we less
divide between God and our own ends, our own way^, we should not divide so much
one from another. Wherefore let us first turn our thoughts to consider a little
of this division between God and other things, and the evil of it.

CHAP. II.
The evil of dividing between God and any thing else.
THis people would give God something, and their idols something, and so think
to please both, 2 King. 7. 33. They feared the Lord, and served their Idols.
Thus Judah in the days of Josiah, Zeph. 1. 5. swear by the Lord, and by
Malcham; Swearing is a part of Gods worship, therefore no humane instituted
Religious ceremony ought to be joined with it, no more then with the Sacrament,
or any other divine worship, no creature should share in it, but they joined
Malcham, that is their King. The worship and service proper to God has been
too much divided between God and the Kings of the Earth; but here it is probable
is meant their Idol, to which they gave a Kingly power over them, their Idol
Moloch had his name from hence.

I have read of Redwald King of the East Saxons, the first Prince of his Nation
that was baptized, in the same place worshipped Christ, and set up an Altar to
worship his Idols. Many men's spirits lie like that Haven, Acts 26. 12. toward
the Southwest and Northwest, two opposite points: Surely their spirits must
needs be very winding and crooked which lie toward such opposites.

This dividing with God is very wicked; what communion has God with Belial?
How can you partake of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils? 1 Cor.
10. 21. And lest they should think it a light thing thus to divide with God,
he adds, verse. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then
he? It is a great provoking of God, and a fighting against him, thus to divide
in his worship. To think that God should accept of such a dividing, is to make
him cruel, like that Harlot, 1 King. 3. 26. who was content to have the child
divided, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but let it be divided. Gods worship
is as dear to him as any child can be to the most tenderhearted mother in the
world. When Darius would have divided with Alexander, No, says Alexander,
there can be but one Sun in the Firmament. If we will be dividing with God, he
will cast off all. 2 King. 17. 33. it is said, they feared the Lord, and served
their Idols; but verse. 34. it is said, they did not fear God, God accounted a
divided fear no fear at all. Verse 16. it is said, They left all the
Commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten Images. If they give
any part of Gods honor to molten Images, he acknowledges no honor at all
given to him, he accounts all his Commandments to be left. So Jer. 32. 23.
They have done nothing of all that thou command them to do: and verse. 30.
The children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done evil before
me.

God is infinite, and has all excellency in him, therefore he must have the
whole heart; Idols do not challenge so much, because they have not an
universal excellency, a piece of worship is enough for them; our hearts,
estates, liberties, all we are or have, are more Gods then our own. Cyrus
took Babylon by dividing the River: The Devil soon surprises us, if he can
but divide our hearts.

The reason why heathen Rome rejected Christ from being of the number of their
gods, when such a thing was tendered to their Senate, was, Because (say they) if
we receive him to be a God, he will suffer none of our other gods; if we take
in any other new god, we may yet retain still our old ones; but if we take this
Jesus, all our old ones must be abandoned. Many at this day reject Christ upon
this ground.

The Romanists since think they can take in Christ for a God, and yet divide
between him and other gods; their Religion is made up of divisions between God
and their graven Images; between Christ the Mediator, and Saints and Angels;
between the Word, and their own Traditions; between Divine Institutions, and
Humane Inventions.

1 King. 18. 21. Why halt ye between two opinions? We must not be voluntary
Cripples to halt between two. Why are you dismembered in your hearts and your
opinions? so Josephus in his History mentioning that place. That is observable,
when the Prophet put that question to them, the Text says, The people held
their peace, their mouths were stopped, they had not a word to say for
themselves. If any thing be pretended for this dividing, it is that trouble may
be prevented: exactness in Religion, through Reformation, giving up our selves
wholly to God and his truth, has a show of bringing much trouble with it.
Hence men wind and shift about, and do what they do by halves.

It was a notable speech of Calvin to those who were offended with troubles
they met with in the work of Reformation, Si di midio Christi essemus contenti,
facile transigeremus omnia.
If we could be content with half a Christ, ( says he) our work would more
easily go on, we could soon bring about what we would have, we should not
meet with so much opposition, but nothing but a whole Christ will serve our
turn.

But it is necessary that all things be reformed at once? Object. 1.


No: Answ.
Affirmative Precepts do not bind to all times, but Negative do; therefore
it is necessary at all times, that there be no mixture of evil with any good
we do, that our Mediocrity be not Medium participationis, but Medium
abnegationis, between two extremes, which are evil, but not partaking of any
evil; no good thing is moderated by mixture of evil, but by removing from it
something that is evil, that has already mingled it self with it.

But must God have all our hearts, Object. 2.
so as we may not let them out at all to any thing else?

If we let out our hearts to any thing but in subordination to God, Answ.
then we divide between God and that thing sinfully; but though we do let out
our affections to other things, yet if it be in subordination to God, so far
as God is in those things, and we may be led nearer to God by them; this is no
dividing between God and other things, but an uniting all in God, and enjoying
God in all. The Saints are instructed in this mystery of godliness, they know
how to give God the whole heart, and yet to enjoy the comforts of wives and
children, and estates, and callings, as much as any in the world; they have
that heavenly skill to unite all in God, and enjoy God in all, God is all in all
unto them in their enjoyments of all good whatsoever; but if our hearts be let
out to any thing otherwise then thus, they go a whoring from God, and will
certainly vanish in their own folly. This is contrary to that singleness, to
that oneness of heart promised as a blessing of the Gospel. Many of you
complain of barrenness, here is the reason your hearts are divided; were the
stream of your hearts wholly after God, it would run strongly, and bear down
opposition before it, you would be fruitful in all the ways of holiness.

How fruitful and gloriously useful would men in public place be, if their
hearts were single and one for God; did they only care to honor God in their
duty, and leave the care of protection of, and provision for themselves and
state to God? Let not men's hearts be cut, be divided with their cares and fears
about consequences and successes; their wisdom should be how to work all about
for God, not how handsomely to contrive that God may have part, and themselves
part. The more fully we give up our selves, our ends, designs to God, the more
securely may we sit under Gods protection, care, and blessing. Many of the good
Kings of Judah had their hearts for God, but yet they let the high Places
stand; their politic wisdom divided their hearts between God, and their fears
of disturbance in the State; If they should raise their Reformation so high, by
this their division, their hearts lay flat, the work was neglected. But 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. Jehoshaphats heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord, he took
away the high places and groves, he sought to the Lord God of his father, and
walked in his commandments, not after the doings of Israel, verse. 4. But did
he not bring disturbance to the Kingdom by this his zeal? No, Verse. 5.
Therefore the Lord stablished that Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
to Jehoshaphat presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance. And verse
10. The fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were
round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat. Verse. 12.
Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly.

Let our hearts be for God alone, for God alone is enough to satisfy our
hearts, to supply all good unto us for ever.

There is infinite reason our whole hearts should be for him, he is willing his
whole heart should be for us. Jer. 32. 41. Yea I will rejoice over them to do
them good, and I will plant them with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.

CHAP. III.
Heart-divisions one from another.
WHen they divided from God, then they divided from his people, they would not
join with his people in the way of his worship, only such as set their hearts
to seek the Lord God of Israel, went to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the Lord God
of their fathers, 2 Chr. 11. 16. only those whose hearts the Lord touched; but
others for their own carnal ends would not join with them, they saw trouble
attended that way; and having divided themselves from God and his people, it
was Gods curse upon them that they should be divided one from another; if you
be divided from the truth, what can hold you together? (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 3. ad
Romans
Truth is a single, simple, plain thing, but error is various, and ensnarls it
self with infinite contradictions: If people go out of the plain path of
truth, they wander up and down God knows whither, intangling themselves in
briars and thorns, so as they cannot extricate themselves: As those ten Tribes
which at first divided from Judah only in their subjection to the house of
David, and in their worship at Jerusalem, but after they denied all Scripture
but only the 5. books of Moses: They were exceedingly given, and generally
addicted unto sorcery, magic, and witchcraft, in which they grew more and
more notorious till Christ's time. This is intimated in that blasphemy of the
Jews against our Savior, Vide Montague Act. and Mon. of the Church cap. 7. p.
473. 474. etc.
Thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil, taxing him with the practice of that
people, who commonly being Witches, had familiar spirits attending on them, for
otherwise they knew he was no Samaritan, but a Galilean of Nazareth: They were
also exceedingly divided amongst themselves. Epiphanius recites four several
sects of them, the Ossens, Sebuaeans, Gorthenians, and Positheans; Truth is the
bond that keeps to unity, but error is wild, you know not where to find it,
nor your selves if you give way to it: Our present times will be a testimony of
this to all future generations. The wild and unruly divisions of our times is
to be the subject of the future discourse. I am not ignorant nor unsensible of
the difficulty, the trouble, the danger there is in meddling with such a subject
at such a time as this. He that meddles with the divisions of the times, may
expect to be divided himself, to have his name, his repute, to be cut asunder
and thrown this way and that way: It is an unthankful work to meddle with a
divided people; a man may with as much safety put his hand into a nest of
Hornets. Cui usui reipublicae Christianae and cui bono mihi.
A learned man being once asked why he did not write his judgment about the
controversy of his time, answered, To what purpose? it would not help the
cause, but much hazard him that should meddle. That which one once said to
Luther, when he was about interessing himself in seeking Reformation, sounds in
my ears, when I first thought of having to do with this Argument, Abi in Celiam
and dic miserere nostri.
O Luther, rather get you into your Cell, and say, Lord have mercy upon us.

It is a great part of the skill of a Minister to divide the word aright; but
this skill of his will be put to it, when he comes to divide the word amongst a
divided people, to give every part its portion. I should never have ventured to
have chosen a Text on purpose for such an argument; but seeing Providence has
brought it so fully into my way, I shall now venture upon it, with my heart
cast and fixed upon that promise, Pro. 11. 3. The uprightness of the upright
shall guide him.

I shall cast what I intend into this mould: 1. The causes of our Divisions. 2.
The evil of them. 3. Cautions about them, that we may not make an ill use of
them. 4. Remedies or cures of them.


The causes of our Divisions.
The principal cause from without, is the Devil, he seeks to keep his own
kingdom free from divisions, but seeks nothing more then to cause divisions in
the Kingdom of Christ. The Mahumetans, who worship a cursed impostor: The
Pagans, who worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars: The Egyptians, who worship
Onions, Leeks, Cats and Dogs, never had such divisions amongst them as the
worshippers of Jesus Christ have had, and have at this day amongst themselves;
for all the former are the Devils kingdom, which he seeks to keep at peace; but
he is that envious one who sows the seeds of division in the Kingdom of Christ;
hence those who foment divisions amongst Christians are called Devils, 1 Timothy
3. 11. The wives of Deacons must not be slanderers: (...)
The word may be translated Devils: women are most liable to the Devils
temptations this way, because they are weak, and are in danger to run away with
sudden apprehensions without due examination; and what can foment division more
then slandering, so far as any, especially in the Church, has a hand in
causing or fomenting division, so far as she is a Devil in
Scripture Language, the part of the Devil is acted by them. I remember Cajetan
has a note upon that place in the Gospel, where the devils being cast out of
the man, who had a legion in him, prayed Christ that they might not go out of
that region; why would they not go out of that region? says Cajetan; He gives
this answer, The Devils have certain places to which they divide their work,
such Devils to such a place for such a service, and such to another for another
service; now these Devils were loath to be displaced of their region, though
they were cast out of the man, having further work to do in that place: If this
be so, surely the Devils that are appointed to cause and foment divisions and
dissentions above all regions, love to be in the region of Churches, for no
where do divisions such heart as there, and at this time especially; for now the
Devils see they cannot prevail to get men to their old superstitious vanities;
but some reformation there will be, they now seek to mingle a perverse spirit of
division amongst men, hoping they shall prevail here, though they could not
hold their own in the former. God put enmity between Satan and the Saints, but
it is the Devil that puts enmity between Saints and Saints. When we hear
fearful thundering, and see terrible storms and tempests, many people say, that
ill spirits are abroad; surely these blustering storms of contention are raised
and continued from evil spirits: But the truth is, all the Devils in hell could
do us no great hurt in dividing us from God or from one another, were it not
for the corruption of our own hearts: Wherefore as the Lord says to Israel,
Perditio tua ex te, thy destruction is from thy self: So may we now say of
England, Divisio tua ex te, thy division is from thy self.

The causes of our divisions from our selves, may be referred to three heads.

1. Dividing principles; sometimes our divisions come down from our heads to
our hearts.

2. Dividing distempers, sometimes they go up from our hearts to our heads.

3. Dividing practices, and these come from head and heart, they foment and
increase both.

We will begin with dividing principles: Except some care be taken of the head,
it will be in vain to meddle with the heart, to cry out against our
heart-distempers; the chief cause of many of our divisions lies here: It is to
little purpose, to purge or apply any medicine to the lower parts, when the
disease comes from distillations from the head.

CHAP. IV.
Dividing Principles. The first, There can be no agreement without Uniformity.
THis Principle has a long time caused much division in the Church. 1.
Dividing Principle.
The right understanding wherein the weakness and falsenesse of it lies, will
help much to Peace, to join us sweetly together.

In the substantials of worship, Unity is necessary; there all are bound to go
by the same rule, and to do to the uttermost they are able, the same thing.

But the circumstantials of worship have a twofold consideration: They are
either such, as though but circumstances to some other worship, yet have also
in themselves some divine worship, some spiritual efficacy, something in them
to commend our service unto God, or to cause some presence of God with us, or
to work us nearer to God, by an efficacy beyond what they have in them of their
own natures. As for instance, Time is a circumstance, but the Lords day has a
worship in it commending our service to God, and an efficacy to bring God to
us, and raise us to God: this not from any natural efficacy of the time, What
circumstanti^^^ of worship must have institution, and what not.
but from Gods institution. Now in such circumstances as these, there ought to
be uniformity; for these have institutions for their rule, and are not at man's
liberty to be altered as he thinks best in prudence; But there are other
circumstances which are only natural or civil, subservient to worship in a
natural or civil way; They are conversant about worship, but have nothing of
worship in them, but are merely natural or civil helps to it. When we
worship God, we do something as men as well as worshippers; hence we have need
of some natural or civil helps. As for instance, when we meet to worship God,
we being men as well as Christians, must have a convenience of place, to keep
us from the weather, to know whether to resort; and of time to know when.

There must be order: Many cannot speak at once to edification; modest and
grave carriage is required of us, as a society of men, meeting about matters of
weight. In these circumstances, and other of the like nature, there is no
worship at all, there is no spiritual efficacy, there are only natural or
civil helps to us, while we are worshipping; therefore for these
circumstances, humane prudence is sufficient to order them.

The right understanding of this takes away a great prejudice that many have
against such as desire to keep to Divine Institutions, not only in
Substantials, but in the Circumstantials of worship; they think it an
unreasonable thing, that divine Institution should be required for every
circumstance in worship; this has bred a great quarrel in the church: and well
may it be thought unreasonable, if we required Institutions for circumstances
in worship, which are but natural or civil helps, and have no worship at all
in them, for that indeed were endless, and a mere vanity. Certainly
Institutions are to be required only in things that are raised beyond what is
in them naturally, in tendering my respects to God by them, or expecting to draw
my heart nearer to God, or God nearer to me in the use of them. The contention
about Uniformity is much increased for want of a right understanding of this
difference in the circumstantialls of worship; did we understand one another in
this, we might soon have Peace as concerning this thing.

In these latter sorts of circumstances we must also distinguish. There are
some that must of necessity be determined, as time and place; it is therefore
necessary, there should be an uniformity in these, in all the members of every
society respectively, that they agree to meet in the same place, at the same
time, natural necessity requires this: but natural necessity requires not the
binding of several Churches to Uniformity in things of this kind. The urging
Uniformity beyond the rule in such things, has in all ages caused woeful
divisions in the Church. Eusebius tells of Victor, Bishop of Rome, about two
hundred years after Christ, broke off communion from all the Churches of Asia,
for not keeping Easter the same time he did. The controversy was not about
Easter, but only about uniformity in the time. Never has there been greater
breaches of unity in the Church, then by violent urging Uniformity.

But further; there are other natural civil circumstances, which need not at
all be determined; though there be a liberty and variety in them, yet order and
edification is not hereby hindered. As for instance, In hearing the word, one
stands, as Constantine was wont constantly to do; another sits; one is
uncovered, another is covered; one has one kind of garment, another, another;
yet no rules of modesty or gravity are broken. Now if any power should
violently urge uniformity in such like circumstances, and not leave them as
Christ has done, here they make the necessity of uniformity a dividing
principle, upon these four grounds.

1. This is a straitning men's natural liberties, without satisfying their
reason.

2. This has been the inlet to almost all superstitions in the Church; First
the plea has been for decency and order, then there has been stamped a humane
institution to raise things higher.

3. The urging such things, when there is no reason seen in the nature of them;
why this rather then that, makes men fear there is some religious respect put
upon them already.

4. Here is a stretching the power of Authority beyond the limits of it, which
Man naturally is very impatient of, not knowing how far it may yet further be
extended. As for the practice of Church-Governors, or civil going beyond their
bounds, we shall speak to in the third Head.

I have read of Solomon the great Turk, Quemadmodum ista varietas herbarum and
florum mirifice oculos recreat, sic in imperio meo diversa fides and religio
potius usui est quam oneri modo pacate vivant.
when he was advised by a Mu^hty to compel those of diverse Religions in his
Dominions to Mahumetisme; looking out of his window into his Garden, where
there was great variety of flowers and herbs, said, As the variety of flowers
and herbs seem very delightful, so the diversity of Religions in my Kingdom
is rather useful then burdensome, so it be those who profess them live
peaceably. I am not of his mind for the variety of several Religions, of which
further by and by; yet certainly in the varity of the practices of Brethren in
such things as we are speaking of, tuned with brotherly love one toward
another, there will be a sweet harmony, when violent urging Uniformity in such
things will cause a harsh discord in the Churches.

When the forenamed Victor of Rome, with those who joined with him, caused
woeful divisions in the Church by standing so much upon uniformity, urging
there could be no Peace without it, by it they brake the peace of the Church.
Iraeneus and others in the same time pleaded for the peace of the Church, to be
procured by yielding to difference of practice in such things, in the name of
all the brethren in France under his charge, he writes to Victor, and those who
joined with him, and tells them of the variety of practices of diverse Brethren
in times before them, which was very near the Apostles times, who yet were at
unity one with another. They who were Bishops (says he) before Soter, of that
Sea which now thou governest, as Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Telesphorus, Xixtus,
were at unity with them of other Churches, although their observations were
various, and Polycarpus being at Rome in the time of Anicetus, varyed in diverse
things from him. Although Polycarpus had (says he) what he did from John the
Disciple of our Lord, with whom he conversed, yet would he not persuade
Anicetus to the same things, but left him to the way of his own Church, and
they communicated lovingly one with another, and parted in a brotherly way.
Cannot men walk peaceably in a broad way, though they do not tread just in one
another steps? What though there be some distance in their walk, one toward
one side, the other toward the other side of the way; must they needs fall
out, because they are not in the same path, when the way is broad enough?
Indeed if they went over a narrow bridge, they must not take that liberty to go
abredth; if they keep not close to one another steps, if they step at a
distance, they may fall into the River. Thus in matters of divine worship, we
must look to it, that we walk exactly in the same steps; if there we presume to
take liberty, we may soon fall; but in circumstances of an inferior nature,
there may be difference without division. We must not here take upon us to be
wiser then Christ. Melancthon in an Epistle to some Brethren of differing minds
(cited by Gersom Bucerus) persuades to unity thus: Cum de praecipuis articulis
doctrinae Christianae inter nos constet, complectamur nos mutuo amore, neque
dissimilitas and varietas rituum and ceremoniarum, addam ego and politiae
Ecclesiasticae, disjungere debet mentes nostras
Seeing (says he) we agree in the principal Articles of Faith, let us
embrace one another with mutual love, the dissimilitnde and varity of Rights
and Ceremonies, (I will add, says Bncerus) and of Ecclesiastical Government,
ought not to disjoyn our minds.

CHAP. V.
The second dividing Principle: All Religions are to be tolerated.
THis is a divider indeed. There is a great outcry of this but what is the
scope of it? 2. The second dividing principle.
it is to exasperate men's spirits against the toleration of any thing. Some
think there must needs be a necessary dependence between tolerating some things
conceived errors, and tolerating all things; and if it were not for the fear of
the one, there would not be such ado about the other. But I hope I shall
clearly show there is no such dependence; but as this is a dividing principle,
that all things should be tolerated, so the other is as truly dividing and
false, that nothing should be tolerated.

There is nothing makes more stir amongst us at this day, then this principle
of absolute liberty in matters of Religion. Conscience presses me to speak what
I shall find to be the mind of God in this thing: The wantonness of men's
spirits, their extreme boldness about the matters of God, and Christ, is such,
as should cause our hearts to tremble; such horrid blasphemous things are
amongst us, owned and professed with so much impudence, and their practice
strengthened by this Principle, That there is to be an absolute liberty in the
things of Religion, that our duty to God, our love to, and care of the
preservation of Religion, calls us to set our selves against such a false,
sinful, dangerous disturbing Principle as this is.

This Principle is strengthened by two Positions; both which are dividing as
well as the Principle it self.

First, That Magistrates have nothing to do with men in the matters of Religion.

Secondly, Conscience is a tender thing, and must have liberty; nothing must be
done to men, who plead their consciences for what they do.

First, we shall show the Principle it self to be a dividing principle; Then
the mistakes in those two assertions, that uphold this principle: As they
strengthen the principle, so they strengthen division.

The principle is dividing; For,

First, It is an abhorring to nature. Is it not an abhorring Exodus 8. 25, 26.
Pharaoh bade Moses sacrifice in the land: But Moses said, It is not meet so to
do; for we shall sacrifice the abominations of the Egyptians: Loc, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they
not stone us? Though they had leave of the King, yet the people would not
endure it.

Secondly, It is against the light of Scripture, Deutr.

Let not any put of this Scripture, saying, This is in the Old Testament, but
we find no such thing in the Gospel; for we find the same thing, almost the
same words, used in a Prophecy of the times of the Gospel, Zech. 13. 3. In the
latter end of the 12. Chapter, it is prophesied that those who pierced Christ,
should look upon him, and mourn, etc. having a spirit of grace and
supplication powered upon them. Chap. 13. 1. There shall now be opened a
fountain for sin and for uncleanness. Verse. 3. It shall come to pass, that
he that takes upon him to prophecy that his father and his mother that begat
him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the
name of the Lord: And his father and his mother that begat him, shall thrust
him through when he prophesies.

You must understand this by that in Deuteronomy. The meaning is not, that his father
or mother should presently run a knife into him, but that though they begat
him, yet they should be the means to bring him to condign punishment, even the
taking away his life; those who were the instruments of his life, should now be
the instruments of his death.



If it be said, Christ has left spiritual means to help this.

It is answered, Christ's spiritual means are to work in a spiritual way upon
the heart to change it, and secondarily upon the outward man; while Christ's
means are working thus, external means may keep evil from breaking forth in
the outward man; Christ has not left the outward man at absolute liberty to do
what it will, till spiritual means be made effectual to the heart,
especially considering if you grant this liberty, men may choose whether any of
those spiritual means of Christ should at all come at them.

The first position that upholds this dividing principle: Magistrates have
nothing to do in the matters of Religion.

It must be granted, that a Magistrate is not an Officer of Jesus Christ the
Mediator in his Mediatory Kingdom. A Magistrate not an Officer Regus
Mediatorie.


There is a twofold government that Christ has:

1. One as he is God equal with the Father, together with the Father, ruling
heaven and earth.

2. Another, as he is God and man, Mediator, in a peculiar Kingdom of his that
he has by way of dispensation from the Father.

Now the Magistrate is an Officer of God, both the Father and the Son, in the
general government of the world. But he is not the Officer of Christ, in that
Kingdom of his that he has by way of dispensation from the Father, that
Regnum Mediatorum, as Divines call it: No, though he be a Christian Magistrate,
there are no Officers of that, but such as are by divine institution set down
in the Word; his Christianity does only add unto him further ability to
execute the work of his Office in a better manner, it adds no new authority to
him: An Infidel Magistrate converted to Christian Religion, is thereby better
enabled to perform the duty of his place then before, but he had the same
authority before; it was his sin, he did not use his Authority now as he is
able to do; though he be a Christian who is a Magistrate, yet the power of his
Magistracy belongs to another Kingdom, different from that the second person
has as he is Christ the Mediator.

But does not this then exclude him from the exercise of any power in the
matters of Christian Religion? Object. 9.


No, Answ.
for God in the exercise of his power governing the world, has a special aim
at the promoting the Kingdom of his Son Christ the Mediator: Therefore
Magistrates exercising this power of God, ought to aim at these ends, that God
himself aims at in the exercise of his own power, that is, to be useful to
Christ's Government in his Church, and for the good of his Church: God in all
his ways, from the beginning of the world, has aimed at the setting up his
Son to be King upon his holy Hill, at the promoting of the glory of him who is
God-man: and if his Ministers do not make use of their power to this end, when
this Kingdom of his Son comes to be revealed to them, he will require it at
their hands.

The power that God invested Magistrates withal in matters of Religion in the
Old Testament, is so full and clear in that which God gave to the Kings of
Judah and Israel, that to name particulars would almost make a volume; I find
many who write about this subject, spend most of their strength here, but I
wholly forbear mentioning instances in this, because it is granted by all that
they had power; but the argument from thence to the power of Magistrates in the
times of the Gospel, prevails little with those who hold this Dividing
Principle we are now speaking of. For they tell us that their power was
typical, they in the exercise of such a power were types of the Kingly power
of Christ, for we find glorious promises of dominion and stability made to
Christ in the persons of many of those Kings.

2. They tell us, that it is no argument, because Priests and Levites had in
time of the Law power in temporal things, in ordering the affairs of the
State; therefore Ministers should have civil authority now: So neither is it
an argument, because Magistrates had power then in spiritual things, therefore
our Magistrates should have the like now.

3. They tell us that the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews were mixed in
one; hence to be a stranger from the Church is expressed by being a stranger
from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12. and therefore their Magistrates
were Church Officers as well as Civil.

4. That the people of the Jews were brought up in a more servile way then
Christ would have his Church, in the times of the Gospel, brought up in:
Compulsion therefore in matters of Religion was more suitable to their
condition, then it is to our Jerusalem which is free.

5. The whole Church was then bound to be under the same State-government; the
Laws of their State were by divine appointment; their Kings were chosen by God;
but now Christ chooses his Church out of all Nations of the earth, and leaves
them to the several Governments, Laws, Officers of several Nations for their
Civil State.

or satisfactory, only so far as there is a common reason and equity in them,
and so all the judicial bind now as well as they did then.

2. So far as the New Testament approves of for the times

The strength of the argument from the power of Magistrates in the Old
Testament, lies in these two.

First, there is a common reason and equity, what ever the strength of such
kind of arguing be from one Spiritual Ordinances to prove another, yet without
all question, it is strong enough from one Civil Ordinance to prove another,
though it be conversant about spiritual things.

It is the Dictate of Nature, that Magistrates should have some power in
matters of Religion. The generality of all people have ever thought it equal.
It has been ever challenged in all Nations and Commonwealths. The Heathens
would never suffer their gods to be blasphemed, but punish such as were guilty
thereof by the power of the Magistrate. Socrates was put to death for
blaspheming their multiplicity of gods.

2ly Surely there is a common equity, for there is a necessity of it as truly
now as there was then. I cannot argue the being of Spiritual Ordinances from
our need of them, not thus there is such an institution, for the Church has
need of it; but rather thus, I find it in the Word to be an institution, and
therefore the Church has need of it. But in natural or civil things this way
of arguing is strong enough; there is need of such a help, and therefore we
should seek to have it.

Now sure the need we have of such a power, is exceeding great, we were in a
most miserable condition if we had no external civil power to restrain from
any kinds of blasphemies and seducements. The condition of the Jews, O how
happy was it in comparison of ours, if this were denied us! for if any one of
theirs did blaspheme God, or seek to seduce any from him, they knew wht to do
with him, besides persuading him to the contrary; but if any should seek to
seduce the wives of our bosoms, children of our bodies, friends as dear to us
as our own lives, into those ways that we think in our consciences will undo
their souls to all eternity, yet we must only desire them they would not do
so, we must only admonish, and seek to convince them, or reprove them, but
restrain them we cannot: If the deliverance of us from the pedagogy of the Law
has brought us into this condition, our burden is greater in this thing then
any that the Law laid upon our forefathers. Has Christ delevered us from one
burden to lay a greater upon us? Must we now see those who are dearest to us
drawn into the ways of eternal destruction, and stand and look on, but no way
left to help them, or our selves, unless we can persuade to the contrary?
surely our condition is very sad: Have we not cause to say, Lord let any
burden of the Ceremonial Law be laid upon our necks rather then this? If there
were a company of mad men running np and down the streets with knives and
swords in their hands, endeavoring to mischief and kill all they met with, and
we must do nothing to restrain them; if we could persuade them to do
otherwise, well and good: but that is all we can do for help; what a dangerous
thing were this? The case is the same, when those who are mad with damnable
Heresies, run from place to place, seeking to draw all they can from the truth;
If we have no means of help but arguments, it is ill with us: Surely God has
not put his people into such a sad condition as this is, he has provided
better for his people then thus.

Thirdly, we find in the Record of Scripture mention of Heathen Magistrates,
who had nothing but the light of nature to guide them, interessing themselves
in matters of Religion, and this the Holy Ghost relates in way of commendation
of them for this thing.

The argument from these examples cannot be avoided, as that which is taken
from the practice of the Kings of Judah. We read Ezra 7. 26. Artaxerxes
interposes his power in matters of Religion, and Ezra blesses God for it,
Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him. And in the next words, Ezra blessed
God, who put it in the heart of the King by these and other means, to beautify
his house. The making such a Law was one notable means whereby the House of
the Lord came to be beautified.

Thus also Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 29. I make a Decree that every people,
nation and language, who speak any thing against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dung-hil, etc. This the Scripture records as a work of the Kings repentance.

The King of Nineveh, Jonah 3. by the decree of his Princes and Nobles,
proclaims a Fast, and commands every one to cry mightily to God, and to turn
from his evil way.

Further, let us see how the holy Ghost justifies this power of the Magistrate
in the times of the Gospel: First, in the Prophesies of the times of the
Gospel: Secondly, in diverse places in the New Testament.

For Prophesies, the forenamed place, Zech. 13. 3. cannot be put off: Isa. 49.
23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers. The
protection of their civil peace is not sufficient to give them such a
denomination of nursing fathers and mothers.

Esaias 60. 10. The sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings
shall minister unto thee: They shall not only be favorers of them, but as
Kings they shall minister to them, even by their power: So Rev. 21. 24. The
Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor to the Church: there is
such a time coming. This surely is more then merely to protect their outward
peace.

In the New Testament, Romans 13. 4. He is thy Minister for thy good. 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as to the supreme, or unto Governors, which are sent
for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. Now
seeing the Scripture speaks thus generally, For thy good, and for the
punishment of evil doers, and praise of them that do well, Non distinguendum
ubi Scriptura non distinguit, Except the nature of the thing require, why
should we distinguish where the Scripture does not?

You will say, The nature of the thing spoken of will require that it must be
restrained to those things that belong to his cognizance.

Such a limitation must of necessity be granted; therefore it is true that the
Magistrate cannot command every good thing, nor punish every evil; the
abstruse controversies in Religion come not under the cognizance of a
Magistrate, as a Magistrate; only such things as are against the rules of
common justice and equity, and the common light of Christianity, where he is to
govern Christians, for he is to enjoin and punish such things only as if he
were not; the community of people which sets him up, ought to enjoin and
punish, for he has his power from them: but of this more in the next Principle.

If you shall say, But those Scriptures speaking of Civil Magistrates, we
must understand them to be meant only of civil things.

The Magistrate has his appellation civil, because the power that he exercises
is civil, the things that he do are civil; he cannot do the works of a
Church Officer, by all the power he has, as administer Sacraments, and the
like; but this hinders not the use of his civil power, and the doing of
external acts upon the outward man, subservient to spiritual good; indeed what
he does, has not any spiritual efficacy in it, for then it were worship.
Though he cannot work in a spiritual way upon man's soul, by his power, it is
not an Ordinance set apart by God to that end, yet he may by the exercise of
his power upon the outward man, restrain it from the external act of evil, or
bring it to an external good; his power still that he exercises is civil, yet
ordered to the help of spiritual good, either removendo prohibentia, or
applicando media externa, or cohibenda a malo externo; removing outward things
that hindered, applying outward means, or keeping from outward evils.
Whatsoever Commandment requires any duty, requires us to make use of all
things that may help us to the performance of that duty; if there be any civil,
natural, spiritual helps, we are bound to make use of all. Only here lies the
great doubt, Whether has God appointed the use of the Magistrates power to be
a help to the things of Religion? Has God made this to be an Ordinance for
the spiritual good of people?

That it is by God an Ordinance for their civil good, is plain out of those
Scripture before mentioned; but how does it appear that ever God intended it
to be an Ordinance for their spiritual good?

What naturalnes there is in any thing, Answ.
it has it from God, for nature is Gods work, if there be a naturalness in it
to work upon the outward man, for the furtherance of spiritual good; this is
from God: if I should use it to work upon the inward man expecting a spiritual
efficacy, then I make it an ordinance to my self, and sin against God,
presuming to put more in a creature of his, then it was appointed to. In this
consisted the evil of ceremonies, they were used in a spiritual way, to work
upon the heart of man, by virtue of that institution that man put upon them,
beyond what God in their natural power ever put into them.

But how can natural and external things be helps to things spiritual and
divine?

Any man's reason, Answ.
yea sense may tell him, that the taking away external hindrances, and the
putting upon external use of diverse things, may keep from much evil, and
further much good that is spiritual and divine; though it cannot reach to the
spiritualnesse and divinenesse of that good, yet it reaches to the external
action, without which that divine and spiritual good cannot be. Wherefore
seeing the New Testament sets out the power of Magistrates, and requires
submission to them in such general terms; from this we may draw such a
conclusion, Therefore the Lord intended to leave Christians for their
subjection to Magistrates, to the light of nature, and to the equity of the
general rules that were in Scripture before time; if God should say, Ye are
Christians, see you part not with that liberty Christ has purchased for you;
we may give this account, Lord we found in thy word that once thou did make
use of the power of Magistrates in matters of Religion, and in the New
Testament there was nothing revealed to forbid their power in them; nay Lord,
Thou toldst us there, that thou have appointed them for our good, and to be a
terror to evil works in the general. From thence we gathered, that in our
yielding to their power, it was thy will we should make use of those general
rules in Stripture we found before the times of the Gospel, and of the light
of nature. Being also persuaded it was thy mind we should make use of all the
natural helps we could for our spiritual advantage, and we found it recorded
in thy Word that thou did allow of the exercise of such power in the things
of Religion, even to those who had only the light of nature to guide them and
being the use of it reached only to the outward man, we did not see a necessity
of a special institution for this, knowing what naturalness it had in it, to
be an external help was put into it by thy self, therefore we made use of it.
God will accept of this account. Add yet a consideration or two.

1. When the Apostles were convented before Civil Authority about matters of
Religion, we never find that they pleaded for themselves, You have no power to
meddle with us in the things of Religion, they belong to Jesus Christ only who
is our King, and to that government he has set in his Church; No, their plea
was only the justness of their cause, that what they professed and preached was
the truth of God, they did it in obedience to God.

2. If all men be bound to improve all the abilities, gifts, talents they have
for the propagation of the Gospel, the Magistrates are bound to improve those
which are peculiar to them; If a man has more wisdom then others, or a greater
estate, or more friends, he is to make use of all these for helps to the
furtherance of Religion; if then a man has more power then others, he is to
improve that likewise, not only by countenancing what he conceives to be
right, but by all other means according to the dictates of Reason, not forb^^
by Scripture.

But we have often heard that of Tertullian urged; S^ ideo dicetur ^ronari
licere, quia non prohibeat Scriptura; ^que retorquebi^ur ideo corona^i non
licere, ^uia Scriptura ^^on jubeat.
If it be therefore said it is lawful because the Scripture does not forbid,
it is therefore unlawful because the Scripture does not command.

Ans. In the matters of Gods worship this rule is to be urged, but not in
matters civil or natural, though in their way subservient to worship, their
Reason may guide very far.

But you will say, What? will you then make the Magistrate a Judge in all
causes of Religion? Tertul. de co^o^ milit.
he may be a wicked man, a Heathen, and yet a true Magistrate.

Ans. Whatsoever he be, yet he may be a Judge in matters of fact, and so far as
Reason may go in matters of right, he may judge whether you do not go against
your own principles, either in your profession, acts of worship, or in the
wrong you do to your brother; yea, he may judge whether your very principles be
not contrary to the common light of the knowledge of God, that God has given to
men, and to the rules of humane justice. A Magistrate who is not skillful in
Physic or Navigation, yet he may judge Physicians and Mariners, if they wrong
others in their way.

CHAP. VI.
The second Position, Conscience is a tender thing, and must not be meddled with.
CErtainly Conscience is a very tender thing; and as men must take heed how
they offer violence to their own consciences, so to the consciences of others;
It is such a thing as is not in subjection to any creature in Heaven or Earth,
only to God himself. Gerrard reports out of the Histories of France of a King
of Navarre, Dominatum in conscientias and animas soli Deo relictum.
writing to his Nobles, used this expression, The rule over consciences and
souls is left to God alone: And of a King of Polonia, who was wont frequently
to say, That God had reserved three things to himself: 1. To make something of
nothing. Deum tria sibi reservasse; ex nihilo aliquid facere, futura scire, and
conscientiis dominari.
2. To know things future. 3. To rule over conscience. Maximilian the second
used to say, There was no tyranny more intolerable then to seek to rule over
consciences. Henry the third, King of France, as the last pangs of death
carried him into another world, had this speech, Learn of me that piety is a
duty of man unto God, over which worldly force has no power; this was spoken
in the same Chamber where the Council was held about that fatal Bartholmew
day, Nullam esse tyrannidem intollerabiliorem, quam conscientiis dominari velle.
in the year 1572.

But for all this, the Devil must not be let alone, though he be got into men's
consciences, God has appointed no City of refuge for him; if he flies to men's
consciences, as Joab did to the horns of the Altar, he must be fetched from
thence, or fallen upon there. Something may be done to men to keep them from
evil, and to reduce them, notwithstanding the plea of their conscience.

But what may be done to a man in such a case? What should be done to a man
that pleads his conscience.


First, any man that pleads his conscience, may be required to give an account
of his conscience; it is not enough for him to say, his conscience puts him
upon such a thing, or keeps

The world requires us to give an account to every man of that hope that is in
us, if he requires it in a due way; we are bound to give no offense neither to
the Jew nor Gentile: It is against the light of nature, that men in a society
should do things of which they need give no account to any whatsoever.



But how shall it be known, Quest.
whether the Devil be in a man's conscience or not? Conscience is an inward
room, who can see into it, what, or who is there?

It is a very hard thing to give a judgment, Answ.
but these notes may help us much in discerning.

that where there is much of his own interest; but this brings him under much
suspicion, if the thing be not exceeding clear to the view of every man.

Secondly, if in the course of a man's life, he appears not to

Thirdly, when the account a man gives cannot in any rational

4ly. If a man be proud and turbulent in his carriage, by that you may know the
Devil is rather in the will then in the conscience; though an erroneous
conscience may cause one to hold fast an error, yet it does not put upon
proud, scornful, turbulent behavior: When a man by reason of his conscience
(it may be the weakness of it) differs from his brethren, he had need carry
himself with all humility and meekness, and self-denial in all other things; he
should be willing to be a servant to every man, in what lawfully he may, that
thereby he may show to all, that it is not from any wilfulness, but merely the
tenderness of his conscience, that he cannot come off to that which his
brethren can do, whom yet he reverences, and in his carriage toward them,
shows that he yet esteems them his betters; but if a man that is weak, very
much beneath others in parts and graces, shall carry himself high, imperious,
contemning and vilifying those who differ from him, and be contentious with
them: There is great reason to think, that the corruption is in the will rather
then any where else; if there should be some conscience yet in these men, their
heart-distempers may justly forfeit their right of pleading their consciences.
Those who oppose them, if they do it in a Christian way, may justify what
they do before God; if God should call them to an account, and say, why did
you deal so with such men who professed they were put upon what they held and
did, by their consciences; If they can answer thus, Lord thou know we were
willing to have dealt with them in all tenderness, if we could have seen
conscientiousness in their carriage; but we saw nothing but scornfulness,
pride, imperiousness, turbulency, conceitednes, we could see nothing of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ acting them in their way; this their carriage persuaded
us, that the sinfulness was got rather into their wills then their consciences.

trying our opinions, or informing our judgments, we should make use of that
means, a conscientious heart will do so.

The sixth note added, will seal up all; when a man by reason Tit. 3. 11. that
is (...), condemned of himself, An Heretic after the first and second
admonition reject, because he is selfe-condemned; we must not reject every man
that erres in every little thing, no not after two or three admonitions, that
was a prelatical, tyrannical rule, but he must be an Heretic, and erring so
grossly, as he is self-condemned in his error, and such a man suffers not for
his conscience, when he is rejected, but for sinning against his conscience.

But who can know when a man is condemned of himself? Object.
the judgment of a man's own conscience is a secret thing.

This is the strength of this hold the Devil gets into, Answ.
he thinks he gets so deep, that you cannot get to it to find him out, and as
for Gods displeasure who knows their consciences, these men will venture that.
But by this Scripture, Tit. 3. it is clear, that a man's conscience may be so
far seen into, as there may be a judgment passed upon a man, that he is a
self-condemned man: To what purpose otherwise serves this Scripture? it is not
like this Heretic would acknowledge that he was self-condemned, but yet the
Apostle makes this the ground why he should be rejected; As if he should say,
You see he will go against his own principles, against what his conscience tells
him is truth, merely to maintain a wicked Heresy that he is infected withal;
let him therefore plead what he will, reject him, for his own conscience
condemns him, and GOD is greater then his Conscience, and knows all things.

The third thing that is to be done to a man who pleads his let evil into his
conscience, he puts himself into such a condition, as whatsoever he does, he
must needs sin against God, so long as he holds his error: Evil gets into the
consciences of many very easily, because they think the dictates of their
consciences will be sufficient to bear them out in what they do; Conscientia
erronea non obligat.
but they are deceived, for an erroneous conscience does not bind, you sin
notwithstanding your conscience bids you do it; and if you go against this
erroneous conscience, you sin too; what a miserable snare is this? you had
need look to your selves then, and take heed what you let into your consciences.

conscience cannot justify him in; if there be indeed any conscientiousness in
the man, this will startle him.

conscience be never so much taken with it, yet if it cannot stand with the
power of godliness, but destroys it, if this man be in a Christian society
after all means used to reduce him, if he still perseveres in it, he is,
notwithstanding his conscience, to be cast out of the society of the Saints;
this is not a little matter, if a man has any conscience in him, it cannot but
be a dreadful thing to him: If poison be got into a glass, and you cannot wash
it out, the poison and glass too is to be thrown into the sinck: Such a man as
this is, with the conscience that he has, is to be thrown upon the dunghill.
If a man by his wickedness cuts himself off from the mystical body of Christ,
the Church may cut him off from his visible, he has forfeited his
Church-priviledger.

conscience. This justifies the cutting off Jesuits and Priests, who teach
people that the Crown is at the dispose of any foreign power, by which also
subjects may be freed from their Allegiance. A Reverend Divine of ours, Mr.
Concn.
in a Treatise upon the pouring out of the 7. Vials, interprets the turning of
the Rivers into blood; the execution of Justice even to blood upon the Romish
Emissaries, the Jesuits and Priests, who come from the Sea of Rome, to take
people off from their Allegiance.

7ly. What ever pretense of conscience a man has, yet this conscience in the
point of community of goods, yet if he take away his neighbors goods by
violence, his conscience cannot deliver him from the stroke of justice. The
Papists pretend conscience for their murders, for the Catholic cause, but
this delivers them not out of the hands of justice; if a man pleads conscience
that he is bound to marry more wives then one, and the like.

Eighthly, a man may bring himself under both Civil and

Though such as are not Christians cannot by violence by conscience, they may
be restrained, and that by violence, if other means will not do it, from an
open blaspheming Christ, and the Scriptures, or doing any acts of open
dishonor to them acts of open dishonor to God done by any whomsoever, as
they are abominable, so such as have loved God and Christ, have accounted them
unsufferable.

I suppose you have heard or read that notable story we have in the Book of
Martyrs, of one Gardener, though we undertake not to justify his practice as
allowable in an ordinary way, he being but a private man, yet there were little
question to be made of it had he been a Magistrate: He being a Merchant in
Portugal, seeing the Cardinal offering the Host, though it were in the
presence of the King and his Nobles, yet he runs to him and snatches it out of
his hand, and throws it under his feet; if the King himself had done this, who
would have condemned it?



Those who strengthen others in dangerous soule-damning principles, may be
taken from them, the light of Nature teaches it.

Magistrate, I might if I had power keep him off: And what I might do by mine
own strength, in case there were no Magistrate, I may call in the help of a
Magistrate to do for me, when there is a Magistrate.

But you will say, Quest.
you speak all this while of the restraint of men from dangerous gross evils;
but what if the evils be of less moment, can there be nothing done to men for
the restraining them from such?

Ye^, Answ.
a man may be put to some trouble in those ways of laid in the way, of that
which is apparently evil, so as men shall see there is something to be
suffered in that way; if there be no more grains of trouble then may help
against this wantonness and neglect of means, I see no reason why any should
be offended at this; indeed if there be a mistake, and the trouble be put into
the wrong scale, if it be laid in the way of truth, let the sin be upon those
who dare venture upon their mistakes; or if so much be put into the scale as
will not balance only against wantonness, and neglect of means, but will be
a sore temptation to decline the truth, and rather embrace that which is
evil, then to endure so much trouble; this is very displeasing to God: If a
man be asleep at a Sermon, his friend may pull his hand, yea he will not be
offended though he give him a nip perhaps: but if he should strike him with a
staff on the head, so as to make the blood come, or cut his flesh with his
knife, this would not be borne.

One step I think may be gone farther. Suppose a man be not

Though such a man should be dealt with in much tenderness and love, Answ.
yet in such things as by his weakness he makes himself less serviceable to
the Commonwealth, or Church, then other men, who have more strength; he may be
denied some privileges and benefits that are granted to others. I instance in
that opinion of some Anabaptists, who deny the lawfulness of War; suppose
their consciences after much seriousness in the use of means, cannot be
satisfied; yet seeing by this error of theirs they are made less useful in
the State then others, they should not think it much though they be denied many
privileges and accommodations that are granted to others, who venture their
lives for the preservation of the State. If a man's body be weak, he cannot help
it, yet by it he is not so useful as others, why should he think much that he
has not whatsoever others by strength are able to attain to? Suppose a man
should have such a principle in his conscience, that the K. has an absolute
arbitrary power; though it be his conscience, yet by it he is disinabled from
employment and preferment in places of trust. So for the Church, suppose the
government of it by Prelates had been lawful, (which now we know was not) there
had been no evil in denying to those who in conscience could not submit to it,
their preferments of Deanries and Prebends, and the like.

But lest what I say in this should be abused, you must understand this denial
of places of profit or honor to men, because of that which their consciences
will not suffer them to yield to, only such places, as the tenderness of
their consciences in such a point makes them unfit to manage, if because their
consciences differ from you in one thing, you will take advantage against them
in other things that have no dependence upon that wherein they differ from you,
and make them suffer in those things too, you now (to say no worse) begin to
grow near to a way of persecution and tyranny over your brethren, which
Christ, is displeased with. We accounted it in the Bishops not near, but come
up to tyranny and persecution, when they would not suffer such as could not
conform to their Church Discipline and Ceremonies, not so much as to teach
children the Grammar, or to practice Physic, or to preach Christ in places
where there was no preaching, but people lived in darkness, perishing for
want of knowledge. What dependence had these things upon their discipline and
Ceremonies, supposing they had been right? Yes, they would foment their errors
by this means.

But seeing there was no dependence between their errors, Answ.
(if you will call them so) and these things, to deny the Church and
Commonwealth the benefit of the gifts and graces of men, upon such a pretense
that they will abuse their liberty, we thought it was hard dealing, yea no
less then persecution.

Suppose a man differs from his brethren in point of Church Discipline, must
not this man have a place in an Army therefore? Though he sees not the reason
of such a Discipline in the Church, yet God has endued him with a spirit of
volour, and he understands what Military Discipline means; must he not have a
place in a College to teach youth Logic and Philosophy? may be not preach
Jesus Christ to poor ignorant creatures? if you fear he will divulge his
opinions, surely some other course may be taken whereby he may suffer as much
as such a fault comes to; but therefore to deprive Church and State of what
abilities God has given him, which might be very useful to them, and that
before any such fault is committed, for fear it may be committed; the softest
word I have to express my self against this, is, It is very hard dealing with
your Brethren.

I have now gone to the uttermost line I can in showing what is to be done to a
man that pleads his conscience in things which we conceive are not right: I
would now speak a word or two to men who have to deal with their brethrens
consciences, and then to those who plead their consciences for their freedom.

To the first. Those who are to deal with men's consciences, must be tender
hearted.
Let those who have to deal with men's consciences, Woe to them who offend one
of these little ones; it were better that a mil-stone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the bottom of the Sea, Matthew. 18. 6. It is his
conscience, and perhaps better informed then thine, and more tender; thou have
it may be a corrupt conscience, thy conscience is broke by thy sinning against
it, or otherwise it is loose or benumbed, no quickness in it, thou can
swallow down greater matters, therefore thou wonderest at those who are so
nice-conscienced, who stand upon small matters; what if at the great day Christ
shall own these to be truly conscientious, and honor them for obeying the
voice of their consciences in small things, for not daring to offend them in
any thing, where will thou appear? what is like to become of thee then? Or if
their consciences be weak, not rightly informed, yet Christ expects thou
should seek to heal, to strengthen them, not to jeer and scorn them; that
fearfulness of theirs to offend Christ, though in the particular they may be
mistaken, shall be accepted, when thy boldness and ventrousness in taking thy
liberty shall appear to be thy folly.

2. Take heed in your dealings with such, you make them not your power over
them, so as to cause them to complain justly to God of conscience-oppression;
Conscience-oppression is the most fearful oppression; of all the cries in the
world, the cries caused by it come up most swiftly to God. When an oppressed
soul shall get alone, and make his moan to God; The moan of a true
conscientious man to God.
Oh, Lord, thou who know the secrets of all hearts, thou know the desires
of my soul in uprightness to know thy will; I can freely and comfortably
appeal to thee. Thou know what a sad affliction it is to me, that my
judgment should be different from my brethrens, whose parts and graces I prize
far beyond mine own. Thou know also there is no means for further
Reformation, but I have been willing to make use of it as I was able, and what
ever other help thou shall make known to me, I am ready to make use of it,
that I may not be led aside into error: and if thou will be pleased to reveal
thy mind further to me, I am ready to submit to it. I should account it a
greater happiness then all the comforts in the world can afford, to know what
thy mind is in such and such things; but Lord, as yet I cannot do this thing,
except I should sin against thee, thou know it: yet thou know also,
that I desire to walk humbly and peaceably with my brethren, and in all
meekness, submissenesse, and quietness of spirit, together with all
diligence, I will wait till thou shall further reveal thy mind to me. But
Lord, in the mean time I find rigid dealing from my brethren; their spirits
are imbittered, their speeches are hard, their ways tomards me are harsh, yea
Lord there is violence in them; Lord, thou know my spirit is not such as to
need any such carriage of my brethren toward me; I am not conscious to my
self (no not when I set my self most solemnly in thy presence) of stiffness,
wilfulness in my way; the least beam of light from thee, would presently
turn my spirit what way thou would have it go.

Such a moan to God would prove a sadder business against such as shall
occasion it, then if such men had strength and spirits to answer bitterness,
harshnesse, and violence, with bitterness, harshnesse, and violence.

Directions to them who plead their consciences.


First, take heed you rest not in this as an empty plea, setting it as a
Bulwark against any thing that shall be said to you: why, it is my conscience,
and who has to do with my conscience? and so think you need look no farther,
nor give any other account to your Brethren then this: This is to abuse your
conscience, and the indulgence of God, and the respect he would have men show
to the consciences of his people; this is a hardening conscience against the
truth, no true tenderness of it.

Secondly, If Conscience be such a thing as none must have consciences are good
enough to prostrate to men, but consciences reserved for God need be kept
unspotted and very clean. Doves love white houses, the holy Ghost loves a pure
conscience.

Thirdly, thou will have none to commaud thy conscience, conscience then
command thee; if thou will rebel against thy conscience, it is just with God
to suffer men to tyrannize over thy conscience. When you complain of men
seeking to have power over your consciences, lay your hand upon your heart, and
say, Have not I rebelled against my conscience? I have resisted the power of it
over me, just therefore it is that others should seek to bring it under their
power.

CHAP. VII.
They who are for a Congregationall way, do not hold absolute liberty for all
Religions.
BUt for all that has been said, Are there not yet a sort of men, who though
they would color over things, and put fair glosses upon their opinions and
ways, saying they would not have such an absolute liberty as to have all
religions suffered, yet do they not come near this in their tenets and
practice? Congregationall men charged for liberty to all Religions.
Do not men in a Congregationall way take away all Ecclesiastical means that
should hinder such an absolute liberty as this? for they hold, every
congregation has sole Church power within it self, and they are not tied to
give any account to others, but merely in an arbitrary way, will not this bring
in a toleration of all Religions, and a very Anarchy

First, Answ.
I know none holds this, and how far men in a congregationall way are from it,
shall appear presently.

In the clearing of this thing, I shall not argue for one side or other, I
shall only show you that there is in effect as much means to prevent or subdue
error, heresy, schism in the congregationall way, (which you call by another
name) as there is in that way, other Brethren endeavor to hold forth. I am not
here to plead what is right, what is wrong, but only to show you the
difference is not great, so far as concerns this thing; what one holds, the
same the other holds in effect; if this be done with clearness, then the great
outcry against that way, as fomenting divisions by opening a gap to all kind
of liberty, will I hope be stilled, and your hearts in some measure satisfied.
I confess were it, as many of you are made to believe, that that way gives
liberty, or at least has no help against all errors and heresies, it must be
acknowledged it were a means of most fearful divisions, and in no case to be
tolerated. But certainly you will find it far otherwise. This argument I am now
about, (namely, how far Brethren agree in a matter of so great moment, and in
that which they are by some thought most to disagree in, and their disagreement
most feared, as a matter of dangerous consequence) I know cannot be an
unpleasing argument to you, although we cannot be ignorant that there is a
generation of men that are vexed when they hear how near their brethren come to
them in way of agreement, it serves more for their turns to have the distance
wide, they would keep open the wounds, yea widen them, but God forbid there
should be such a spirit in you.

Wherefore for your help in this thing, these two things are to be premised.

1. That the only way the Church has to keep down errors or heresies is
spiritual; as for other means they are extrinsicall to the Church; this all
acknowledge: as for subjection to the Magistrate, if he pleases to interpose,
to that both they and we must yield.

2. The virtue of spiritual power works not upon the outward man, by its
prevailing upon conscience; therefore so far as men are conscientious, so far
it works, and no farther.

Now then see what difference there is in the Congregationall way from the
Presbyterian, for the prevailing with men's Consciences, to reduce to the truth
those who go astray from it.

First, Those in the Congregationall may acknowledge that

Secondly, they acknowledge that Synods of others Ministers

3ly. That these Synods may by the power they have from

Fourthly, as there shall be cause, they may declare men or

5ly. They may by a solemn act in the name of Jesus Christ

Sixthly, they may declare, and that also in the name of Christ. Now all this
being done in Christ's name, is this nothing to prevail with conscience?

You will say, What if they care not for all this?

That is as if you should say, What if they be not conscientious? Answ.
What if nothing can prevail with conscience?

I demand, what can any Church Power do more to work upon men's conscience for
the reducing them from evil?

You will say, They may do all this with more authority then the
Congregationall way will allow.

We need not contend about the word Authority: But, how Answ.
much higher is an act of authority in the Church, then for the Officers of
Christ to act in the name of Christ?

If you say, private Brethren may admonish, and declare in the Name of Christ.

This is more then if any private Brethren should do the same thing; for a
Synod is a solemn Ordinance of Christ, and the Elders are to be looked on as
the Officers of Jesus Christ.

But our Brethren say, There is one means more in their way then the
Congregationall way has, that is, if the six former will not work, then
Synods may deliver to Satan.

In this very thing lies the very knot of the controversy between those who
are for the Presbyteriall, and those who are for the Congregationall way, in
reference to the matter in hand, namely the means to, reducing from, or keeping
out errors and heresies from the Church, in this lies the dividing business;
But I beseech you consider what a punctum we divide here, and judge whether the
cause of division in this thing be so great as there can be no help, and
whether if an evil spirit prevail not amongst us, we may not join; For,

First, consider, what is there in this delivering to Satan? which is a seventh
thing that our Brethren think may hopefully prevail with men's consciences,
when the six former cannot.

Yes, say they, for by this they are put out of the Kingdom of Christ into the
Kingdom of Satan, and this will ter^ifie.

This putting out of Christ's Kingdom must be understood, clave non errante, if
the Synod judges right, not otherwise; Yes, this is granted by all.

Then consider, whether this be not done before, and that with an authority of
Christ by those former six things; for Heretical Congregations, or persons are
judged and declared in a solemn Ordinance, by the Officers of Christ gathered
together in his name, to be such as have no right in any Church-ordinance, to
have no communion with any of the Churches of Christ: Now if this judgment be
right, are not such persons or Congregations put out of the Kingdom of Christ,
and put under the power of Satan consequently?

But they are not formally and juridically delivered up to Satan? Object.


What? Answ.
shall we still divide, as to devour one another, for formality and
juridically, when those terms are not at all in Scripture, seeing we agree not
in the substance of the thing, which may as really and fully prevail with
conscientious men, as if formality were observed? especially, if we consider,

Secondly, that it is a great question amongst our Brethren, whether this
traditio Satanae were not Apostolical, peculiar to the power of Apostles, so
as ordinary Elders had it not: and if it prove so, then non-communion will
prove the utmost censure the Church now has.

But thirdly, if some brethren rise to a seventh degree, and others stay at
six, which yet have such a power over conscience, that if they prevail not,
the seventh is no way likely to prevail: Why should not the Apostles rule
quiet us all, Phil. 3. 15, 16. whereunto we have already attained, let us walk
by the same rule: If in any thing you be otherwise minded, God will reveal
even this unto you. If we have attained but to six, and our brethren have
attained to seven, let us walk together lovingly to the six; If God shall after
reveal the seventh (we will promise to pray and study in the mean time) we
shall walk with them also: why must it needs be now urged with violence, so as
to divide else? and although we hold not the seventh, yet there is an
ingredient in the sixth, that has in it the strength of the seventh? For
wherein lies the strength of the seventh above the rest? is it not in this?
that it is the last means Christ has appointed in his Church to work upon
the heart, this consideration has much terror in it: Now those in the
Congregationall way say, that this is fully in the sixth, wherefore that it is
as terrible to their consciences as the seventh can be to the consciences of
our brethren, and that upon the same ground.

And consider now, my Brethren, whether the Congregationall way be such, as if
it be suffered, there will be no help to reduce an erring or heretical
Church, but all Religions, Arrianisme, Mahumetisme, any thing must be suffered.
Surely men do not deal fairly, in raising such mighty accusations upon such
poor and weak grounds; this great aspersion, and huge outcry, that these men
would have all religions suffered, and in that way, there is no help against
any Heriticall Congregations, moulders and vanishes away before you.

Let no man yet say, All this that has been said is nothing.

If you be conscientious who hear them say so, your own breasts must needs
suggest an answer; surely these things would be very much to me, to prevail
with my conscience.

But what if Congregations refuse to give account of their ways? what if they
will not show so much conscientiousnesse, as to regard admonitions, declaring
against them, withdrawing communion from them?

So we may say, Answ.
what if they will not regard your delivering them up to Satan, but will go on
still?

You will say then, you will complain to the Magistrate, his power must come in
to assist, to make them regard what the Church does.

But now you have no further help from any intrinsicall power the Church has;
Answ.
and as for subjection to the Magistrate, there we are upon equal ground, if
he will interpose, he may assist and second the sentence of judging men
subverters of faith, of withdrawing communion from them in the one, as well as
the sentence of giving men up to Satan in the other; and we must still be
subject here to suffer what is inflicted, if we cannot do what is required;
only we do not go so far as some do, in this one thing, whereas they lay a Law
upon the consciences of Magistrates, that they are bound to assist with their
power the decrees of the church, taking cognizance only of the fact of the
Church, that they have thus decreed, not enquiring into the nature of the
things, we dare not lay any such bond upon the Magistrates conscience.

But say, that he is to assist the Church both upon the knowledge of what the
Church has done, and the knowledge of the nature of the thing, seeing every
private man has this power to be judge of his own act, it were a great misery
upon those who have power over men, to be denied this power.

If it shall be said, But surely they do not agree so far, they do not come up
to these six things mentioned. To that I answer, I do not in these deliver only
mine own judgment, but by what I know of the judgments of all those Brethren
with whom I have occasion to converse by conference both before and since; I
stand charged to make it good to be their judgments also; yea, it has been
both theirs and mine for diverse years, even then when we never thought to have
enjoyed our our own Land again; and if it be so, then let the Lord be judge
between us and our Brethren, for those loud and grievous outcries there has
been against us in this thing.

But if the difference be so little, why do they not come in?

We come as far as we have light to guide us, we dare not step one step in the
dark; if we do, we shall certainly fall into sin; whatsoever else we fall into,
what ever the thing be to others, it would be our sin, if there were no other
reason, but because we venture in the dark. We sail up to our Brethren as far
as we can see the Line of Truth, and beyond it we dare not venture in the least.

The controversy is not about little or great trouble, or inconvenience; if it
were, such a charge might well make us blush, the inconvenience or trouble is
little, yet a few men will not yield to their Brethren, who are many, for peace
sake, but the controversy is about sin: now whether that be little or great,
the difference cannot but remain, if one part shall urge upon another that
which to them is sin, as to acknowledge any one thing to be a power of Christ,
which he cannot see Christ has owned in his word, must needs be; therefore the
way to peace, is not the necessity of coming up one to another, because the
thing is little, but the loving, and peaceable, and brotherly carriage of one
toward another, because the difference is but small.

CHAP. VIII.
The third dividing Principle, That nothing which is conceived to be evil, is
to be suffered.
THis is the other extreme; some think all things should be suffered, and they
are loose, and cause divisions on the one hand; others think nothing is to be
suffered, and these are rigid, and cause divisions on the other hand; If any
thing be conceived evil, either in opinion or practice, if instructions and
persuasions cannot reform, there must be means used to compel: This is a harsh
and a sour Principle, a disturbing Principle to Churches and States, to
mankind. This Principle seldom prevails with any but those who have got power
into their hands, or hope to get it. This must needs be a dividing Principle.





But if this Principle prevails, every man almost is made liable to punishment
for thousands of things that he can see no reason why he should be punished: It
is very hard to bring men's spirits to yield in such things.

But you will say, May not men be punished for things that they see no reason
why they should be punished? for many malefactors may easily escape thus; guilt
will quickly blind men, they will see no reason why they should be punished.

It is not what men say they see no reason for, Answ.
or what it may be they indeed see no reason for; but what men cannot see
reason for, though they should bend their understandings, and strength to the
uttermost; yea, what the generality of man kind, and of that community of which
a man is, cannot possibly see reason for, it is impossible for the generality
of mankind, and the community of any Church or State, though they should be
never so diligent to find out what is good, and what is evil, yet to be able
to understand every thing that is evil, to be so.

If you will have laws made against all things, that such as are in authority
conceive to be evil, then you must give them power to judge, not only by the
rules of common justice and equity, and punish for the breach of them, but by
the apprehensions that their own raised parts shall suggest unto them, and to
punish men for not being raised to that height of understanding themselves
have; but this power is more then is fit to be given to any men upon earth.
This would bring tyranny both in State and Church.

For first, 1. The civil Magistrates not to punish every thing that is evil.
from whence is the rise of all Civil Power that any man, or society of men,
are invested with? is it not from the generality of the men, over whom they
have power? Is it not the power which they themselves had, and which they might
have kept amongst themselves? For who can say, that a Democracy is a sinful
Government in it self? True, God establishes it upon particular men by his
Ordinance, after it is given to them by the people, but the first rise is from
them; and if so, then they should make no law to bring those men under
punishment, who gave them their power, but such a Law as these men may possibly
come to understand, to be equal and just, for they act their power: and it
must be supposed, that they never intended to give a power beyond this. Those
who give power, may limit power; they may give part to one, part to another;
they may limit the matter about which the power shall be exercised, it shall go
so far, and no further; the utmost limits cannot go beyond these rules of
Justice which they are capable to understand. Hence it is, that all men in our
Law, are tried Per pares, by their Peers, because it is to be supposed, that
they are to be accounted offenders and to be punished; only so as those who are
equal with themselves, shall judge them worthy; and this likewise is the reason
that Courts are in public, no man is to be shut out, because all men that
will may behold the trial, and justify the proceedings of Justice against
offenders: It must needs be supposed then, that the rules by which the Judges
go, must be the rules of common equity and justice, that all men may
understand; beyond what these rules will reach to, the Civil State is not to
punish, not every thing that men of deep judgments and strong parts, may
apprehend to be evil.

The power of the Church likewise extends not to the punishment of every thing,
that either may by the Governors of it, be conceived to be evil, or that is
indeed evil.

As the rise of the Civil power shows, that only such things are to be punished
by it, as are against the common rules of Justice and Equity; so the rise of
Church power will show, that only such things as are against common rules, such
things as some way or other appear to be against conviction, and are
obstinately persisted in, are by Church censure to be punished.

The rise of Church power is indeed different from the rise of the Civil, yet
agrees in this, that it limits the Church, as the rise of the Civil does the
Civil power. The power of Governors in the State arises from the people, and
they act their power that the Commonwealth gives to them: But the Governors
of the Church have not their power from the members of the Church, but from
Christ; neither do they act in the name of the Church, but in the name of
Christ. It is true, the Members of the Church do design such men to such an
Office; but being designed, now they are invested with the power of Jesus
Christ, they exercise his power, and do act in his name, not in the name of the
Church.

You will say, seeing the Church chooses their Officers as well as the
Commonwealth theirs: How does it appear, that the Officers of the Church do
not exercise the power of the Church, as well as the Officers of the
Commonwealth, the power of the Commonwealth?

These two things show the difference clearly. Answ.


First, The Officers of the Commonwealth can do nothing

2ly. The members of the Church cannot limit the power

Now then, the rise of the power of Church-governors rising from Jesus Christ,
and they doing what they do in the Name of Christ, therefore they cannot
punish any evil beyond what Christ would have punished.

You will say, What evils would Christ have punished, and what not?

Christ would have no evil punished that is repented of; Answ.
if it be a known evil, then it must be repented of particularly; if it be a
(...) of ignorance, Christ forgives it upon a general repentance, although a
man should never be convinced of it all his days; Yet, says Christ, I
discharge him of all these, supposing the rise of his ignorance be not some
wilful neglect: But if it be a sin committed through wilfulness, or
continued in obstinately, then says Christ, I will have this man smart for
such an offense; now comes in the power of the Church Officers, to do in the
Name of Christ what he would have done: But if they go further, then they
exercise a tyrannical power, if they will punish every thing which they
conceive to be evil, whether committed through ignorance and weakness, or
wilfulness and obstinacy, in this they take upon them a higher power of
punishing then Christ (according to the tenor of the Gospel) exercises. For my
part, says Christ, I go but thus far with my power; If I see any of my Church
sin through weakness and ignorance, laboring to understand and do my will,
and mourning that they know no more, they do no better, I will pass by all; but
if any shall appear wilful and obstinate, I will deal severely with such a
one.

If you say, If men have means of knowledge and strength, and yet continue
ignorant and weak, should not such be dealt with as wilful and obstinate?

No, Answ.
says Christ, I do not go by any such rule, for I have revealed my will in my
Word, I labor by my Spirit and Ministers to convince men, yet I see after all
means I use, there are many, who merely through their weakness are not
convinced, I pity them, I deal gently with them, I pardon them. Those then who
will go further, they will punish for every evil; and if they use means to
convince them, and they be not convinced, they will judge them obstinate, and
proceed against them accordingly; these challenge and exercise not the power of
Christ, but Antichrist. If Christ should deal so with them, as they deal with
their brethren, it would go ill with them; If Christ should say, whatsoever I
see evil in you, I will not suffer it in you; if you are ignorant
notwithstanding means of light, I will deal with you as wilful and obstinate,
and never leave inflicting punishment upon you, till you be convinced, and do
reform; could any of you stand before Christ dealing thus with you? Take heed
of exercising that power over your Brethren (and that in Christ's name) that you
would not have Christ exercise over you.

Both the Civil State and Church must take us as we are fallen from that
integrity of our first creation, not as we came first out of Gods hands: God
the Creator may (indeed) punish us for not knowing or doing what is our duty to
know or do, because he once made us perfect; but Man must not do so, Man must
deal with his fellow creatures, as men imperpect; one man cannot require of
another that perfection not only of heart, but of external conversation, that
God may, yea God-man our Mediator looks upon us in a state of imperfection,
and deals with us accordingly, and thus he would have all do who have to deal
with his people in his name.

But you said before, All things must not be suffered; now you say, some things
must be suffered: Tell us then what must not, and what must.

I am persuaded most of you yield to the falseness of both these dividing
principles; you verily believe all things must not be suffered, and yet you
think it were too harsh to affirm that nothing is to be suffered; only here
lies the difficulty, what must, and what must not be suffered. This has been
the unhappiness of pleading for toleration of any thing, yet of the very
mention of it, that men presently cry out, and say, we would have every thing
tolerated.

I confess it is very hard to cut here right in the joint; were I sure that
none would blame or oppose what I shall deliver in this; but those who are
willing to interess themselves in such a knotty business as this, and to be
helpful to us in the understanding how to untye such a knot, what ever such
opposers should prove otherwise, I should not fear them for being too numerous.

What I have, I shall present unto you.

CHAP. IX.
Rules to know in what things we are to bear with our Brethren.


First, Ways to draw forth men's judgments, who would keep them to themselves.
by requiring men to subscribe to things which they suspect are against their
judgments; they invent Articles, which if put to them, they know will pinch
them, and draw forth their judgment, which when they come to know, they make
them as Articles of Accusation against them. Surely such dealings as these are
very harsh.

But you will say, Blessed be God, we hope we have done with forcing men to
subscribe.

God grant that we never meddle with any thing answerable to that tyranny; Answ.
heretofore we groaned under the drawing out men's judgments, and then the
punishing them for them.



their judgments different from yours, is not this to make men suffer for
their judgments, though they would live peaceably, keeping them to themselves?
Here is not that suffering of Brethren that Christ would have.

2ly. In things controversall and doubtful amongst godly

Our Brethren of Scotland writing against the tyranny of Prelates, when they
were under it, in that Book, entitled English and Popish Ceremonies, have this
passage: If the error of Conscience be about things unnecessary, then it is
tutior pars the surest and safest way, not to urge men to do that which in
their consciences they condemn. And the Ministers of the Protestant Churches
in France, giving their judgments, De pace inter Evangelicos procuranda, How
peace amongst the Protestants in Germany may be had, set forth by Duraeus, say
thus: Itaque capita omnia controversa certa quadam formula concipiantur, quae
utrisqu* satisfaciat ex ipsis sacrae Scripturae verbis (si steri possit)
contexta, n^mo a fra^re quicqua^ praeterio exigat.
Let all matters controversal be brought into such a certain model, as may give
satisfaction to both parties; and that if it be possible, framed out of the
very words of Scripture: and let no man require any thing else of his brother.
Zanc. in praecep. 4. has this notable speech: Est hoc quod dico diligentur
observandum, qui autores sunt principibus ut omnes illi populi, regna,
respublicae, quae aliqua in re, fundamenta tamen religionis non convellentes ab
ipsis dissentiunt, damnentur haereseos, excludantur ab amicitia, pellantur a
finibus, ii certe nec suis principibus, nec Ecclesiae Christi been consulunt.
That which I say ( says he) is diligently to be observed, that those who would
stir up Princes to have all people, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, which (not
overthrowing the fundamentalls of Religion, differ from them in any thing)
condemned of heresy, excluded from friendship, driven out of their
territories, these are no friends, says he, either to their Princes or to the
Church of Christ.

Many think they do great service to Christ, the Church and State, if they
can stir up Magistrates to suppress whatsoever they conceive are errors; it may
be their hearts are upright in the main, they aim at peace, but certainly they
cause much disturbance in Church and State.

Bishop Davenant in a little Book, entitled, His Exhortation to brotherly love
amongst Churches, the ninth Chap. has this title, Fraternam inter Ecclesias
Evangelicas communionem non esse rescindendam ob diversas de quaestionibus
controversis opiniones, probatur rationibus petitis a defectu legitimae
potestatis, ni ministris ad eandem dissolvendam Chap. 10. Hoc mihi inprimis
videtur esse praemittendum, vincula fraternae communionis non oportere dissolvi
inter Ecclesias Christianas ob quaevis opinionum dissidia, sed solummodo ob
fu^ndamentalium dogmatum oppugnationem aut negationem.
that Brotherly communion between Churches Evangelicall, is not to be cut
asunder, because of diverse opinions about Questions controversall. And in the
beginning of the 10. Chapter, This is to be premised, The bonds of the
brotherly communion of Christian Churches ought not to be dissolved upon every
difference of opinions, but only for the denying or opposing Fundamentals. Here
see the moderation of a Prelate.

Thus Cyprian of old delivered his opinion, Cypr. ep 72 ad Steph. Ep. 73. ad
jubajanum.
and practiced it accordingly, differing from many of his brethren, but withal
professes, That he meant not to prescribe or give Laws to any; that he would
not contend with any of his Colleagues, so as to break divine concord, and the
peace of our Lord; that he was far from judging or censuring any of his
Brethren, or cutting off from his communion any that were of a different mind;
and that in such case none ought to constrain his Colleague by tyrannical
violence, ( therein glancing at the violent proceeding of Stephen to whom he
wrote) to a necessity of believing or following what he thinks meet. Aug. cont.
Don. l. 1. c. 18. l. ^. c. 1, 2.
This modesty and charity of Cyprian is very often and very deservedly
commended by St. Augustine, says D. Potter, an Episcopal man.

That this may go down the better, or at least that men's spirits may be in some
measure moderated, take these following Considerations.

First, this contending about every difference of opinion, and

Do not all Divines say, There are some things in Scripture wherein the
Elephant may swimm, some things where the Lamb may wade? matters of Discipline
are acknowledged by all, not to be revealed with such clearness, but that
truly conscientious, upright, diligent men may not be able in many things to
see the mind of Christ in them. And to what end has Christ done this think you.

2ly. Compulsion in such things as we are speaking of, is to summa justitia,
which is the degeneration of it: As Physicians say of the uttermost degree of
health, it is a beginning of sickness: If Justice be wound up a peg too high,
it breaks: Though Justice were to be managed by the most holy, wise,
self-denying, and meek men upon the earth, yet there would be much danger in
winding it up to the highest; for it is administered by men full of infirmities,
to men full of infirmities, therefore God will not have it strained too high,
he will rather have charity to be above Justice, then Justice to be above
charity. This I have out of Luther, though he was a man of a fiery spirit, he
could tell how to contend where there was cause; yet in an Epistle that he
writes to the Divines of Norimberg, Servire debet judicium, non dominari
charita^i* (...) est unum de quatuor istis malis quae turbant terram (ut
Solomon ait) scilicet, servus regnans, seu ancilla haeres dominae suae Luth.
Ep. ad Theol. Norimberg.
upon occasion of dissentions risen amongst them, he has this passage,
Judgment must serve, not rule over charity; otherwise it is one of those four
things that Solomon says troubles the earth, namely, a servant ruling, or the
Maid heir to her Mistress; if therefore you would have peace says he,
charity must rule over justice, you must not suffer justice to rule over
charity.

3ly. If men go upon this principle, they will be in danger of opposing truth
as well as falsehood, and compelling to falsehood as well as to truth; for in
matters doubtful and controversal amongst good and peaceable men, it is not
easy to have any such grounded confidence, as to be out of all danger of
mistake; there is more confidence needful in a thing that we impose upon
others, then in what we practice our selves; If a thing be to us rather true
then otherwise, we may lawfully do it; but this is not enough to be a ground
for the imposing it upon others, who cannot see it to be a truth; in such a
case we had need be very sure. The weak drislings of our probabilities,
guesses, and opinions, are not enough to cause the stream of another man's
conscience to stop* yea to turn its course another way; especially
considering, that in such things we have oftentimes misgiving thoughts our
selves; yea, and not long since we were confident, that what we now condemn
was true; and what we now are ready to enjoin others, we then did as
confidently condemn. There must be great care taken, that when we seek to pluck
up tares, we pluck not up the wheat also; this may be understood of things,
of truths and falsehoods, as well as of persons; we may be mistaken in the one as
well as in the other. Pluck not up the tares. Christ does not sorbid casting
out any wicked men from the Church; but as Hierome has it, in those Countries
tares were very like the wheat; therefore take heed, says Christ, what you do in
plucking up; when you have to deal with men whose condition is any way
doubtful, be sure they be hypocrites, or else meddle not with them, do not
pluck them up upon every surmise, because you think they are not right, for
then you may pluck up a wheat as well as a tare, he may prove to be a godly
man; therefore you had better let tares grow; If you do but think that such
men are not right, you were better let them continue in the Church, then by
venturing upon them, to be in danger to pluck up the wheat.

Thus in respect of things good or evil, there are some things apparently
evil, they are rather thistles and briars, then tares, we may freely pluck up
them; but other things, though perhaps they may prove evil, yet they have some
likeness to good, so as you can hardly discern whether they be good or evil.
Now says Christ, take heed what you do then, do not out of eagerness oppose
all evil, to get out every tare, pluck out some wheat too; what if that you
oppose with violence as evil, prove to be good? you had better let forty tares
stand, then pluck up one wheat.

Fourthly, If men take this power upon them, to compel Phil. 3. 15. was, Let
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you; nevertheless,
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk. If any should be otherwise
minded then I or the other Apostles, God will reveal it in due time, we will
not force him, (...) Chrysostom. in Phil. 3. Hom. 1^.
only let us walk up to what we have attained. This rule, Zanchy, says
Augustine, would repeat a thousand time; and Chrysostom has a good note upon
this place, he does not say, God will bring them to it, if they be otherwise
minded, but God will reveal it, noting the love and goodness of God to those who
are otherwise minded, excusing them that it was not through wickedness, but for
want of knowledge that they did otherwise, Acts 15. where the Apostles and
Elders were met together, the furthest they would take upon themselves, was to
lay no other burden but those necessary things. The false teachers put a yoke
upon them, which was such a burden, that neither they nor their forefathers
could bear, v. 10. yet it was no juridicall authority that these had over them;
surely the yoke they put upon them, in the judgments of all was but doctrinall:
But for us, say the Apostles, we finding what the mind of the Holy Ghost is,
dare not yoke you as they did; all that we burden you with, is these necessary
things, no Church Officers, no Synod can go further then this, but certainly
every matter in controversy amongst godly and peaceable men cannot be
conceived to be necessary.

Romans 14. is a very useful place for this, Him that is weak in the faith
receive, but not to doubtful disputations; Receive him, though he understands
not all you do; do not trouble him, neither with nor for doubtful things: One
believes he may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs; let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not; neither let him that eats not,
judge him that eats, verse. 5. One man esteems one day above another,
another esteems every day alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind. Upon this he gives general rules, to do all to the glory of God; all
these people were not in the right, for a man not to eat flesh out of
conscience, when the thing was not forbidden, certainly was a sin; or to make
conscience of a holy day, which God required not, was a sin: Now the Apostle
did not come with his authority, and say, I will make you leave off keeping
such days, or you shall eat, or to abstain thus as you do, is evil, and it
must not be suffered in you. No, the Apostle lays no Apostolical authority
upon them, but tells them, That every man must be fully persuaded in his own
mind, in what he does; and who art thou that judge another man's servant? the
Lord has received him. And yet the Governors of the Churches in the Primitive
times might upon much stronger grounds have stood upon such a principle, then
any Governors of the Church now can; there was less reason why they should
suffer any difference in opinion or practice amongst them, then why we should
suffer differences amongst us; for they had men amongst them immediately
inspired, who could dictate the mind of Christ infallibly, they could tell them
the certain meaning of any Scripture. The burden of being under the
determinations of such men in points of differences, had not been so great as
subjection to any Governors now in such cases would be; our differences are
usually about the meaning of such or such Scriptures, in which both sides think
they have the right, and profess one to another, as in the presence of God the
searcher of all hearts, that if they could but see the meaning of such a
Scripture to be so as their brethren believe it is, they would soon agree: and
yet though there were in those Primitive times such means of reconciling
differences more then we have, yet there was much mutual toleration amongst
them; they used no compulsive violence to force those who through weakness
differed from them, to come up to their judgments or practice. Yes, It is also
more tolerable in Papists, not to tolerate any difference in opinion or
practice, because First, they believe they have an infallible Judge to decide
all Controversies. 2ly. They hold implicit faith in the judgment of their
Clergy, to be sufficient warrant to justify the belief or practice of the
people, or of any particular man, and yet they suffer differences in opinions
and practices amongst them; They have their several orders of their Monks,
Priests, Friars, Jesuits, they differ very much one from the other, and yet
agreeing in the root, they are suffered, supposing those two helps to union;
they have an infallible Judge, and implicit faith; we have cause either to
admire at their moderation in their mutual bearing one with another, or at the
disquietness, the rigidness of spirits amongst us, who cannot bear with far
lesser things in their brethren differing from them; for we profess, we know
no such external in fallible Judge, upon whom we may depend; neither dare we
warrant an implicit faith. We teach men, that every man must be persuaded in
his own heart, must see the rule of his own actions, must give an account of
his own way to God: now what can men that have the most gracious and peaceable
spirits, you can imagine, do in such a case? Before they believe or do what
their brethren believe or do, they must see the authority of the Word to ground
their faith or actions; and for the present, though sincerely willing to know
Gods mind, and diligently laborious to search it out, yet they cannot see it:
and yet according to this sour, rigid principle, they must be forced to it by
violence, what is it but to command the full tale of brick to be brought in,
where no straw can be had, if this be not? Straw might be had in Egypt by
seeking for it; but here, after the most careful and painful seeking for it,
yet it cannot be had.



You will say, Those who are the Governors, they, or those whom they call to
consult with, may argue and discuss, but not others.

Is not this to deny the Church the benefit of the gifts and graces of
thousands of others? Answ.
The Church may soon receive as much prejudice by this, as the trouble caused
by some differences comes to.

of Scripture and Reason, seeing we have power to compel men to yield to us?
And men who can do least by Reason and Scripture, are many times strongest in
their violence this way, this strength must come in to make up their other
weakness. But it may be Conscience will not let them compel men presently; it
will tell them they must seek first to convince men: but because the seeking to
satisfy other men's consciences in things differing from us, is a troublesome
work, the temptation that this principle presents, may at least prevail thus
far, that seeing besides means of conviction by arguing they have another help
at hand to keep down error, namely, compulsory violence, making men who differ
from them, to suffer for those things; therefore not to trouble themselves very
much in the way of seeking to convince, but for their own ease to rid their
hands of such a burthensom work, to cast the trouble, and lay heavy burdens
upon their brethren, this is easy for them to do, though hard for their
brethren to suffer; But the Tables may turn one day, wherein the sufferers
shall have the greatest ease, and the inflicters the sorest burden. But God
forbid that their brethren should lay it upon them, though it were put into
their power to do it.

The temptation to pride is not less, neither are men's hearts less prone to
this. If it prevails, what domineering is there like to be of one over another,
yea of some few over many? If they judge in things never so doubtful, all must
yield, at least for their profession and practice. This is a great power to be
given to men over men in matters of faith and godliness. This is Lording it
over Gods inheritance. It is observable, when the Church was in the lowest
condition, this power was highest; the power of making Canons in doubtful
things to bind under penalties: And when this power was lowest, as in the
Primitive times, then the Church was highest.

Seventhly, This will be a means to bring gross ignorance all is done, they
must be bound up at least in their profession and practice, to what either is
or shall be determined by those who have power of rule in their hands.

Our late Prelates design was to bring in ignorance, that they might with the
more freedom rule over us as they pleased; and in nothing did they drive on
this design more, then in the practice of this power, which they took to
themselves to command things doubtful and controversall, and by violence to
urge their commands upon people: by which, had their power continued, gross
ignorance would soon have bin spread over the face of the land. From whence
has come the gross ignorance of Popery, but from the prevailing of this
principle? By which the people have been brought in such subjection under their
guides, that they have lost their understandings in the matters of Religion.

If it be said, But we will take care that those men who shall be consulted
withal, and those men who shall have power in their hands to determine, shall
be wise, understanding, godly men, and then the danger will not be so great.

Suppose those men who for the present have such power, Answ.
have attained to the highest measure of of knowledge and godliness that can be
imagined to be in any men upon the earth, yet the people are under this
temptation, to neglect the getting of knowledge themselves; and it may be the
rather, because those who are appointed to determine things, are so
understanding and so conscientious; now these people growing ignorant; when
these knowing and godly men who are now in place, shall be gone, who shall
choose other in their places? I suppose it to be the opinion of most of you,
and of the godly in the Kingdom, and in all Reformed Churches, that either the
body of the Church, the people must choose their Officers, or at least, that
none must be put upon them without their consent. Well then, if the people
through the prevailing of the former temptations grow ignorant, is it not like
they will choose such guiders and leaders as themselves are? or if they shall not
choose, yet their negative voice will have such an influence into the choice, as
it is very probable, that in a generation or two, blind guides will be brought
in, and so the blind leading the blind. And when by this ignorance has
prevailed and gotten head in the Church, there is almost an impossibility ever
to get it out again; this brings men into the dark, and locks and bolts the
doors upon them.

Hence men by pleading for this principle, may bring themselves and their
posterity into greater bondage then they are aware; for although now while they
have the power in their own hands, it may be well with them; yet hereafter
others may have the power, and then it may prove ill enough; they may then
complain of what they now plead for; though now the guides of the Church may be
good and holy, yet they may live to see such a change, or at least their
posterity, that such a principle acted by such men as they may be under, may
wring them; yea, it is the more strange, that men should plead so much for this
now, when as the soars of their necks, caused by the bondage under it a while
since, are scarce yet healed.

Eighthly, there is yet a further danger in this, not only that

But you will say: This supposes that some things will be urged that is
contrary to truth, which is uncharitable to suppose.

Although in matters fundamental, Answ.
there is no fear that godly able men will err, yet let charity be stretched
to the full latitude of it, and reverence of men in place raised to the
uttermost height; yet if they will meddle with such things as are doubtful and
controversal amongst godly and peaceable men, and force them upon others; that
confidence of theirs that shall put them out of fear of erring, shall be to me
a ground of great fear, that they will err.

But some will acknowledge, that some liberty should be granted in things thus
doubtful and controversall, to men who are indeed conscientious, godly and
peaceable men; but if this be yielded too, then men who are not conscientious,
but of turbulent and corrupt spirits, will abuse it.

We have given rules to find out those who only pretend conscience, Answ.
and if by those, or the like, it does not appear, but that men are indeed
conscientious in their way, we should judge charitably of them; you think much
if those be not admitted to communion with Christ and his Saints, when they
profess godliness in word and life, and nothing appears to the contrary; why
then should you think much to tolerate those as conscientious, who profess it
in words and life, and nothing appears to the contrary.

Bishop Davenant in that exhortation to peace before quoted, Quia solius Dei
est corda scrutari, nostrum est in partem beni^niorem semper propendere and de
quolibet praesu^ere ubi con^^arium non constat manifestis indiciis, qu^d
conscientia poiius quam pertina^ia ab assensu praestando reta^dotur, and
inhibeatur. Adhort. ad fratern^m communionem, p. 38.
as one means for peace, gives his opinion thus, Because it belongs only to
God to teach the hearts of men, it is our duty always to make the best
interpretation of things, and to presume of every one where the contrary
appears not by manifest signs, that he is kept from assenting by his
conscience rather then by obstinacy.

As for the peaceablenesse of men's dispositions, let it be judged from their
carriages in other things of as great moment, wherein the temptation for the
attaining their own ends is as great, yea far greater then here: Do they not
carry themselves in as peaceable, gentle; self-denying way as any? Mr. Parker
upon the Cross, cap. 5. sect. 14. pleads for himself and others, who could not
yield in some things enjoined them, when they were accused of pride, contempt,
unpeaceablenesse; What signs, says he, do men see in us of pride, contempt,
unpeaceablenesse? What be our caetera opera, that bewray such a humor? Let it
be named wherein we go not two mile, where we are commanded to go but one;
yea, whether we go not as many miles as any shoe of the preparation of the
Gospel of peace will carry us: What payment, what pain, what labor, what
taxation made us ever to murmr? Survey our charges where we have labored,
if they be not found to be of the faithfullest Subjects that be in the land.
We deserve no favor; nay, there is wherein we stretch our consciences to the
uttermost to conform and obey in diverse matters: Are we refractory then other
things? As Balaams Ass said to his Master, Have I used to serve thee so at
other times?

And whereas it is said, that some will abuse such liberty at this: It is
answered, Surely those who are peaceable and conscientious, must not be
deprived of what sufferance Christ allows them, because others who are in the
same way, are, or may prove turbulent, and do or may not appear truly
conscientious. This is as far beneath the rule of Justice, as no sufferance
in any thing conceived erroneous, is above it.

Thirdly, whatsoever errors or miscarriages in Religion Custos utriusque
tabulae; yet certainly no man can imagine, that this his charge reaches further
then the charge of the Church: That he is to be more exact in his oversight of
these things, then the Church is to be; for what ever the power of the
Magistrate be in these things, yet to the Church especially are the Oracles,
the Ordinances, the Truths of God committed. The charge of the spiritual
estate of men especially belongs to the Church: Now the Church is to bear with
men in their infirmities, though they be ignorant of many things, yea after
means used for information. No Church must cast off any from communion with it,
but for such things that all the Churches of Christ ought to cast them off for.
Proscindi nec debent nec possunt a communione particularium Ecclesiarum quae
manent conjunctae cum Ecclesia Catholica.
This is generally held by our Brethren, if a man be rightly cast out of
communion with one Church, he is thereby cast out of all; if this be so, then
surely many things must be suffered before we proceed to cast out a member, it
must not be for every error or miscarriage. Thus Bishop Davenant in his rules
for Peace, Those may not be cut off from communion with particular Churches who
remain joined to the Catholic Church.

Yea, Hominem a communione aliorum Christi quorum excludere licet propter
haeresim damnabilem, in qua est proprio judicio condemnatus, aut de per^inacia
convictus, non licet propter errorem in q^em aliena fraud deductus est,
quemque nulla pertinaci animositate, sed imaginatione veritatis and p^etatis
illusus defendit. Daven. ad pacem Eccl. adhort. c. 9.
none is to be cast out of communion, but for that which if whole Churches were
guilty of, we must refuse communion with, yea with all the Churches in the
world, if they could be supposed to be so far left of Christ, as to be guilty
of the same thing; If this be so, when a Church is about casting any out of
communion, it need be wary, and not presently fall upon him, because there is
something evil in him; and if the Church should be so, the civil Magistrate
much more, whose care of a man's spiritual estate is not so immediate and full
as the Churches is.

From what has been said these 2. consequences are clear: First, Articles or
rules for doctrine or practice in matters of Religion to be imposed upon men,
should be as few as may be; there is a very great danger in the unnecessary
multiplying them: This in all ages has caused divisions, and exceeding
disturbances in the Churches of Christ.

I find an excellent passage in an Epistle of Isaac Causabon to Cardinal
Perron, which he wrote in the name of King James by his command, Rex
arbitratur rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem non magnum esse numerum,
quare existimat ejus majestas nullam ad in^undam concerdiam braviorem viam
fore, quam si diligenter separarentur necessaria a non necessariis, and ut de
necessariis conveniat omnis opera insumatur in non necessariis libertati
Christianae locus detur, pauca sunt ista necessaria, atque istam distinctionem
sereniss. Rex tanti putat esse momenti ad immuniend^s controversias, quae hodie
ecclesiam, tantopere exercent, ut omnium pacis studiosorum judicet officium
esse diligemissime hanc explicare ^^ocere, urgere.
The King ( says he) thinks that the things that are absolutely necessary to
salvation are not many, therefore His Majesty is of that mind that there is no
shorter way for peace, then first by severing necessary things from things that
are not necessary, and then to labor a full agreement in those; but as for
things not necessary, let them ( says he) be left to Christian liberty. And
again, These necessary things are few, and the King thinks this distinction to
be of so great moment to lessen the controversies which this day do so
exceedingly trouble the Church, that all who study peace, should most
diligently explicate, teach, and urge this.

God has so graciously ordered things for the body, (...). Arist. pol. l. ^.
that things necessary for life are not many, nor costly; the greatest stir in
the world is about things not necessary. So for the soul.

A second consequence from what has been said, is; we see

But do not men in a Congregationall way urge upon others their own
conception^ and practices, Object.
according to the power they have, as much as any? for if men will not enter
into covenant, if they hold another kind of government in the Church differing
from them, they will not receive them, nor communicate with them.

I would all our controversy lay here, Answ.
surely we should soon agree. Whosoever does as you say, cannot be justified
in so doing; some men it may be through an earnest desire of promoting what
they conceived to be the mind of Christ, have been too rigid in their dealings
with their Brethren. What has been said, will show the evil of their practice
as well as of others.

As for entering into Covenant, It is true, there is such a practice in the
Congregational Churches, and a Covenant either explicit or implicit, I think
all acknowledge: that is, there must be some agreement to join those together
in a body, who formerly were not joined, to make them to be of such a society,
to have power in it with others for the choice of Officers in this
Congregation, and to be under the care and charge of those Officers more then
Members of another congregation: what shall join them, if not at least some
mutual agreement to join in one body for such spiritual ends as Christ has
appointed this body for, the very nature of a society that is embodyed, carries
this with it; and any farther then this I know none requires as necessary.

Indeed the more explicit this agreement is, the more is the edification.
Surely there is no Christian but will acknowledge that the more one Christian
opens his heart to another, and binds himself to walk in the ways of Christ
with another, the more comfortable it is, and helps to edification: and upon
this ground do the Congregationall Churches practice this.

Suppose any godly man shall come and desire to join with any of them, but
withal tell them, that for his part he yet cannot be convinced by any thing he
can find in Scripture that this way of convenanting is required; if the Church
cannot satisfy such a man (being godly) in their practice, yet desire to know
of him whether he be willing to join with them in all the ordinances of
Christ, so far as he knows, a mere affirmative to this is a covenant
sufficient to join him with them. The more fully he expresses this to them,
it would be the more acceptable. Now then why is it that there is such a noise
every where in exclamations against Church Covenant, when it is nothing but
this, which how any gracious heart upon due consideration can be against, I
cannot see. And this is not only our present opinion, but that which ever since
we knew any thing in that way, upon all occasions, we have held forth.

But what do you say to the other; If a man who you believe is godly, yet not
being convinced of your way of Government, but rather thinks the Presbyteriall
Government to be the way of Christ; would you receive such a man into communion
with you?

If any godly man whose conscience is not satisfied in that way of Government,
Answ.
yet is so cast by Providence as he cannot join with those Churches where
there is that Government he thinks to be Christ's; and because he is desirous
to enjoy what ordinances of Christ he can, therefore tenders himself to one of
these Congregationall Churches: Such a man should be received to these
Ordinances he sees to be Christ's, if there be nothing else against him, but
merely because after all due means, yet through weakness he cannot see Christ's
mind in some other ordinance. Christ does not lay so much upon the ordinance
of Government, as to exclude all his Saints all their days from all other
Church-ordinances, if through weakness they cannot be convinced of that.

Now let one who is in a Congregational way, and connot see Christ's mind in the
Presbyterial Government, yet come to one of those Churches, and say, he would
gladly in all his ways see the mind of Christ, and enjoy all his ordinances,
but he cannot see that a Minister who takes only the charge to feed by Word and
Sacraments one Congregation, yet should with others have the charge of ruling
an hundred or more; and till he be convinced otherwise, he cannot in his
practice acknowledge that Government to be Christ's, would you yet receive such a
one to communion with you in all other Church-ordinances? If you would, I make
no question then but if we well understood one another, and were of quiet
spirits, we might live together in peace.

Let not miscarriages in particular men or Churches in things of this nature,
hinder our peace; what we say ought to be suffered in us, we profess to be our
duty to suffer that or any thing of the like nature in others: and where there
has not been that brotherly and Christian forbearance as ought to be, there
has been sin committed against Christ: but let not this hinder brotherly and
Christian agreement amongst our selves, or any other Churches of Christ.

4ly. Evils that are small or uncertain, or come by accident, per se, should
be hindered. We must take heed that in our zeal to oppose evil, we hinder not
a greater good: If opposition of evil lies so far out of your reach as you
cannot come at it but by hindering much good, you must be content then to let
it alone.

Lastly, Suadenda est fides non imponenda. Bern. Nova and in a^d^^a est ista
praedicatio quae verberibus evigit fidem.
if the evils be such as only can be removed by supernatural means, we must
not use violence for the removing of them, though God has such authority over
us, as he may justly punish us for not doing that which we are unable to do by
the strength of nature; yet one man has no such authority over another.

The power that God has given a Magistrate, Greg. l. 2. ep. 52.
is but a natural help at the most, and therefore it can go no farther then to
help us in a natural way, to do what we are able to do by a natural power;
when it has gone so far, there it must rest. I shall refer the Learned to
Zanchy upon the fourth Comment, where they may see more about this.

CHAP. X.
The fourth dividing Principle, Division is the best way to maintain Dominion.
THis is Machiavels principle, The 4^ dividing Principle*
Divide and regna. When Division is got into such a Principle as has not only
in the bowels of it, that is something to foment it by what may be drawn from
it; but when the principle carries division in the very face of it, not
collaterally, or by consequent avowing it, but directly and immediately
justifying it, then it grows strong indeed, who can stand before it? When this
is brought down to the people, it is expressed by that Proverbiall speech, It
is good fishing in troubled waters. The divisions of the times are our
advantages. Some men's ends are best served, when church and State are most
divided. They never had such comings in as now they have. It is true, it may be
desired that men in evil things should not agree, that they may be like the
witnesses that came against Christ, who could not agree in their testimony.
Paul cast a bone of dissension between the Pharisees and Sadduces.

But when men love division, and desire the continuance of

England is, who would not willingly lay down his his life to cure the present
divisions and distractions that are amongst us, who would not desire with
Nazianzen, as formerly Jonah, to be cast into the Sea himself, so be it all
might be calm in the Public? Oh cruel, hard-hearted man, who for his own
private advantage is not sensible of the woeful miseries of Church and State,
yea of that dreadful dishonor to the name of God, caused this day by our sad
divisions, miserable distractions^ just it were that such a man should be
separated to evil, and that his name should be blotted out from under heaven.

But if things were settled in Church and State, some men should not have such
liberties as now they have, therefore they are willing enough to have our
differences continued, their plot is to lengthen them out.

First, Answ.
That which thou call seeking to lengthen out divisions, it may be God now
accounts, and will another day

Secondly, the liberties these men seek for, are either evil

But if those liberties they seek be good, or but supposed by them to be so,
why then should they fear a right settling of things? what ever is good, can be
no enemy unto good. That Scripture, Romans 13. 3. is enough to keep their hearts
from fearing, the right ordered power of authority, especially from fearing it
so far, as by the fear of it, to be driven into such a desperate guilt of
wickedness as this is, to desire or endeavor the continuance of such public
mischief for their own ends. Rulers, says the Text, are not a terror to good
works, but to evil; will thou then not be afraid of their power? do that which
is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. Surely then the power was as
formidable to any thing a christian heart could suppose good, as now any power
is like to be that we have to deal with.

Thirdly, it is a sign of a very poor, low, unworthy spirit, to think that any
in whom thou have any persuasion there is any fear of God, or interest in
Christ, should have no higher thoughts for their support and encouragement in
what they conceive good according to the mind of Christ, but such as the hopes
or desires of continuance of such woeful evils in the divisions of Church and
State raises in them, if they did believe that Christ took no more care of
them then so, but left them to such miserable supports as these are, their
condition were sad indeed.



CHAP. XI.
The fifth dividing Principle. The 5. dividing Principle.
That every man is bound to profess and practice always what he apprehends to
be truth.
THis has the greater strength, because it comes under a show of exact
godliness: I do not mean an hypocritical show, but an appearance to men's
consciences.

sway them, but quite different to poyse them a cross way, there must needs be
much strife, such divisions as will be hard to reconcile. If men sometimes can
hardly prevail with their own thoughts to agree, notwithstanding the sway of
their own affections and ends; how are they like to agree with others, whose
affections and ends are so various from theirs.

Secondly, if men do presently profess and practice what

3. If a man has once made profession of what he conceives Augustines self
denial, to publish retractations to all the world. Now if a man through the
strength of this temptation, shall still retain what he has made profession
of, and others shall see his weakness, joined with wilfulness; they must
oppose him in it, and so contention and division is like to rise higher and
higher. In regard therefore of the great usefulness of this point, and the
difficulty of the right understanding it, I shall endeavor to speak to it
under these three Heads.

First, to show wherein Profession is necessary.

Secondly, wherein men may keep in, what they think they

Thirdly, I shall propound some rules of Direction, to show in what manner a
man should make profession of what he conceives to be truth, though it be
different from his Brethren.

For the first. Certainly profession in some things is very necessary.

Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation. Confession is here joined to
believing, as necessary to salvation. This I conceive to be the meaning of
those places which hold forth the necessity of Baptism, He that believes and
is baptized, Salvi esse non possumus nisi ad salutem proximorum, etiam ore
profiteamur fidem. Aug de temp. 181.
shall be saved. Augustine in one of his Sermons De Tempore, says, We cannot
be saved, except we profess our faith outwardly for the salvation of others.
And Christ, Mar. 8. 38. says, Whosoever shall be ashamed of him and of his
words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of Man
be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels. And
it is observable, Ad Aras Jovis aut Veneris adorare, ac sub Antichristo fidem
occultare. Zuingl ep 3.
that they follow upon those words, What shall it profit a man if he shall
gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? As if Christ should say, If you would not lose your
souls eternally, look to this, make profession of the truth, as you are called
to it; Non perfect credunt, qui quod cre^^nt nolunt loqui. Aug. in Psalm 115.
though you live in a wicked and an adulterous generation, yet be not ashamed
of me before them; for if you be, your souls may go for it eternally.

Zuinglius in his third Epistle, says, We may as well with a Dioclesian worship
before the Altar of Jupiter and Venus, as conceal our faith under the power of
Antichrist.

Now though profession be necessary, Quando in particulari tanta sit utilitas
vel necessitas proximi, ut prae^isam obligationem inducat, arbitrio prudentis
judi^a^ dum est, nam regula omnino certa assignari non potest.
yet in what cases we are bound to profess, and in what not, is no easy
matter to determine.

Zuarez, a man of great judgment, yet falling upon this Question, When a man
is bound to make profession of the Truth, says, We cannot give rules in
particular, when there is a necessity of profession, in regard of the good of
our neighbor, but it must be determined by the judgment of Prudence.

But though the determination be very difficult, yet we may assert these five
cases to bind us to profession. Suar. de. F^d. Disp. 1^. sect. 2.


First, when the truths are necessary to salvation, In what cases we are bound
to make profession.
and my forbearance in them may endanger the salvation of any, the salvation of
the soul of the poorest beggar, is to be preferred before the glory, pomp,
outward peace and comforts of all

Secondly, when not profession shall be interpreted to be a interpretative, I
must rather be willing to suffer, then the truth should suffer by me so far:
This was Daniel's case, when he would not cease his praying three times a day,
neither would he shut his windows, though it endangered his life. A carnal
heart would say, why might not Daniel have been wiser? he might have forborne a
while, at least he might have shut his windows. No, Daniel was willing to
venture his life in the cause, rather then he would so much as by way of
interpretation, deny that honor that he knew was due to God,

Thirdly, when others shall be scandalized, so as to be weakened

Fourthly, when an account of my faith is demanded, if it Pet. 3. 15. Be ready
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you. If to every one, much more to Mag^strates.

Fifthly, so far as those whom God has committed to my

Yet this duty of profession being a duty required by an affirmative precept,
though we are bound always, yet not to all times, semper, but not ad semper,
we must always keep such a disposition of heart, as to be in a readiness,
rather to give testimony to any truth of God, if called to it by God, then to
provide for our ease or any outward comfort in this world, so as we may be able
to appeal to God in the sincerity of our hearts, to judge of that high esteem we
have of his truth. Lord if thou shall make known to me now or any other time,
that thy Nature may have any glory by my profession, of any truth of thine,
whatsoever become of my outward peace, ease, or content, I am ready to do it
for thy Names sake. There is a time, says Hugo, when nothing is to be spoken, a
time when something, but there is no time when all things are to be spoken.

There are six other cases wherein you are not bound to profess. Six cases in
which we are not bound to make profession.


First, when you shall be required in way of scorn, or to ensnare

I have many things to say, says Christ, but ye are not able to bear them.
So St. Paul, Have thou faith? have it to thy self; he speaks in the case of
doubtful things, which will trouble weak ones.



Romans 14. 1. holds forth this; Receive not those men who are weak in faith to
doubtful disputations; this may hinder them in the great things of the
Kingdom of God, Righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, verse. 17. As if
the Apostle should say, Let them be well established in them; but these
doubtful disputations will hinder them in such things as these are.

Fifthly, when my profession at this time in this thing is like Prove. 29. 11. A
fool utters all his mind, he that is wise keeps it in till afterward. It was
the wisdom of Paul when he was at Athens, not presently to break out against
their Idols, he staid his due time, and yet all the time he kept in his
uprightness in the hatred of Idolatry as much as ever.

Let the spirit of the Prophets be subjects to the Prophets: we should wait
till God will some other way, or at some other time have that prevail in their
hearts and consciences of his people which we conceive to be truth, and they
are now so much offended at. There could never be peace continued in the
Church, if every man must continually, upon all occasions, have liberty openly
to make profession of what he apprehends to be a truth; never have done with
it, though the Church, which is faithful, and desires unfeignedly to honor
Christ and his truth, be never so much against it.

In diverse of these cases the consideration of that Text, Eccl. 7. 16. is very
suitable; Be not righteous over much, neither make thy self over wise, why
should thou destroy thy self? Amongst other things this is included in the
scope of the Holy Ghost; when you apprehend a thing to be a truth, do not think
that you are bound all times, upon all occasions, to the utmost, profess,
practice, promote that truth, without any consideration of others, being
carried on with this apprehension, it is a truth, come of it what will;
whatsoev^ becomes of me, whatsoever trouble shall follow upon it, I must and
will profess it; and publish it again and again to the death: In this you had
need look to your spirit, in this you may be over-just, and make your self
over-wise; though there may be some uprightness in your heart, some love to
Christ and his truth, yet there may be mixture of your own spirit also; you may
stretch beyond the rule; this is to be over-righteous, to think out of a zeal
to God and his truth, to go beyond what God requires.

It is true, at no time, upon no occasion, though thy life, and all the lives
in the world lay upon it, thou must not deny any the least truth, but there may
be a time when God does not require of thee to make profession of every thing
thou believe to be a truth.

You will say, This tends to looseness, to lukewarmness, to time-serving; men
pretending and pleading discretion, grow loose and remiss, and so by degrees
fall off from the truth.

Verse. 17. Let men take heed of that too; Be not overmuch wicked, neither be
thou foolish. As you must be careful not to go beyond the rule, so take heed
you fall not off from it; so you may grow wicked and foolish, yea very wicked,
over-wicked, God will meet with you there too: Wherefore verse. 18. It is good
thou should take hold of this, yea also from this withdraw not thine hand:
Take both, be careful of thy self in both, but especially mark the last clause
of the 18. verse. He that fears God shall come forth of them all. The fear of
God possessing thy heart, will help thee in these straits; thou shall by it be
delivered from being ensnared by thy indiscreet, sinful zeal, and it shall
likewise keep thee from bringing misery upon thy self, by falling as far on
the other hand, to looseness and time-serving. The fear of God will ballast thy
soul even, it will carry thee on in a way that shall be good in the eyes of the
Lord, and of his Saints.

There is a natural boldness, and a mixed zeal in many who are godly, that
carries them on in those ways that causes great disturbance to others, and
brings themselves into great straits and snares; and these men are very ready
to censure others of nesse and looseness, who do not as themselves do; but
this Scripture reproves them, showing that it is not through fleshly wisdom,
and providing for ease that is the cause others do not as they do, but the fear
of God in a right way ballasting their spirits; God will own his fear to be in
their hearts, ordering them aright, when thy disorderly, mixed zeal shall
receive rebuke from Christ.

But does not Christ say, Object.
He came into the world to witness to the truth, and is not every truth more
worth then our lives?

That man who in the former five cases wherein profession is showed to be our
duty, Answ.
shall witness to the truth, he shows that truth is indeed precious to him,
and gives that testimony to the truth, that he was born for, although in the
six latter he shall forbear.

But when these latter cases shall fall out, Object.
how shall the truth be maintained? will it not suffer much prejudice?

1. Christ will not be beholding to men's weaknesses for the maintenance of his
truth. Answ.


2. If every man according to his place to deliver his own soul, shall declare
(observing the rules we shall speak to presently) what he conceives to be the
mind of God, though he shall not either in words or practice continually hold
forth the same, yet thereby the truth is maintained.

3. The truth is maintained, by forbearing that practice which those opinions
of men that are contrary to the truth, puts them upon, not doing as they do is
a continual witness against them, and so a witness for the truth, and this is
a Christians duty at all times, although I must never upon any ground do that
which my conscience says is in it self sin, in the least thing, yet I am not
ever bound to do that which my conscience says is in it self good (as it may
fall out) in some great things. A thing in itself evil can never be made my
duty to do, what ever circumstances it may be clothed with, what ever good I
conceive may be done by it; but a thing in it self good, may by circumstances
attending of it, be such, as at this time it is my duty to forbear it, so that
in not doing it I cannot be charged of a sin of omission, of not living
according to what my judgment and conscience is convinced of to be truth, and
good.

That we may understand yet further our duty of profession so as we may cause
no divisions by it, Five rules for the ordering our profession of truth.
let these five rules be considered for the ordering of it.





godly, able brethren. We must take heed of publishing any such things rawly,
undigestedly, lest we wrong the truth of God, and make the profession of it
become ridiculous. If the thing be true to day, it will be true to morrow.

4. We must not think it enough boldly to assert things, but Pet. 3. 15. we
must give an account, 1. with meekness; we must not do it in a passionate,
froward way, not with our affections hurrying and tumultuous; not after a
contentious manner, as if we desired victory rather then truth; but with
quietness and composedness of spirit. We must not think it much to bear
contradiction from others, yea though it should arise to contemptuous carriage
against us, and with fear, that is, either in respect of our selves who make
the profession, or in respect of those before whom we make it. For our selves,
we must not do it in a conceited way, not in a high, arrogant way, with foolish
confidence in our selves, in our own apprehensions and abilities, but with
fear, manifesting our sensibleness of our own weakness, vanity, and
nothingnes: 2. In respect of those before whom the profession is made. We must
manifest our due, reverent esteem of them; no unbeseeming behavior, no
scornfulness, lightness, contempt, if it before Magistrates, especially then
whatsoever they are in regard of their persons, yet reverentiall respects ought
to be given to them in respect of their places; and if they be men of worth,
learning, graces, public use in the Church or State, that respect that is due
to their worth, is to be manifested also in our carriage toward them. Grace
teaches no man to be unmannerly, rude, scornful, furious, or foolish.

5. If you would make profession or practice any thing differing well if none of
those who pretend it, did not give some occasision: were not the temptation to
the despising of that expression, yet you should first go to those who are
most able to judge, acquaint them with what apprehensions you have, and see
whether they cannot make it appear to you that you are mistaken; if not, they
may confirm you in the truth, that you may go on in it with the more confidence.

If Churches were settled as they ought, I should think it very ill for any
Minister to preach any thing not ordinarily received by the Saints, before they
have acquainted other Elders, yea some of other Churches with it, if out of an
eager desire to be foremost in venting some new thing, they shall do it merely
from themselves, they may be means to raise and engage themselves in woeful
disturbances before they are aware. That common union and fellowship that there
is between Elders and Churches, requires mutual advise and consultation in
matters of difficulty, though to lay a law upon them to advise in every thing,
be it never so clear, would be hard.

CHAP. XII.
The sixth dividing Principle. The sixth dividing principle.
What is in it self best must be chosen and done, not weighing circumstances,
or references.
THis brings much trouble to the Churches; yea it causes much trouble in the
spirits and lives of many truly godly. It causes men to break the bonds of
their Callings, of their Relations, of their public Interests, therefore
certainly it must needs be a dividing Principle.

Some men whose calling is only to a private employment, yet having some gifts,
and having used sometimes in their Families to take a Scripture, and speak
something out of it; upon this they think it is a better thing to be exercised
in preaching Gods word, then to fit in a shop all day, at some mean work, or
selling out wares, therefore they think they are bound to give over their
Callings, which they look at as too low, mean things, and be Preachers of the
Word, not regarding those due ways that Christ would have men come into such an
employment by. Although I do not think, but that Tradesmen, who have good
knowledge in the Scripture, and are gifted by God to speak the Word to people
for their edification, when there is a want of able men, who have been all
their lives preparing for such a work, and are set apart for it, rather then
people should continue in ignorance, and so perish (if those who are able and
fit to judge, shall judge them meet for such a work) they may be employed to make
Christ known to them; yet for every man that takes himself to be a gifted man,
and it may be is so judged, by some who are willing to flatter him, to take
upon him of himself, or by the advice of two or three of his friends, to leave
his other employment for the work of the Ministry, because that is a more noble
and excellent work; this is not a way of God, but a way of confusion and
disorder.

Again, it is in it self a better thing to enjoy a Ministry of the most
eminent gifts and graces, then one of lower; but if this should be made a rule,
that a man who is under a Pastor, who is faithful, and in some good measure
gifted, upon another man's coming into the Country that is more eminent, he
should forsake his Pastor, and join to the other* and if after this still a
more eminent man comes, he should leave the former and join to him; and by the
same Law, a Pastor who has a good people, yet if others be more likely to
receive more good, he may leave his own people, and go to them, what confusion
and disorder would there be continually in the Church? Men must consider, not
only what the thing is in its own nature, but what it is to them, how it stands
in reference to their relations. If you be joined to a Pastor, so as you
believe he is set over you by Christ, to be a Pastor to you (not because the
Bishop has sent one, or an old Usurer dies, and leaves the Patronage of a
living to some Ostler or Tapwench in an Alehouse, and he or she shall send one
by virtue of their right to the patronage, this cannot tie a man's conscience to
depend upon him for the ordinances of Christ all his days, in case he cannot
remove his dwelling, but if you cannot but look upon the man as the Pastor that
Christ has set over you.) Though this man has meaner gifts then others; and
it would be more comfortable to you to have another Pastor; yet this is not
enough to cause you to dise^t him whom Christ has set over you; and if people
may not leave their Pastors, because others have more eminent gifts, then
surely Pastors must not leave their people, because others have more eminent
Livings.

To instance yet further, that you may see how this Principle disturbs men's
spirits: Many being in the works of their Calling, have some thoughts come into
their mind, that prayer is a better work, more noble and spiritual then to be
employed as they are; therefore they must needs presently leave their work,
and go toe prayer: How many have been perplexed with temptations this way, by
which their lives have been made very uncomfortable? Prayer in it self is
better, but is it better at this time for me, all things considered? am not I
about that which God has called me to do? By this Principle many decive and
trouble themselves, in respect of their souls; as some by a conceit of the like
nature, deceive and bring great trouble to themselves in respect of their
bodies; some who have sickly bodies, their flesh is decayed, they think such
and such things have most nourishment in them, such things are hot, and full of
spirits, and juice, therefore they will eat and drink altogether such things,
leaving their ordinary diet; by this means they many times overthrow their
bodies: for though a man wants flesh, yet the way for him to have it, it may be
is not to take nourishing things, but purging; and though he be troubled with
faintness, it may be the way to get good spirits, is by eating ordinary diet,
and cooling his body, that so some distemper may be cured, and he may get his
veyns filled with good blood, and spirits got from it, rather then by drinking
hot waters that are full of spirits, which perhaps burns his heart, and dries
his body, that there is no good blood generated from his diet.

It is not enough therefore to say the thing is in it self better, but is it
better in all the references I have, and it has? is it better in regard of
others, in regard of the public, for the helping me in all my relations? May
it not help one way, and hinder many ways? If a Physician should come to a man,
and see his disease is hot, and should therefore presently cool him by giving
him water, the man may like it for the present; why is it not better to be
cool, then so burning hot? but thus the Physician discovers his folly, and the
Patient loses his life. A Physician in prescribing some physic had need have
forty considerations in his head at once, how one part stands affected to the
other, of what years the man is, of what complexion, how long the disease bath
been upon him, what was last done to him, etc. So it should be in the duties of
Religion, a Christian who desires to walk orderly, to beautify and honor his
profession to enjoy communion with God, and peace in his own soul, and be
useful to the public, had need have his wits about him, not presently to fall
upon a work, because it is now presented as good to him in a single
consideration; he must compare one thing with another, and see what it is in
all its references; or otherwise he will but enterfeir, he will but hack and
hew, and bungle, and disturb himself and others in the ways of Religion, he
will make Religion tiresome to himself and others, he will be in danger in
time to cast off strictness, and to grow so much the more loose then others,
by how much more straightened he has been in a disorderly way then others. I
believe some of you have known those who in their young time have been very
strict and tender; whatsoever they have conceived to be better then other, they
have presently followed it with all eagerness, never considering
circumstances, references, or consequences, but the thing is good, it must be
done; yet being wearied with this, they have after grown loose, in as great an
excess, the other way; yea, it may be have vanished and come to nothing.

CHAP. XIII.
The seventh Dividing Principle; The seventh dividing principle.
It is obstinacy for a man not to be convinced by the judgment of many, more
learned and godly then himself.
THe making this to be the rule to judge obstinacy by, has in all ages caused
great divisions by exasperating the spirits of ^^en one against another. In
times of Popery what rage did it raise against men who were most conscientious?
the generality of men thought they did God good service, in persecuting those
who would not yield to the judgment of others, who had the repute of learning
and piety; and those who were conscientious, could not yield to their
determinations, not seeing the truth of God in them, and this made the stir.
While men appear obstinate, by the rule of Christ we are not to bear with
them; and this Principle sets thousands of godly peaceable men in the seat of
the obstinate, these cannot in conscience yield, and others cannot but in
conscience oppose them; what reconciliation then can there be hoped? either men
must captivate their consciences, cause them in a sordid way to bow down to
slavery, or else there must needs be continual division and opposition where
this prevails.

I confess such a Principle as this is would make for union amongst those who
either think they need not, or through carelessness regard not to searth out
truth, but with an implicit faith take in all that shall be imposed upon them,
who think ignorance of Gods mind and conscience slavery, to be no great evil;
this is never urged with violence, but either by those who have given up their
consciences to be serviceable to the ease and content of the flesh, or those
who have, or hope to have power in their hands, to bring others in subjection
to them.

Because the right informing our judgments in this, may much conduce to peace,
I shall endeavor, 1. To show you what due respect is to be given to men's
judgments who are learned and godly. 2. Yet not so much as to make their
judgments the rule to judge men obstinate, if they differ from them. 3. What
then should be the rule? by what should we judge a man to be obstiate?

For the first, Certainly much respect is to be given to the learning and
godliness of men. There is a great delusion in many men's hearts, What respect
is to be given to the judgment of learned holy men.
that makes them think it to be half Popery, to give any respect to Learning;
although the abuse of Learning has done much evil, against that much has
been and may be said; but I dare avow this, that never since the beginning of
the world could a man be found to speak against earning but an ignorant man;
neither is it like, nay I may aver, it is impossible that any but such will be
found to the end of the world: Learning has so much of God in it, that it
never had nor will have any enemy but ignorance.

1. Tim. 4. 13. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Ver.
15. Give thy self wholly to them, (...), Be in them. And when we see grace
added to Learning, it should add much to our esteem of such a man; it is the
orient pearl in the gold ring, it is a great testimony to a way, that it is the
way of good men, Prove. 2. 20. That thou may walk in the way of good men, and
keep the paths of the righteous. The judgment and counsel of such is to be
received with very great respect, especially if the eminency of their grace
appears in the tenderness of their spirits, that we may see much of the fear
of God in them. Ezra 10. 3. Now let us make a covenant, according to the
counsel of my Lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God.
And when not only some few godly men are of this mind, but when it is that
which God has sealed in the hearts of the Saints generally, very high respect
is to be given unto it.

Wherefore he that differs in his judgment from wise, learned, godly men, had
need

First, spend much time in Prayer and Humiliation before Basil, cited in an
Appendix of an Epistle of Luther to the Ministers of Norimberg, Multa anxie
considerare eum oportet, and multas noctes ab sumere insomnes, and cum multis
lacrymis petere a Deo veritatis demonstrationem, qui se a fratribus separare
vult.
who were at variance one from another: He who will separate him self from his
brethren, had need consider many things even to anxiety; he had need break his
sleep many nights, and seek of God with many tears, the demonstration of the
truth.

2ly. You must even then when you cannot subject to their judgments, preserve
due reverence in your heart, and show due respects to men of learning and grace
according to their worth. We have a notable relation of that holy man. Mr.
Greenham, in a Letter of his to the Bishop of Ely, in whose Diocese he lived;
the Bishop seeking to bring him to conformity, objected thus unto him, Why will
not you yield? Luther His sober and gracious answer was, I reverence more the
revealed will of God in teaching that worthy instrument of God, Mr. Luther so
many necessary things to salvation, then I search into his secret will, why he
kept back from his knowledge other things of less importance.









We are to raise our respects to men of learning and godliness thus high; but
if we should go so high, as to give up our judgment and consciences to them, we
should in honoring them, dishonor Christ, yea they would account themselves
to be dishonored. Quantum apud alios valeat authoritas Ecclesiae, nescio;
certe apud me tantum valet, ut cum Arianis and Pelagianis sentire possim, si
probasset Ecclesja quod illi do^uerunt. Eras. Bilibal do Pyrckeymeroll. ep. 20.
ep. 3.
Such as are truly godly and wise, do rather account it their honor to carry a
loving respect to those who differ from them, then desire that men should,
blindfold, before they see their grounds, follow them. Prelaticall spirits
indeed account it their honor to force men to be of their mind; it is their
glory that they can say to the consciences of men, Bow down before us. A
gracious spirit abhors the thought of such a tyranny. This to high raising
respects due to learned, holy men, has been very hurtful in the Church,
prejudicial to the souls of men, but especially to the honor of Christ. I will
give you an instance. Erasmus was no novice, yet how dangerously he was taken
with this, will appear by a strange expression of his, in an Epistle he wrote
to one Bilibaldus: How far the authority of the Church prevails with others, I
know not; but with me it has that power, that I could be of the opinion with
Arrians and Pelagians, if the Church did but allow that which they taught. This
you will say is a strange expression, coming from a learned man, and one too,
not addicted to the Church that then was in that excess as others were; how
then did this conceit prevail with men more weak, who gave up their consciences
to others through their blind superstition?

Wherefore secondly, though great respect is to be given to men holy and
learned, yet not such, that a man must be judged obstinate, if he submit not
to their judgments and determinations. For,

First, if a man should believe or do any thing before he sees Lord, I am a
poor weak man, I cannot find out thy truths my self, therefore I seeing
learned godly men to be of such a judgment, and doing such things, I thought
it too much presumption for me to differ from them, therefore I also believed
it to be true, and practiced accordingly. This were an easy way for people to
agree, and it might well be judged obstinacy to gainsay. But this account
Christ will not take, for he tells us, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
and the judgments and practices of godly learned men, he never made to be the
rule of faith.

2ly. If God in revealing his mind to men, always did it David was a man as
eminent for parts, and was filled with the Spirit of God as much as Nathan,
both in regard of Prophecy and godliness; yet sometimes that was revealed to
Nathan, which was kept hid from David. When the Book of the Law was found, and
read before Josiah, they send to Huldah the Prophetess, yet there were
Prophets in the Land at that time.

But you will say, Is it not more likely that men of learning and piety, should
know what is right, and what is not, better then others?

True, Answ.
it is more likely they should; but God many times does things which we think
are not likely; that which is the most unlikely to us, God many times chooses
as best to serve his ends.





You will say, How can that be? For if men be very learned and godly, and take
much pains to find out the truth, there is the more reason we should believe
their judgments more then our own.

We must indeed honor them, Answ.
then, the more; but yet the exquisiteness of their learning, the eminency of
their godliness, the industry of their labors, for the finding out of truth,
may excuse those from obstinacy who cannot see into the ground from the word,
of all that they are able to see; for is it not more then probable, that men
who are weak and exceedingly beneath them, should through mere weakness be
unable to see the rule of Scripture in those things which they have got the
sight of, by the help of their great learning, godliness, and indefatigable
labors? Can it be, that men who have not attained to that eminency, who are
not able to take so much pains in searching, that they (though they have their
help added) should be able to attain to what these men so eminent and
industrious have attained to? Can they in a few months come to see that which
they have been studying, and debating one with another diverse years before they
could see it, can they be satisfied in their consciences of the mind of Christ,
when these eminent men, for a long time could hardly satisfy one another? yea,
it may be after all the help of their learning, godliness, and painful
labors, they look upon many things but as probable, as more likely to be so
then otherwise, they have not a Plerophory in their own hearts; and shall those
who do not see ground enough for the foot of Faith to settle upon, be judged,
and dealt with as obstinate? Because they yet are not of their mind, (God
forbid.)

Fifthly, there is much danger in making this to be the rule;

If you shall say, True, our case would be sad, but we must venture it, there
is no help, better an inconvenience then a mischief.

But here will be not an inconvenience only but a mischief? Answ.
In civil things this indeed must be ventured, for there we are not bound to
understand the reason and ground of all things; but if nothing appear to be
contrary to the rules of justice and piety, we are to submit; but in the
matters of Religion it is otherwise, we must understand the ground of all from
the word; therefore those who shall lay down such a position, that we may deal
with these men as obstinate, by the Ordinance of Christ, who after two or three
admonitions shall not be of the same judgment, and do the same things that
learned and godly men determine, do bring the Church into greater bondage then
they are aware of.

New England the greater number of learned and godly men go another way.
Lately the greater number of learned and godly men in old England did judge
submission to Prelaticall power in the Church, and practice of Ceremonies, and
use of Common Prayer to be lawful, I hope it is not so now.



Try all things, keep that which is good, abstain from all appearance of evil.
If after the trial of Prophecy, there be but an appearance of evil, we are
not bound to abstain.



But if we shall not judge men that go against the determination of those who
are most able to judge, then every man may do what seems good in his own eyes,
and so there will be nothing but confusion.

Not so neither, Answ.
though this be not the rule to judge men to be obstinate by; yet men may by
some other rules be judged to be so, and dealt with accordingly; as those by
which we judged, whether the evil be in a man's conscience or in his will,
especial these four.

First, If the thing wherein men differ, be against the common

Secondly, In other things, if their carriages be turbulent,

Thirdly, where there is neglect of those means of reformation,

Fourthly, If he so crosses his own principles, that he appears to be
self-condemned.

CHAP. XIV.
The eighth dividing Principle. If others be against what we conceive to be
truth, The 8. dividing Principle.
we may judge them going against their own light.
THis is a worse, a more dividing Principle then the former; it is worse to
make our judgments the rule of other men's actions, then other men's judgments
the rule of our actions: This makes men who differ, to have exceeding hard
thoughts one of another, it causes a mighty spirit to rise in them one against
another. A man cannot judge worse of another, then this, that he goes against
his own light. Of all things conscientious men knows not how to bear this; yet
how ordinarily will men who are weak, judge those that are strong, because they
cannot see into the reasons of their actions? therefore those that do them,
must needs do them against their own light: If they see another man's garb, and
manner of converse, and way, to be differing from their own, they presently
judge him sinning against his own conscience, to be acted by by-ends to do
what he does merely out of cunning and craftiness; This is from the pride and
sowrnesse of men's spirits. This is far enough for you to go in judging your
brother, were I in his condition, should I do as he does, I should go
against my light, I should act by by-ends; but therefore to conclude that he
goes against his light, and acts by by-ends, is very sinful. Many carnal men
think, if they should make such a show of Religion; if they should do such
things as such and such men do, it would be hypocrisy in them, and they judge
truly, because their Principle would not bear out their practice; but
therefore to judge all that do such things to be hypocrites, we account to be a
very wicked thing. If thou had any spirit of humility or wisdom in thee,
thou would rather think, it may be he sees what I do not, I am to look to
mine own heart and ways, by what principles I go my self: Men who are weak,
and can see but a little way into things, must take heed they censure not
others, who know how to manage businesses better then themselves; some may do
that acceptable to God, that thou could not do without an evil conscience:
The same honesty and sincerity may continue in a man, though in true wisdom
and discretion he applies himself diversely, according as occasions are diverse;
as the hand remains the same, whether closed into a fist, or extended abroad,
or bended this way or that way as occasion serves. Wherefore for your direction
in this, take these five rules.

Logitians, Sequi partem deteriorem, but incline to that which may any way be
conceived or hoped to have any goodness in it; we must rather wrong our selves
by thinking too well of them, then wrong them by thinking too ill of them. This
would help exceeding much to peace.



in censuring our Brethren for what he has denied them.

4ly. We must remember, that not long since we were our

5ly. We must consider also, that in other things our Brethren Nolo libertatem
meam captivari quam Paulus dedit, dicens, Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete.
Luther.
that they should judge us, going against our light, and to be acted by by-ends
in that we differ from them. We must grant that liberty to our Brethren we
would have our selves; that is not to be involved in the judgments of others,
but try all things, and keep what God makes known to us to be good; This
liberty, says Luther, Paul has given me, and I will stand to it, I will not
suffer it to be captivated.

The ninth Dividing Principle. Rules of prudence are sufficient to guide us in
natural things and civil affairs, and may as well suffice us in spiritual
and Church-affaires.
A Great part of our divisions about Church Affairs comes from this Principle:
If God would help us with right apprehensions about t^is, our divisions would
in a great measure vanish. Those whose consciences are taken with a contrary
principle, namely, that there must be institutions for all things that are
properly Ecclesiastical and spiritual, they cannot yield to any such thing,
till they see the stamp on, an institution upon it: Others who think because
Prudence is enough to order civil affairs, there needs no institution for
these things, they think such as stand for them to be too rigid and stiff in
their way.

It divides also upon this ground: In the corrupt estate of the Church (such as
ours yet is) if we bind to institutions, we shall be sorely pinched with many
things that will be very troublesome to us, but if we go according to the rules
of common prudence, we may decline, or alter what would pinch, and take up what
may be commodious for us: Hence the principle is very desirable, if it can be
maintained, men will strive hard before they will lose it; and on the other
side, God is looked at as a jealous God, who will not suffer a man's wisdom to
share with him in the things of his worship, which are spiritual and holy, to
appoint and leave out as may be most commodious for the freedom of them from
trouble, therefore they dare not yield to any Ordinance that is beyond civil,
but upon some institution of Christ in his Word, and this divides.

Now for your help in this: As God has given two lights to the world, the
Sun, the grater to rule the day; and the Moon, the lesser, to rule the
night: So he has given two Lights to man, to guide his course; the Scriptures
the greater, to guide man, especially in his spiritual condition, in those
more immediate references he has to God, for his worship and enjoyment of
communion with him: The other the less, the light of Reason, to be his guide in
natural and civil things, in the ordering his life for his natural and
civil good; and though it is true, Religion makes use of Reason, and we have
help from the Scriptures in our natural and civil affairs, yet these two
lights have their distinct special use, according to those distinct conditions
of man.

When I say, What are those things we must have institutions for.
we must have Scripture, and in it institutions for those things which are
spiritual, and properly Church Affairs, I mean whatsoever is made use of for
the drawing my soul nearer to God, or God nearer to me; or for the tendering up
my Homage to God, beyond what it has in the nature of the thing, put into it
by God; for that I must have an institution, I must not frame any such thing to
my self; If I make use of any thing of mine own, for such an end that I may
worship God by, or that God might convey some spiritual efficacy to me in the
use of it, because it is a thing that I think as fit for such an end, as other
Ordinances I find in the Word, and yet have not an institution for it; in this
I sin against Christ the Lord, who alone has power to set apart the use of
what he pleases, for the tendering up homage to God, or the conveighing of any
spiritual efficacy from God into the hearts of his servants.

Man's natural and civil good is not so high, but reason and prudence will
reach them; but for such things as these are, all the reason and prudence in
the world lies too low, they can not without sinful presumption attempt the
putting any thing of their own in the place of these: Therefore there can be no
other officers in the church, to act by any spiritual power, then what we find
in the Word; no new Ordinances, no new Courts erected, no kind of authority, no
extent of authority any further then we find in Scripture: The proof is
evident, all Church Ordinances are for spiritual ends, to work by a spiritual
efficacy, beyond what is natural or civil; and the efficacy of the power of
government consists much in those who govern; if they have not their Charter to
authorize their power and the extent of it, it loses its efficacy, though it
be otherwise managed with never so much wisdom and justice; the same act that
is an act of Justice in one, is murder in another; yea, the same man's act done
within such limits is an act of Justice, and if done beyond those limits, it is
murder.

But you will say, Surely there is use of reason and prudence in matters
spiritual; how far may their use extend?

To the doing of these two things.

First, Answ.
by reason I may compare institutions, and argue from one institution to
another, and so find out institutions that lie more in the da^k, by others
which are more apparent. Though the thing that I gather be not terminis in
Scripture, yet if I gather by necessary consequence from an institution, one or
more, it has the force of an institution in it: If I make Reason to be the
Basis, the ground of my consequence, it will never rise up to that height as to
raise an institution; but if I make some other institution the Basis of my
consequence, then it may.

Secondly, when I have found out an institution, then reason Let all things be
done decently and in order; for they joined institutions of their own to Gods,
to make them decent and orderly: But that Scripture only shows you when you
have an institution of Christ, you are to apply by the use of reason and
prudence, what natural or civil helps you can, for the better managing this
institution of his.

From hence we have an answer to that Objection is made against many things
done by those who are in a Congregationall way; what institution have they for
many things they do? what for their Covenant? etc.

Though there be no Text of Scripture holds forth this in terminis, Answ.
yet it is grounded upon other institutions, plainly held forth in Scripture.

First, it is clear in Scripture, that besides the Catholic Church there are
particular Churches, Saints imbodied, under such Officers, who are so Officers
to them as they are not to others: These people can look upon this man as their
Pastor, and this Pastor upon this people in a peculiar relation; they may do
some acts of power over one another in their Congregation, which they cannot do
over others in another Congregation: Now then it follows, they being a body,
must needs have something to join them together; and the least thing that can
be to join them, is the manifestation of their assent to join for those ends
for which Christ has appointed such a body; and what is their Covenant, but
this? Only some manifest their assent more largely, some more briefly; I know
nothing more is required, but to manifest their assent to join with that body,
to set up all the Ordinances of Christ so far as they know.

If there be any other thing done in their Churches wherein they make further
use of reason and prudence, then in the two forenamed things, they cannot
justify it, but must acknowledge it evil.

The tenth Dividing Principle; The 10. dividing Principle.
or rather vain conceit. Every difference in Religion is a differing Religion.
What do you hear more ordinary then this, How many Religions have we now?
Shall so many Religions be suffered amongst us? we cannot tell now what
Religion men are of; upon this apprehension they oppose such as differ from
them in some few things, with all the violence they can, as men bringing up new
Religions, and would take away their Religion from them; how can they possibly
accord with men that are of a different Religion from them?

Surely we are more afraid then hurt; Answ.
Though our differences be sad enough, yet they come not up to this, to make us
men of different Religions. We agree in the same end, though not in the same
means; they are but different ways of opposing the common adversary. The
agreeing in the same means in the same way of opposing the common enemy would
be very comfortable, it would be our strength, but that cannot be expected in
this world.

Livie in his story of a great Battle between Hannibal and Scipio, Lib. 30.
says, That at the joining of the Armies, the shouting of Scipio's men was
far more terrible then the shouting of Hannibal's, because Scipio's men were
all Romans, their shouting had all the same tone: but Hannibal's Army was made
up of men of several Countries, so that in their shouting there was variety of
the tones of their voice, which was not accounted so formidable a shout as the
other. It is true, our adversaries do not look our opposition to them having so
much diversity in it, so formidable as they would if we were all but one in our
way of opposing them; But still we are all shouting against the common enemy;
although therefore the terror upon our adversary would be greater, if our
shout were more uniform; yet we hope the victory may be as sure.

Soldiers who march against a common enemy, all under the same Captain, who
follow the same Colors in their Ensign, and wear them upon their hats or arms,
may get the day, though they be not all clothed alike, though they differ in
things of less concernment.

Revel. 15. 2. we read of the Saints standing upon a sea of glass, which had
fire mingled with it. Mr. Brightman interprets this sea of glass, the doctrine
of the Gospel, more clear, more transparent then the doctrine of the Law,
which, he says, was resembled by the sea of brass that Solomon made; But
there is fire mingled in this sea of glass, that is, says he, There are
contentions and divisions in the Church, where this doctrine of the Gospel is
taught: But yet mark what follows, They got the victory over the beast, and
over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, and had
the harps of God in their hands, and sang the song of Moses, etc.

Men who are in a crowd, tread one upon another, yet they all make to the same
door, they would all go the same way: Godly people are divided in their
opinions and ways, but they are united in Christ; though they may be divided
from such a particular society, yet they are not divided from the Church; it is
with the Saints here, as with the boughs of trees in time of a storm; you shall
see the boughs one beat upon another, as if they would beat one another to
pieces, as if Armies were fighting, but this is but while the wind, while the
tempest lasts; stay a while and you shall see every bough standing in its own
order and comeliness, why? because they are all united in one root; if any
bough be rotten, the storm breaks it off, but the sound boughs come into their
former place. These times of division may break off men whose spirits were
before unsound, they will never come in to join with the Saints again so as
they seemed to do in former times: but within a while when this gust is over,
others may come in and show themselves to be all united in, and receive sap
from the same root.

CHAP. XIV.
Dividing Distempers, the lusts of men's hearts.
THese divide us not only from God, but from one another. Hoc disco mea
experientia, quod non habeo tam magnam causam timendi extra me, quam intra me.
Luther.
This I learn, says Luther, from mine own experience, that I have more cause
to fear what is within me, then what is without. What ever others do to divide
us would prevail little, were it not for the lusts of our hearts within.
Vapors that are got within the earth, are the cause of all earthquakes, they
rend and tear: the winds, storms, and tempests without never move it. Ill
humors within the body, disturb more then the air without. James 4. 1. Whence
are wars and fighting amongst you? are they not hence, even from your lusts?
Whence come they? The answer is soon made, Do you not see plainly that they
came from your lusts? Yet were this Question put to some of us, Whence are all
our divisions? Some would answer, Such kind of men are the cause of them, and
others would answer, Nay but such men cause them. We all put off the cause of
our divisions from our selves; few would give Saint James his answer, They are
from hence, even from our lusts. There would not be such evil distillations
from the head, if it were not for the malignant vapors that arise from the
stomach. The curing the heart will sooner cure the head, then the curing the
head will cure the heart:

Whence are wars? even from your lusts. The Apostle does not here condemn wars
simply, this was the error of the old Manichees, raised up again by some
amongst us; especially as the Wars are looked upon under that notion, raised
for Religion. They seek to weaken our hands in these wars, by telling young
people who have newly given their names to Christ, and therefore desire to be
guided by the Word in all they do, whom God has used under himself to be the
strength of these wars, that they have no warrant to fight for Religion. To
whom our Answer is, that we have a Civil right to the outward peaceable
profession and practice of our Religion; we have the Laws of the Land for it,
and for the maintenance of this right we fight. There can be no reason given
why our civil right we have to our Religion, may not as well be maintained by
the sword, as our civil right to our houses and lands. This answers all
objections against the maintenance of Religion by the sword, from the practice
of the Christians in the Primitive times, who never sought to maintain Religion
thus. We say their case was not the same with ours; they never had any civil
right to the profession and practice of Religion in the Countries where they
lived, as we have.

The wars meant in this Text are contentions, jars, divisions amongst
Christians; though they did not take up the sword one against another, yet
there were many quarrels, jarrs, and divisions amongst them, these came from
their lusts. The lusts of men's hearts are very quarrelsom. Storms and tempests
are here below in this impure muddy part of the world, in the higher part all
is serene, calm, and clear. 1 Cor. 3. 3. For ye are yet carnal; how does he
prove that? whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are
ye not carnal and walk as men? Strifes and divisions do manifest men's hearts
to be very carnal.

August. upon that place, Genesis 15. 10. where God required Abraham to take
beasts and birds for sacrifice, the beasts were divided, Carnales inter se
dividuntur, spirituales nullo modo Aug. de civit. lib. 16. cap. 14.
cut asunder, but not the birds: Thus (says he, by way of allusion) carnal
brutish men are divided one from another, but not the birds, not those who are
more spiritual, more celestial.

Ye walk as men, says the Apostle, ye should not walk as men, ye should walk
as it becomes those whose condition is raised above the condition of men, as it
becomes Christians the redeemed ones of the Lord; you say, Can flesh and blood
endure this? Can any man living bear this? what if flessh and blood, what if a
man cannot? A Christian may, a member of Jesus Christ who is God-man, may.
Chrysostom in one of his Sermons to the people of Antioch, brings in Gods
gracious dealing with Cain, as an example for them to imitate, in their
carriage toward those who carry themselves ill toward them; He brings them in
also replying, God indeed was gentle and patient toward Cain, for he is God,
he is above all passion, but we are but men; he answers them, Therefore did the
Son of God come down, that he might make you as near as may be to God.

The Scripture says, The Saints are made partakers of the divine nature;
therefore do not say, We are but men. You must not walk as men, but as those
who are endued with the Divine nature. It is a great charge that the holy Ghost
lays upon the Corinthians, that they walked but as men; yet many come short of
the lives of men: they rather walk as dogs, as tigers, as wolves. Gal. 5. 20.
The fruits of the flesh are hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings. All these are the causes or workings of
divisions: Surely our divisions are the fruits of the flesh. We see it in
nature, the more spiritual any thing is, the more it unites; and the more gross
the substance of any thing is, the less it unites; the beams of the Sun are
of a kind of spiritual nature, therefore thousands of them will unite in
puncto, but it is not so in other things; spiritual hearts in this are like the
Sun beams, though thousands of them live together, they will unite in one so
long as they continue spiritual. The three thousand Converts, Act. 2. joined
with one accord, with one single heart: We find it now by experience, so long
as there be but a few in a Church, they agree well, but usually when they come
to be numerous, dissentions rise amongst them; this is an argument that the
hearts of men are not spiritual, still much flesh remains. Brackish water
ascending to the Heavens, is sweetened, it comes down sweet from thence; thus
those things which have trouble, which have an aptness to breed divisions, yet
spiritual heavenly hearts having to do with them, they turn the nature of
them, they work spiritual advantage out of them.

The higher fire ascends, the more it unites; the flame that is broad at the
bottom, as it grows high, unites to be as the point of a needle. When the
hearts of Christians keep below, and have a great deal of smoke amongst them,
they do not so unite; but when they can get up high, O what close,
single-hearted union is there (...) a crooked and a right line cannot join, How
many ways men's lusts cause divisions.
but two right lines will join in every point.

The lusts of men's hearts cause divisions many ways:

First, they are men's own, therefore they will contend for

Secondly, Men's lusts blind their judgments; Perit judicium cum res transit
in affectum; when the heart is tainted, the judgment is soon blinded; if the
beam of the scale you weigh by, be not straight, the scale that has the light
weight may weigh down the heavier; if our hearts be crooked, warping to any
sinful lust, what weight soever there be in any arguments to convince, the
scale will go according to the warping of the heart, the conclusion will
follow the worser part.

3ly. Men's lusts weaken their spirits, so as they are not able Omne invalidum
natura querulum.
sick people, who are weakest, fall out most with one another; things that are
rotten cannot hold together, every little touch breaks them asunder; that which
is sound has strength to hold one part to another.

Fourthly, in men's lusts there is confusion, they cannot the men be never so
numerous, never so differing in other respects, yet if they keep their ranks,
they are all but one; but if put to a rout and confusion, then the bond of
unity is broken, and every man divides from another to shift for himself.



Isa. 60. 18. God promises peace, and there promises, that violence should be
no more heard in their Land. Men's lusts are boisterous and unruly, especyally
when they have been acting a while; at the first venting they seem to be fair,
but after a while they grow outrageous: violent and boisterous dispositions are
unfit for society.

You shall find in experience men who seem to be of weak spirits, of softly
tempers, very remiss in what they do ordinarily, yet let the lusts of these
men be engaged in any cause, to any side, O how violent and impetuous will they
be! they care not what they say or do, they will divide from God, from the
public, from their dearest friends, from their nearest relations, from what
themselves have made profession of heretofore, from their credit, profit, from
their own peace, from any thing, and all to serve a lust engaged in such a
business; it is a dangerous thing to have a man's lust engaged, nothing can
stand against an engaged lust, a man runs on headlong, he will break his
conscience, he will desperately endanger his eternal breaking, to maintain the
engagement of his lust.

Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and
her seed.

In Antipathy the opposition is,

it comes not in accidentally; you may find two sheep fighting upon some
accident, but the natures are not opposite, like the Wolf and the Sheep.

2. The cause of this opposition is secret; wicked men have Bonus vir Caius
Seius sed Christianus, non amo te, I love you not, but I can give no reason;
Hoc tantum possum dicere, Non amo te, all that I can say is this, that I do not
love you.

3. It is a settled, constant opposition: This has been in all

4. It is very strong, ungodly men are exceedingly imbittered Ezekiel. 26. 6.
Because thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced
in heart, with all thy despite against the Land of Israel: This spirit of
bitterness and indignation that was in them against the people of God, is
seminally at least in all wicked men.



The great divisions amongst us are those that are between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the Serpent; some division* there are between those who
are the seed of Christ, but the great stirs in the Kingdom come from the evil
spirit there is in the seed of the Serpent against the godly in the Land. In
the beginning of the Parliament, when men's liberties and estates being involved
in one, there was good agreement, all men rejoiced, generally the countenances
of those who were not Popish and Prelaticall, were serene, they had comfortable
aspects one upon another; but when those whose spirits were opposite to the
power of godliness, saw how the godly amongst them rejoiced, how their heads
were lifted up, how their hearts were filled with hopes of good days, wherein
Religion should be countenanced and honored; that Antipathy that was in their
hearts against the ways of God, boy-led in them; though they were glad that
they should be freed from some burdens, yet to see those whom they hated in
their hearts, to rejoice so much, they could not bear, but their spirit rose
against them, and in opposition to them they have raised these stirs, they have
made these woeful distractions that are amongst us.

Gravius persequitur filius pa^rem male vi vendo, quam pater filium castigando.
Grav^^. Ancil^a Saram pe^sequuta est per iniquam superbiam, quameam Sara per
debitun disciplinaun Aug. de unitat. e^cl. c. 18.
because God requires every man according to his place to make opposition
against them; the cause of the strife lies not in those who oppose them, they
do but their duty; but in in those who nourish such lusts within them; yet we
find it ordinarily, that those who are most corrupt will cry out against those
who oppose them in their wicked ways, as the cause of strife and divisions, as
if they were the troublers of Israel, whereas indeed themselves, the wicked
lusts of their own hearts are the troublers of Israel, those who oppose their
lusts desire all good to their persons. I remember Augustine in his Book about
the unity of the Church has this passage, The Son does more grievously
persecute his father by living naughtily, then the father him by chastising him
duly. Sarahs Maid did more trouble her by her wicked pride, then she her Maid
by her deserved correction. Those men who are most faulty, are the men who are
to be charged to be the greatest troublers in Church and State.

Thus in the general, men's lusts are the cause of divisions; but let us
enquire into the particular lusts of men, which we may also charge: We shall
find these dividing distempers to be as many as the dividing Principles: As the
Philosopher speaks of four Cardinal virtues, so the first four that I shall
name I may call the four Cardinal vices, these are Pride, Self-love, Envy,
Passion or Frowardness; All the other distempers that cause divisions, have
the poison of these four at the root of them. These are the Chariot wheels of
the Furies, or the four horses that draws them up and down hurrying from place
to place.

CHAP. XVI.
The Pride of men's hearts the great dividing distemper. The first dividing
distemper.

PRide is the greatest Master of mis-rule in the world, it is the great
incendiary in the soul of man, in families, in Towns, Cities, in all
societies, in Church and State: This wind causes tempests to arise. Prove. 13.
10. Only by pride comes contention. The holy Ghost singles out pride, as the
only cause of all contentions, because it is the chief; though there be many in
a riot, the whole usually is laid upon the ringleaders. Pride is the
ringleader to all ryots, divisions, disturbances amongst us. Prove. 21. 24.
Proud and haughty scorner is his name who deals in proud wrath. Pride may be
well indicted for the great common Barrettor in all Towns, and Cities, and
Kingdoms, it makes woeful troubles wheresoever it comes. Mathematicians make
this a rule to know when a thing is exactly round, and when it is exactly
plain; Round things will not touch but in puncto, if you lay plain things
together, they will touch in every part of them.

Proud hearts will join only in some things that concern themselves, but plain
hearts will join in every thing wherein God may have glory, and their Brethren
good.

G^uty swollen legs keep at distance one from another; bladders that are blown up
with wind, spurt one from another, they will not close, but if you prick them,
and so let out the wind, you may pack a thousand in a little room. We find
this by experience, when God gives us most success in our Armies, then are we
most divided, then every man begins to look high, and to be sharking for
himself; and when the Lord discountenances our Armies, and brings us low, then
we think and speak ways of Accommodation, then we bewail our divisions with
some brokenness of spirit: As it is with Soldiers when they are fighting
against the common adversary, then they can agree well enough; but when they
come to divide the spoil, or be put into their Garrisons, then they fall out:
When we lie under the danger of the same common calamity, then we can agree;
but when we come to share for our selves, then our spirits swell one against
another.

We read in Scripture of the Mannah that God gave his people; such was the
nature of it that the heat of the Sun melted it. You will say, How could it then
endure the heat of the oven? for they baked it in the oven; yet so it was, of a
strange kind of nature, that it could bear the heat of the oven, and not the
heat of the sun. Even of such a temper are our hearts; the heat of the sun of
prosperity dissolves us, causes us to runn one from another, but the heat of
the fire of affliction bakes us, brings us, and settles us together; it makes
us to be one, it takes away our rawnesse, it consumes many of our ill humors,
and so composes our spirits into one.

The stupidness of our hearts is such, as we do not make our brethrens case,
who suffer the rage of these wars, our own; But we for the present having some
more liberty then formerly, we are lifted up, and in the pride of our hearts
push at our brethren, and smite our fellow servants: If the dogs be at a
little distance from us, though we even hear the cries of our brethren who are
worried by them, yet we foolishly bless our selves in our present ease,
enjoyments, and hopes, as if our flesh must be spared, our estates, our
liberties and enjoyments must be continued, yea raised, whatsoever becomes of
others. Oh sinful vain spirits, befooled and hardened with their pride!

But what are the several workings of pride that make such a stir in the
world? The several workings of pride causing divisions.


First, A proud man thinks himself too great to be crossed, Shall I bear this?
I will make you know what it is to do such things against me; Answ.
he thinks it a great dishonor to him to bear any thing, therefore he must
needs quarrel and contend, if it be but to show what a man of spirit he is, or
to show that he is a man of such worth, as whatsoever others bear, yet it is
not fit for him to bear it; it is but reason that such a man as he should make
men who will presume to cross him, to yield to him, to stoop under him. Now
when one proud man thinks it a dishonor for him to put up wrongs from another
who it may be is as proud as himself, and he thinks it a dishonor for him to
put up wrong, what peace can there be? some wrongs must be put up, but proud
men will never agree who shall begin.

Secondly, because his spirit swells so big, he thinks every thing that
crosses him to be very great; his sufferings are great to him according to
what great thoughts he has of himself, according to the excellency or
meannesse of any person: So are his sufferings to be reckoned, sufferings of a
man in eminency are judged according to his eminency and place; if a mean man
suffer the same things, they are not accounted so great; now whether a man be
great really, or in his own apprehension, its all one in regard of his esteem
of his sufferings, he thinks himself therefore intolerable, because they are
against himself.

Dan. 3. 14. Is it true O Shadrach; Meshach, and Abednego? Do not ye serve my
gods? that which you have in your books, is it true? Arius Montanus translates,
Nunquid de solatio: what, is there desolation made? what, you to oppose the
command of a King? if this be suffered, what desolation must needs follow? Add
indeed the root from whence the word comes, signifies desolari, (...)
to make desolate; why? was it a desolation that these three poor innocent men
made, because they would not, nay, they could not do as this proud K. would
have them? wht made him thus to aggravate the offense, but merely the pride of
his heart? he thought that any thing cross to his command was a most heinous
offense, a thing most horrid in the very mention of it, no less then the utter
undoing of all things. Pride ever aggravates any thing done against its own
mind. This in Dan. that Montanus turns, Nunquid desolatio, Buxtorfius
translates number de industria; what on purpose? you do it on purpose to provoke
me; thus proud men and women in their families, whatsoever children or servants
do amiss; what? you do it on purpose to anger me, do you? When the wind comes
cross the stream, the waters rage: So does the will and affections of a proud
heart, when any thing crosses it.

Hab. 2. 5. He is a proud man, neither keeps at home, who enlarges his
desire as hell, and cannot be satisfied. If any humor of the body goes beyond
its bounds, it brings much trouble to it, the health and peace of the body
consists in the keeping of every humor within its vessel and due proportion.

Dan. 5. 20. His mind is hardened in his pride. If you would have things
cleave, you must have them soft, two flints will not join; the Spanyard has a
Proverb, Lime and stone will make a wall, if one be hand, yet if the other be
yielding, there may be joining, and good may be done, not else.



6ly. Pride causes every man to desire to be taken notice of What, shall such a
man as I? of such parts, such approved abilities, so endued by God to do some
eminent service, be laid aside, and no body regard me? I must set upon some
notable work, something that may draw the eye of observance upon me. I have
read of a young man, Interrogatus cur hoc egerit, respondit, ut qui bonis non
poterit, vel malis innotesceret.
who set Diana's Temple on fire, and being asked the reason, he said, That he
might have a name, that the people might talk of him. Because he could not be
famous by doing good, he would by doing evil. Proud spirits will venture the
setting the Temple of God, yea Church and State on fire, Difficile est cum
praestare caeteris concupieris servare equitatem. M. Tul. li. 1. offic.
that they may have a name, whatsoever they do or suffer; to get a name they
will rather venture, then dye in obscurity, that of all things they cannot bear.

7. A proud man would have others under him; and others being proud too, would
have him under them; he would have others yield to him, and others would have
him yield to them, where will the agreement then begin? What is that Romans
between Sylla and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, were they not from hence? It is
hard for men in great places, and of great spirits, to accord long. Melancthon
in his Comment upon Prove. 13. 10. says concerning such men, there was wont to
be this Proverb, Duo montes non miscentur, Two mountains will not mix together.

8ly. A proud man makes his will to be the rule of his actions, though there be
nothing else but pride, and in the Hebrew it is (...) Dabit jurgium, give
contention, if there be no cause given, it will make it.

Now let every man look into his own heart, and see what pride has been, and
still is there, and be humbled before the Lord for this. All you contentious,
froward, quarrelsome people, you are charged this day from God to be men and
women of proud spirits, and what evil there is in our sadd divisions, that
pride in your bosom is a great cause of. Saint Paul did beat down his body,
left after he had preached to others, he should become a reprobate. Let us all,
and especially Ministers, labor to beat down our spirits, lest after all our
profession and glorious shows, we at last become Reprobates, at least such as
God may cast out for the present in this world, taking no delight in making use
of; what in such times as these are to have hearts swollen and lift up in pride?
God is now about the staining the pride of the earth. How unseasonable and
dangerous is it for a Mariner to have his topsails up, and all spread in a
violent storm? it is time then to pull down all, lest he be sunck
irrecoverably. The point of a needle will let the wind out of a bladder, and
shall not the swords of God, the swords of War and Plague, that have got so
deep into our bowels, let out the windy pride of our hearts? The haughtiness
of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord himself will be exalted. The Lord
humble us, that he may reconcile us, not only to himself, but to one another.

CHAP. XVI.
Self-love, The 2. dividing distemper.
the second dividing distemper.
THis is near akin to the former: Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through
strife: Ver. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others: This is the cause of strife, because men look so much on
their own things. Many will have no peace, except their own party be followed;
Jehu-like, What have thou to do with peace? follow me. It is not Peace, but
Party that they mind. Maxima pars studiorum est studium partium: The greatest
part of their studies, is to study sides and parts. Luther upon Psalm. 127. has
a notable speech, Ego plane in ea opinione sum, Monarchias long diutius
duraturas, si Monarchae hoc ^num Pronomen [Ego] omisissent.
I am of that opinion, says he, that Monarchies would continue longer then
they do, were it not for that same litte Pronoun [Ego] that same [I] ( my
self.) Yea certainly could this same Self be but laid aside, all governments
and societies would not only continue longer, but flourish better.

Self-love is the cause of our divisions.

First, where this prevails, men love to take in all to themselves, but let out
nothing from themselves; this must needs divide societies in Church and State,
for they are Bodies; if

2ly. Those who are acted by self-love, have no common their actions, and of
his too. Thus the blustering wind of pride in men's hearts causes them to
justle one against another, and so to split themselves one upon another; as
where many ships lie together, a violent wind breaking their Anchor-cables,
causes them to dash one upon another, and so to make shipwreck even in the
Haven.



Hab. 2. 5. The proud man is as he that transgresses by wine; and Drunkards
you know are quarrelsome. Wonder not at an absurd thing in a proud man, for
pride makes him drunk. Prove. 13. 10. Proud men who cause contention, (...).
are opposed to the well advised, But with the well advised (cum consultis) is
wisdom. The Sept. reads it, The wise are such at know themselves, but the
proud do not.

Psalm. 19. 14. Deliver me from presumptuous sins, a superbis, so some, Ab
insolentibus, so others, from proud, from insolent sins. Superbus fictor est
audacia and f^rtitudinis.
Pride makes insolent. A proud man, says the Philosopher, is a faigner of
boldness and valor, and therefore will foolishly venture upon any thing.
Arist. E^h, l. 3. c. 8.


12. If there is any thing to be done that is conceived to be mean and low, a
proud man will seek to put it upon others,

13. If there be any good success in any thing, then pride

14. One proud man thinks himself the only worthy man

Lastly, one proud man is very discerning in the discovery Boniface the second,
Bishop of Rome, he says of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and of the rest of
those who were present at the sixth Council of Carthage, that through the
instigation of the Devil, they swelled with pride against the Roman Church, he
means against the supremacy of it, for it was spoken upon the submission of
Eulalius Bishop of Carthage, to the Chair of Rome. Behold the proud Bishop of
Rome, who would have all the pre-eminence himself, swells with pride against
the pride of others.

Here we see what a makebate Pride is; That which Tertullus said to Felix,
Act. 24. 2. is true of Humility, By thee we enjoy great quietness; but the
contrary is as true of Pride, By thee are made woeful divisions, by thee we
suffer miserable disturbance. Though there be no occasion of quarrel, yet pride
will make some; only by pride comes contention, as before, Pro. 13. 10. good;
but there being a principle of Self within, like the sap in the board, when
they began to feel heat, some difficulties rising, they warp^d to their own
ends, and divided from those they were employed with. Men's private ends are
narrow, they cannot drive on them, but they will meet with one another, and
justle one another, quarrel, contend, and fight for the way* as Car-men do
when they meet in narrow streets, and Boat-men in narrow passages. If we had
public ends, our way would be broad enough, Quicquid est hujusmodi in quo non
possunt plures excellere, in eo plerumque sit tanta cententio, ut difficillimum
sit sanctam fervari societatem M. Tul. lib. o^^ic.
we might to on peaceably and comfortably without, without prejudice to one
another. If a man lived alone, then he might go on quietly in his way, only
God would meet him in it; but seeing men live in the world amongst others, they
must consider, that if they will drive on their own designs, and work their own
end, other men have designs and ends to drive on and work as well as they: it
is therefore impossible but you will cross and be crossed, you will vex and
fret at others, and others will vex and fret at you. Whatsoever is such, says
Tullie, wherein many cannot excel, in that there is for the most part such
contention, as society can hardly be kept entire.

Nero being abominably filthy, would not believe there was any chaste man in the
world: whatsoever evil he does, he thinks all men if they had the like
opportunity, would do the same; if they have plots to fetch about their own
ends, they think every man is plotting too.

Omne affectatum odiosum: as vermin are odious, because they only take into
themselves, consume thing, and are no way useful to any thing else. When any
thing does but smell of Self, it begins to be loathed, let a man have never
such excellent parts, do never such excellent things, yet if Self appears, the
loveliness and glory of all is gone; therefore those men that act self, they
had need be very cunning, to keep in and hide it; herein appears what a vile
thing Self is, that though in truth it acts all, and receives the incomes of
all, yet it dares not appear, but lies sculking under all the covers it can;
how vile* is this self, for which all must be done, which thou make thy God,
yet cannot in the least appear, but is odious and abominable to every one? yea
it is conscious to it self, that it is so, and therefore dares not appear; yet
the acting of it is very mischievous to all humane Societies.

Fifthly, There is this wickedness in self-love, that even Acts 26. 7. Unto
which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God night and day hope to
come, for which hopes sake I am accused of the Jews. The twelve Tribes, the
whole body of the Jews constantly grant the promise of the Resurrection, and
yet in malice to me they accuse me of this; or if not so, yet they are willing
that I should sink in this cause: Just as many Ministers were wont in their
Pulpits to commend highly the ways of Religion, to exhort men to grow up in
godliness, to be careful of all their ways; but when some of their
Parishioners did but practice in the particular, what themselves had commended
to them in the general, they would hate them, and persecute them for it. God
deliver us from such a spirit.

Sixthly, Self causes men who are in public employment Aristides and
Themistocles, who had many jarrings between themselves, but being both employed
in the work of the Commonwealth, in an Embassage, as they went over the
Mountains, one says thus to the other, Let us lay down all our private
grudges upon these mountains, at least till our business be over, and if
there shall be just cause when we have done our work for the Commonwealth, we
may then examine them. It were happy with us, if all men in public employment
in this Land would from their hearts speak thus to one another, but men are
selfish and cannot do it: Hence comes so many of our breaches and divisions.

Cor. 13. Love covers a multitude of faults to self-love. Selfish men see
little evil in themselves, al is ever well with them whatsoever others do; and
the more they cocker themselves, the more severe they are to others; but Christ
would have the quite contrary, severity to our selves, but indulgence to
others; those that are so, are the most peaceable men. Mat. 18. 8. If thy hand
or foot offend thee, cut them off, and ^ast them from thee; or if thine eye
offend thee, pluck it out. We must deal severely with our selves in those
things that are as near and dear to us as our hands and eyes; but Verse. 15.
When Christ gives order how we are to deal with our Brethren, he then requires
more moderation; If thy Brother offends thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone; If he will not hear thee, then take with thee one
or two more, and see what thou can do with him that way; yea, and after that
tell the Church, not presently cut him off, or cast him away, as you must do
when your hand or eye offends you; If men have any indulgence, let it be
exercised toward their Brethren; if they have any severity, let them exercise
that against themselves. I remember I have read of Pliny, that he says of
himself, That he so passed by other men's offenses, as if himself were the
greatest offender; and he was so ^evere against himself, as if he meant to
pardon none. If it were so with us, we should live at more peace one with
another then we do.

8. Selfishnesse causes reservednesse; great self-lovers never

You will say, These were wont to be very entire friends, how came they to
break? what has either of them done? what unkindnesse has befalne them?

None at all, only that principle of Self was not so fully fed as it would
be; upon that they began to be reserved, and so strange, and at last quite fell
off from one another, from former love and friendship, and then every little
thing caused grudgings between them.

Ninthly, Self sets men's wits on work in all cunning craftiness,

10. When one is for Self in his ways, he teaches another at my first
acquaintance with him, and then my heart was let out to him fully, but now I
see every man is for himself, and why should not I be so too? and what then is
like to become of the public?

Surely this selfishnesse is very vile in the eyes of God; God has made us
members of a community, the Universe is maintained by union, therefore the
creatures will venture the destroying themselves in going contrary to their
natures, rather then there should not be union in the world; that which they do
in a natural way, we should do by the strength of reason, much more by grace.
Philosophers say there cannot be a vacuity in the world; The world could not
stand, but would be dissolved, if every part were not filled, because Nature
subsists by being one; if there were the least vacuity, then all things should
not be joined in one, there would not be a contiguity of one part with another.
This is the reason that water will ascend when the air is drawn out of a pipe,
to fill it; this is to prevent division in nature; O that we had but so much
naturalnesse in us, that when we see there is like to be any breach of union,
we would be willing to lay down our self ends, to venture our selves, to be any
thing in the world that is not sin, that we may help to a joining: O foolish
heart, that in such a time as this art selfish, when the danger is public! As
in a storm, when the Ship is in danger, if every Mariner should be busy about
his own Cabin, dressing and painting that, what infinite sottish folly were
it? and is it not our case? It were just with God to leave thee to thy self
hereafter, if thou will look so much to thy self now. Ezekiel. 22. 16. And thou
shall take thine inheritance in thy self in the sight of the Heathen, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord: This is in a way of threat, as appears if you
compare it with verse. 14, 15. Woe to us if God leaves us to our selves. I have
heard of a story of a fool being left in a chamber, and the door locked, and
all the people gone, he cries out at the window, Oh my self, my self, O my
self, nothing else came from him but O my self. Such fools have we amongst us
now, nothing but Self is in their thoughts, their hearts and endeavourt. The
Apostles complaint, Phil. 2. 21. may justly be ours, All seek their own, not
the things which are Jesus Christ's: Their own things, (...).
that is, says Chrysostom, their pleasure and their security, their temporal
commodities, their profits, their honors: So others, why are not the comforts,
the safeties, the honors of the Saints the things of Christ, does not Christ
own them? Are they not under his protection and care?

Ans. Yes, and he would own them more, if we owned them less; the more we deny
them, the more has he a care of them: we may by our giving them up to the
honor of Christ, make them to be amongst the number of his things, and then
they would be precious indeed: but by desiring them, using them, rejoicing in
them, in reference to our selves, Christ accounts them not amongst his things,
things of a higher nature are his things, the glory of his Father, the
propagation of the Gospel, the spiritual good of his people, and the things of
eternal life, they are his things; let us make his things ours, and he will
make our things his.

CHAP. XVIII.
The third Dividing Distemper, The 3. dividing distemper.
Envy.
Envy is a squint-eyed fool, Job 5. 2. Envy stays the silly one. Jam. 3.
14. If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts. Envy is a bitter
thing, and causes strife, and makes that bitter too: So verse. 16. Where envying
and strife is. Gal. 5. 20. Hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings. 1 Cor. 3. 3. There is among you envying, strife,
divisions. Envy made divisions between Angels and men; it was the fist sin,
not the first born of the Devil, but that which t^rned Angels into Devils. The
first heart-division amongst men was between Gain and Abel, and what caused it
but envy? Who can stand before envy? she is subtle, undermining, dares not
appear at the first: but if she cannot be satisfied with her under-works, then
she flings, ^ends, frets, and fights, uses violence, seeks to raise a contrary
faction, falls on any thing in the world so be it mischief may be done, let
become of Gods glory, of service to the public, of saving souls, rather then
that steem, respect and honor that otherwise might be had, should not be
obtained; all must come under, all must be serviceable to this base lust,
rather then the glory of an envious man must be eclipsed, God himself and his
blessed Truth must be darkened: O hideous wickedness and high impudence against
the God of Heaven! Envy divides in Counsels, in instruments, actions, in all
proceedings; she will make use of good to oppose that which is good; if she
cannot raise evil men to oppose good, she will seek to get good men to oppose;
she would make God contrary to himself, she would strike at God with his own
sword. Phil. 1. 15. Some preach Christ out of envy. As Envy makes use of good
for evil, so God makes use of this evil for good: Many seek to excel in
preaching, or otherwise, by this means; and says S. Paul, Howsoever I do
rejoice, and will rejoice. If Envy cannot reach others by imitation, she will
reach them by calumniation. Zoilus the common slanderer, being asked why he
spoke evil of such and such men? Because, says he, I can do no evil to them.
If there be any good done, that she seeks to blast, together with the
instruments of it; if any evil, that she rakes into, and feeds upon, like that
Bird Ibis in Africa, that eats Serpents. Luther says, envious men feed upon
the dung of other men; they are like flies, that love to be upon sores. Erasmus
tells of one, who collected all the lame defective verses in Homer, and passed
over all that were so excellent. When you see a man seeking to rake and gather
together all he can of any distempers, disorders, mistakes, miscarriages by
hear-sayes, letters, or any way, so be it he may fill up his dung-cart; and for
the good, the graces or gifts of God in men, those are laid aside, or slightly
passed over, if at all mentioned, it is with some dirt mingled: Surely this is
an envious man fitted for strife and debate, whom God permits to be an
affliction to his people, in raising up a spirit of strife and contention, and
causing divisions amongst them, like the Kite, who passes over fair Meadows,
and pleasant fields, not regarding them, till she meets with a carrion, there
she falls and fastens, now she is upon her prey where she would be: How pleasant
is it to some men to hear of, or find out evil in others whom they do not
love? To say no worse, you know how it has been an old practice, to seek to
get any thing by reports, or any other ways that might blast the professors of
Religion; and how glad were they? how did it please them at the heart if they
could meet with any thing that might serve their turn?

This is a very shameful distemper, some men will upon occasion confess they
fear other men, and others that they love not other men, or that they contemn
others, but no man will acknowledge that he envies others, there is too much
shame in this, to be owned by any. The impiety and wickedness is not less, it
is a monstrous wickedness for a man to complain of God, that he made the
world no better; and yet such wickedness there is in some men's hearts, but
what is it then to complain of, and quarrel with God, that he has made the
World, or any part of it so well? This the envious man does.

An envious man cannot endure to see others better then himself, or to have
more respect then himself. It is reported of Licinius an intimate familiar with
Constantine the Great, who also married his sister, but fell off to be a
desperate enemy against Christians, alleging this to be the reason, because in
their Assemblies they prayed for Constantine, and not for him. Envious men,
whether they deserve respect or no, yet if others have it, and not themselves,
they rage, and are mad.

There is no vice but has some kind of opposition to some other, as
covetousness to prodigality, etc. but Envy only opposes that which is good,
and all good, therefore there is nothing in it but evil, and an universal evil.
Gulielmus Parisiensis brings in Gregory, saying, That all the poison in the old
Serpent is in this sin, as if it had emptied it self of its poison, and
vomited it in this sin, so much venom there is in it.

Is it not a very evil thing, that in men's opposition against what they see
others desire, they should give this reason why it should not be suffered, Nemo
existimet Bonos de Ecclesia posse discedere: triticum non rapit ventus. Cipr.
de unitat. eccles.
because if it be, the greater part of the most godly people in all places will
join with it? This brings to mind what I have read in Ecclesiastical History:
in the Second Century, The Emperor Adrian would have build a Church for the
honor of Christ void of Images, because such was the custom of the
Christians; but his friends dissuaded him, saying, If he did so, all men would
forsake the Temples of the gods, and become Christians. I find in that learned
piece of Voetius, Desperata causa papatus, a notable story of Ray^erius a
Popish Inqui^^tor, he exclaims against the Waldenses, those poor men of Lio^s
(as he calls them) He says there was never any more pernicious Sect then that;
Sectae haereticorum ab ol^^ fuerunt multae, inter quas omnes quae sunt vel
fuerunt non est perniciosior quam pauperum de lugduno, ^ibus de causis; prima
quia diuturn^or a tempore Sylvestri, alij quidam dicunt a tempore Apostolorum;
secunda quia generalior, fere enim nulla terra est in qua haec ^ecta non
serpat; tertia, quod omnes aliae immanitate blasphemiarum in Deum horrorem
inducant, haec leouistarum magnam habet speciem pietatis, coram nominibus just
vivant, and been omnia de Deo credant, and omnes a^ticut^s qui in symbolo
cominentur, solum Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant. Voet. vesp. causa papa^us, l.
3. sect. 2. Toll invidiam, and quod meum est, habeo; toll invidiam and quod
tuum est, ego habe^. Aug. in Psalm. 136.
and I pray why? He gives 3. reasons; First, That it is very ancient; Some say
(says he) it has continued from the time of Sylvester; others, from the times
of the Apostles. Secondly, It is so general, there is scarce any Country but
this has got into it. Thirdly, whereas others are guilty of blasphemy against
God, upon which they are abhorred, these appear to be holy men, they live
justly, their belief of God is right, they believe all the Articles in the
Creed; We can find no fault with them either for their lives, or for their
Doctrine, only they are against the Church of Rome, in which the people are
ready to join with them. These are strange accusations; for do not they
themselves make all these the signs of the true Church? and yet are these poor
men so vile, because such things are found amongst them. Surely, it is Envy
that imbitters the spirits of men against others, because they see in them
those things which they cannot but acknowledge to be good, and herein the great
evil of Envy, that malignity of it, by which it causes such great contentions
does appear, they are angry they can find no evil in them, whereby they may
get advantage against them.

The holy Ghost say, that envy is rottenness to the bones; the same learned
man Guliel. Paris. applies this to such as are chief in Church and
Commonwealth, who are as it were the bones, the strength, the support of the
societies whereof they are; Envy, says he, is often found amongst them, and it
is rottenness to them. This vile sin has caused a rot in many men of eminent
abilities and places, who might otherwise have done much service for God and
his people in Church and Commonwealth: oh it is a michievous sin. Take away
envy, says Augustine, and what is mine, you have; take away envy, and what is
yours, I have. We read Acts 11. of Barnabas, that he was a good man, and fu^l
of the holy Ghost, and he was a man of a cleaving disposi^ion, of an uniting
temper, ver. 23. He exhorted them that with full purpose of heart they would
cleave to the Lord: This man was free from envy, for the Text says, when he
had seen the grace of God, he was glad: He rejoiced in, and blessed God for the
grace he saw in his Saints. Do you envy for my sake, says Moses? I would to God
all the people of the Lord did prophecy. Moses was a fit man for public
service, who was so void of envy; No men are so fit for public employment as
such who can bles God that he is pleased to make use of others as well as, yea
beyond themselves. It was a good speech of that gracious holy, old Disciple Mr.
Dod lately deceased, I would to God says he, I were the worst Minister in
England; not wishing himself worse then he was, but all Ministers better.

The fourth dividing Distemper, Passion. The 4. dividing distemper.

Prove. 29. 23. An angry man stirs up strife. Passion is so opposite to
Union, that Prove. 22. 24. the holy Ghost would have us make no friendship with
an angry man.

First, this fire of anger burns asunder the bands of union, Nebudhadnezzars
fire did the bands of the three Children. A froward heart car^^ not for any
relations. What makes divisions between husband and wife, brother and brother,
servants and Masters, and Mistresses, neighbor and neighbor, but passionate
forwardness?

Secondly, this fire burns asunder the bands by which men's Primum mobile, they
would set all the world on ^ire: If our lower affections, especially this of
Anger, be not kept in and ordered by Reason and Religion, they will set all on
^ire. Passion makes men and women to be lawless, boundless, careless.

Men know not what they do in their anger; this raises such a smoke, that they
cannot see their way; the more corrupt the heart is, the greater and the more
noisome is the smoke raised by this fire in the heart. Put fire to wet straw,
and filthy stuff, oh what a filthy smoke arises!

Lev. 13. 25. we read of a leprosy breaking out of a burning; seldom do men's
passions burn, but there is a leprosy breaking out of that burning, and what
union can there be with such? It froward people were dealt withal like the
Lepers, shut up from others, we should have more peace. Some men when once
their anger is got up, they will never have done, we can have no quiet with
them; this fire in them is like that of hell, unquenchable. The dog-dayes
continue with them all the year long. Seven devils can better agree in one Mary
Magdalen, then seven froward people in one family. If one should set the
Beakons on fire upon the landing of every Cock-boat, what continual
combustions and tumults would there be in the Land? Those men who upon every
trifle are all on a fire by their passions, and what in them lies set others on
fire, do exceedingly disturb the peace of those places where they live, those
societies of which they are. Their hot passions cause the Climate where they
live to be like the torrid Zone, too hot for any to live near them. Christ is
the Prince of Peace, and the Devil is the Prince of divisions. Hence that
expression of the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4. 27. Let not the sun go down upon your
wrath, neither give place to the devil: you are loath to give place to your
brother, you will say, What, shall I yield to him? you will not yield to him,
but you will yield to him that is worse, to the Devil. So you do when you
yield to wrath.

There are diverse other dividing distempers that we shall speak to; The week
after the victory at Naseby*
but for the present let us make use of the great mercy of God toward us that
yesterday we solemnized in a public Thanksgiving; let us see how we may
improve this glorious work of God for the closing of our spirits, the healing
our divisions. It calls to us aloud to join, oh let your hearts join. There are
12: Arguments in this great work of God, to persuade us to union.

First, there has appeared much of Gods presence in this I will praise thee O
Lord, for thou have done it, Ps. 52. 9. The Lord has appeared wonderfully, his
naked arm has been revealed, his right hand has become glorious in power.
Those who were present saw much of God in this work. They send to us to give
God the glory, and all the Country about sent still to tell us how much of God
they have seen in this.

But how is this an argument for us to unite?

Suppose children or servants were wrangling one with another, Answ.
were not this an argument to make them be quiet, Your Father is here? your Mr.
is come? will not all be whist presently? God is come amongst us, we may see
the face of God in what he has done for us, and shall we be quarrelling before
his face?

But 3. days before this great goodness of God, by special Humiliation set
apart to mourn under the heavy hand of God against us in delivering us up into
the hands of our enemies, as (through his mercy we have had a day of
Thanksgiving, to bless him for our deliverance from them) would not this sin
have been the matter of a great part of the comfession of all your Ministers?
Oh the divisions that are amongst us! Thou have dealt righteously with us. Our
wraths were up one against another, and just it is with thee O Lord to let out
the rage of the Adversary upon us; and shall we yet continue in that after a
mercy, which we have confessed might justly have prevented the mercy? shall we
still be guilty of that which our consciences tell us would have been the burden
of them, as the just ^ause of our misery, if the Lord had come against us in
his sore displeasure? God forbid. Let not that evil now be found in us, that
would have galled our consciences, if mercy had been denied us.

Ezekiel. 5. 3, 4. the Prophet was bid to bind up a few hairs in his skirt, which
was to signify a few of the people which were preserved from that common
calamity, but after these were cast into the fire, and fire came forth from
these to all the house of Israel. Polanus upon the place has this note, that
grievous evils may come upon those who have been preserved from former common
miseries, and those who for a while have been preserved by their contentions
and divisions, may be the cause of woeful evil to others. God forbid that this
Text should be fulfilled in us. Let not a fire come from us, who yet are so
graciously preserved, to devour the house of Israel.



to further it, to the uttermost we can; let us not exasperate the spirits of
one another in ways of strife and opposition, but let every one set his hand
and hand to this work, that he may be able to say. Oh Lord God, thou that
knowes^ the secrets of all hearts, know that upon this great mercy of thine,
my heart was so moved, that whatsoever I could possibly see to be thy will for
the furtherance of this great work of Reformation, and that I was able to do,
I did set my self to do it, and am resolved to spend my streng^h and life in
it. If every one did thus, oh what glory might God have from this mercy of his!

6ly. When the Lord comes to us with mercies, and such Mat. 18. 19. If two of
you shall agree on earth touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done
for them. Surely Praise requires agreement much more. Psalms out of tune are
harsh to the ear; disagreement of heart is much more to the Spirit of God.

7. Surely when God has done so much for us, it must be That we would lay
aside our divisions, our frowardness, that we would abandon our contentions
and strife, that we would put on the bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one
another; If any man has a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye, Col. 3. 12. And 1. Pet. 3. 4. A mee^e and a quiet spirit is in the
^ight of God of great price, it is much set by, (...). Psalm. 15. 17. The
sacrifice of God, that which is in stead of all sacrifices, is a broken spirit.
Our hearts have been broken one from another in our unhappy divisions, oh that
now they could break one toward another in love and tenderness! Here would be
a sacrifice more esteemed of God, then thousands of Rams, and ten thousand
Rivers of Oil: Loving mercy, and walking humbly is preferred above such
sacrifices, Micah 6. 8.



Sam. 11. 11, 12, 13. a notable experiment of the efficacy of mercy to sweeten
men's hearts. After Saul had slain the Ammonites, some of the bosterous spirits
would have had him to have slain those who formerly had rejected him; but mark
Saul's answer, ver. 13. There shall not a man be put to death this day: Why? For
this day the Lord has wrought salvation in Israel. Though Saul at another time
was a man of a harsh and cruel spirit, yet now mercy sweetens him; that which
he was one day by the sense of mercy, that should we be not only in the day of
our Thanksgiving, but in the course of our lives. When salvation came to the
house of Zacheus, O what a sweet temper was he in! Behold, half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have wronged any one, I restore fourfold.
Salvation is this day come to the Kingdom, O that all we had hearts to say, If
we have wronged any, we will restore; if we have wronged any in their names,
by word, or writing, any way, we will restore: Mercy and love calls for mercy
and love; if we were in a right tune, there would be a sympathy between the
bowels of God and ours; as in two Lures, if the string in one be wound up to be
answerable to the other, if you then strike one string, the other will move
though lying at a distance: Now Gods love, Gods bowels move, let our love, our
bowels move answerably.

owned us: Why should not we own our Brethren, notwithstanding their
infirmities? Why should our divisions cause u^ to call off one another, seeing
our divisions from God has not provoked him to cast us off?

11. Is it not in our desires, that this great Victory might

Lastly, we had need take heed of breaches, lest God should Jude, ver. 5. The
Lord saved the people out of the land of Egypt, yet afterward he destroyed them
that believed not; the Lord has granted us a great salvation from our Enemies,
who would have brought us into Egyptian bondage. We have been singing the song
of Moses, we have been praising God according to that, Apoc. 15. 3. but let us
take heed that yet God be not provoked against us, for we are not out of all
danger; as they by not believing, so we by not agreeing, but contending and
quarrelling may at l^st be destroyed. You know how the Lord of that servant to
whom 10000. talents were given, took it, that he should presently go to his
fellow servants who ought him but a hundred pence, and lay hands on him, and
take him by the throat, and say, Pay that thou owe, and cast him into prison,
Mat. 18. 28. If men be not mollified by this mercy, they will be hardened, they
will use their brethren worse then they did before, the rather, because they
would declare to all the world, that they make no such interpretation of this
mercy, as that God would have them have further tender regard toward, to seek
union and peace with, to bear with or yield unto their Brethren more then
before; it is not unlikely but temptation may be suggested to do some act the
more against them, either now or within a while, to wipe away any conceit of
any such an interpretation of this gracious work of God for us. But those who
are of gracious and peaceable spirits, should take the hint of this, and go to
all they know, who have been at distance one from another, of whom they may
have hope to do good, and seek to mollify their spirits, to know what it is
they have one against another, what prejudices, what hard thoughts have been
entertained by them, and by all means they are able to remove them, that so we
loving and delighting in one another, the Lord may love us, and delight in us,
and show mercy to us yet more and more.

CHAP. XIX.
The fifth Dividing Distemper (Rigidnesse;) The 5. dividing distemper.
the sixth, Rashness, the seventh, Wilfulness; the eighth, Inconstancy.
RIgid, harsh, sour, crabbed, rough-hewn spirits are unfit for union; there is
no sweetness, no amiableness, no pleasingnesse in them, they please themselves
in a rugged austereness, but are pleasing to none else in all their ways; they
will abate nothing of their own, nor yield any thing to others: this is against
the rule of the Apostle, Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. We must not please our selves, but
let every one please his Neighbor for his good to edification; and this,
according to the example of Christ, who pleased not himself. This is the duty
not of weak men only, who had need please others, because they have need of
others, but ver. 1. those that are strong ought not to please themselves, but
seek to please others: Men who are of austere spirits affecting a gravity which
turns to a dull, sullen, sternnesse, they think it to be the commendations of
the strength of their spirits, that they can carry themselves as they do
toward others, seeking altogether content to themselves without any
yeeldableness to others; no, that is but lightness and weakness in men, they
are of a more staid and strong temper then to do so: These men by their wisdom
do very much sin against the wisdom of the holy Ghost in this Scripture; yea,
and against the example of Jesus Christ, who as in his whole course manifested
tenderness, gentleness, affableness, amiableness toward weak ones, who were
infinitely beneath him, and here is set forth unto us to be one who pleased not
himself, far from this rigid harsh temper: Those swords are not of the best
tempered metal who will not bend but stand stiff, but such as yield and bend
with most ease, and stand straight again; neither are those dispositions the
best, who are the stiffest; but such as are most yeeldable, and yet stand
straight too. This harsh and rigid spirit makes men's gifts and graces to be
very unuseful. When Plato saw Xenocrates of an austere rigid temper, he advised
him to sacrifice to the Gra^es, that he might have more mildness, fearing that
otherwise his parts and learning would be unprofitable. The Jews observe upon
Exo. 25. 3. That no Iron was in the stuff of the Tabernable; rigid iron
spirits are very unfit for Church work. Levit. 17. 7. They shall no more
sacrifice to Devils: (...)
The word translated Devils, signifies rough ones; Devils had their names from
thence; this is the name of a Satyr, Isa. 34. 14. The rough one. The Spirit of
God is a Dove-like sweet spirit, but the spirit of the Devil is a rough harsh
spirit, the spirit of a Satyr. Prove. 11. 17. He that is cruel, troubles his
own flesh. That word here translated cruel, the Septuagint elsewhere
translates it by a word that signifies rigid, stiff, (...), Jer. 30. 14. Men
of such tempers are very troublesome to themselves, to their families, to all
with whom they converse: If a Smith would join two pieces of iron, he must
first file them, or beat them smooth: If the Joyner would join two pieces of
wood, he must plain them: Except our spirits be filed, beaten smooth, or
plained, they are unfit for joining.

The sixth dividing Distemper, The 6. dividing distemper.
Rashness.
ACts 19. 36. Ye ought to be quiet, and do nothing rashly. Doing things rashly,
and quietness, are opposed.

1. Rashness makes men engage themselves suddenly in business, before they
have examined it well: This causes much trouble, for if a man be engaged he
lies under a temptation to go on in it: As 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. When the man of God
came to Amaziah, to take him off from a busin^sse he was engaged in; O but says
he, what shall I do for the hundred Talents I have given out already? thus many
answer to the truth of God that would take them off from what they are engaged
in, but what shall I do for my credit that lies engaged?

2ly. Rashness causes men suddenly to provoke others; whereas did they
consider what ill consequences might come of it, they would forbear. Rash men
quickly take hold of the sword of Justice to hack and hew; they think that what
they do is according to reason: but they do not wisely weigh things in the
balance of Justice. Remember, Justice (...) a Balance as well as a Sword.
Prove. 29. 11. A fool utters all his mind. fa^uus. (...) subita, repent.
The Sept. translate it (...), utters all his anger. Rash fools by uttering
their anger, suddenly cause great stir and trouble where ever they come. The
Hebrew word that signifies a fool, and that which signifies suddenly, rashly,
is from the same root.

3ly. When peace sometimes is even concluded, and there is great joy in hope of
a comfortable agreement, rashness will suddenly break it without any due
consideration.

O that that promise Isa. 52. 4. were fulfilled among us. The heart of the rash
shall understand knowledge. Rash men think they presently understand all that
is knowable in such a busisinesse, and thence presume to make sudden
determinations; but as overhasty digestion causes wind, and brings much
trouble to the body; so overhasty resolutions to men's spirits and to societies.

The seventh Dividing Distemper, Wilfulness.
I Think I may say in most men, Will is the axletree, lust and passions are the
wheels, whereupon almost all their actions are carried: Where there is much
will, though the thing be little about which men contend, yet the opposition
may be great; as a little stone thrown with a strong arm, may take deep
impression. It is a dangerous thing to have men's wills engaged in matters of
difference, it is easier to deal with twenty men's reasons, then with one man's
will: A man of a wilful stout spirit, stands as a stake in the midst of a
steam, lets all pass by him, but he stands where he was; What hope can there
be of union, where there will be no yielding? one man's will raises another,
set will to will they may dash one against another, but not like to close, to
get into one another. A wilful man thinks it is beneath a wise man to alter his
way; yea, it may be he thinks it a dishonor to the truth, that both he, his
profession, and the honor of God shall suffer by it; when a stubborn
self-willednes is taken for a right constancy and setlednesse, it is very
strong in men; but let us take heed of this, it is no matter though we go back
from our former assertions, so long as we go forward to the truth. Luther was
called an Apostate; I am so, says he, but it is from error to truth. Many
times stoutnesse of spirit comes from weakness rather then strength; there is
not always the greatest strength of judgment where there is the greatest
strength of will: As a man's judgment that is without prejudice is very strong,
so a man's prejudice that is without judgment is as strong: The dullest horses
are not always the most easily reigned. I know and am persuaded, says the
Apostle, Romans 14. 14. many men are persuaded before they know; those who are
persuaded before they know, will not be persuaded to know. Men's wills will not
suffer their understandings to consider; if they do consider, they will not
suffer them to be convinced; if they be convinced, they will not suffer them to
acknowledge that they are convinced.

It is dishonest for a man not to give in his Bond when the debt is paid; so
for a man not to acknowledge himself convinced, but stand out against the
truth, though his conscience tells him it is made clear to him. Let men lay down
their wills, and there will be no hell, says Bernard: So say I, Cesset propria
voluntas, and non erit infernum. Bern. ser. 3. de Resur.
take away men's wills, and contentions will cease. Scaliger tells us, the nature
of some kind of Amber is such, that it will draw to it self all kind of stalks
of any herb, except Basiliske, an Herb called Capitalis, because it makes men
heady, filling their brains with black exhalations: Scalig. excert. 140. number.
12.
Thus those who by the fumes of their corrupt wills, are grown headstrong, will
not be drawn by that which draws others.

But this charging men of wilfulness is presently catched hold of, in an
abusive way; if men will not yield to what some conceive to be right, presently
they are charged with wilfulness and stubbornness, they do not see because
they will not see; they are not convinced, because they will not. We who differ
so much from others in things that others think to be clear, should take heed
how we charge others of wilfulness who differ from us: As it is dishonest not
to give in the bond when the debt is paid, so it is a cheat to require the bond
before the debt be satisfied: Men may think, and give out, they have done
enough to convince men, when indeed upon examination, it will be found to be
nothing, or far short of satisfying the reasons that are against it if they
were their own. But when a man may have peace in his conscience, that what he
holds or does, is not through wilfulness, but constancy of his love to the
truth, I shall speak to presently.

The eighth dividing Distemper, The 8. distemper.
Inconstancy.
IF a man had an art to change his face every day, to seem sometimes white,
sometimes black, sometimes ruddy, sometimes pale, sometimes hairy, sometimes
smooth, sometimes old, sometimes young, how unfit were such a man for society?
this which men cannot do in their faces, they do in the unconstancy of their
spirits: As our affections and determinations must not be like the Persian
Decrees, to admit of no alteration, so neither must they be such as the
Polonian laws are, which (they say) last but 3. days: When a thing is so brittle,
that it breaks as soon as you meddle with it, how can you make it join? there
must be some consistency in that which you would fasten to another thing; when
men's spirits are so fickle, that a man cannot tell where to find them, how can
there be a close? O how much are men now differing from themselves, in what
their thoughts of men and carriage toward them have been, though the men
concerning whom they thus differ remain the same they were, yea the same they
appeared to be long since, there was sweet agreement in affection, loving
embracements! rejoicing in the presence of one another, and yet nothing is
known in those from whom their hearts, countenances and ways are alienated,
etc. more then formerly was: not difference in judgment, that was known before:
Such a change of spirits and carriages in hodly men one toward another has
appeared, as never appeared in any age since the world began. A great deal of
stir there has been more then formerly, Adv. Haeres li. 3. tom. 2. epist
aduers. Antidic^marianitas.
and yet what are these men otherwise then they have bin many years since? Were
I to speak to wicked men, to charge them of the unconstancy of their spirits, I
would make use of that similitude I have out of Epiphanius, (...), etc.
who speaking of the Jews desiring the coming of the Messiah, but when he was
come, they hated him, They were (says he) in this like mad dogs, who first
glaver upon men, and then bite and devour them. But because I speak to many of
the Saints, I had rather use a softer expression, more suitable to the honor
that is due to godly men; I compare them in their unconstancy toward their
brethren which has caused so great division, to the sweetness of the, air in
a fair sunshine morning, oh how does it delight the traveller when he goes
forth ^ and truly such were the serene countenances of our brethren toward us,
but within a while the clouds over-cast, the sky looks lowering, gusts of wind
arise, yea thunderbolts of terrible words fly about our ears, and the
flashes of their anger strike upon our faces.

Tantae ne animis coelestibus irae. Unconstancy is evil, and a cause of
division: Stoutnesse is evil, and a cause of division: A man must not be one
thing one day, and another another day; not like a weathercock, carried up and
down with every wind; neither must he be wilful and stout, not like a rusty
lock that will not be stirred by any key. Now then, how shall we know when a
man is neither fickle nor stout? For except some rules of discerning be given,
this temptation may be before me, I must not be fickle, unsettled, and
unconstant, I will therefore stiffly stand to maintain what I have professed.

You may know whether your fickleness be avoided by true settled constancy of
spirit, Answ.
or by stoutnesse, by these five notes:

First, true constancy and setlednesse of spirit is got by much prayer and
humiliation before the Lord; How to know whether we avoid our fickleness by
true constancy, or by stoutness: five notes.
Establish me Lord with thy free spirit, unite my heart to fear thy Name. When
after thy heart-breakings and meltings, and heart-cryings and pourings forth,
Lord show me what thy will is in this thing, keep me from miscarrying, let me
not settle upon any error instead of the truth, but what is thy truth fasten
my soul in it, that what ever temptations come, I may never be taken off from
it. Tell God in Prayer what the thing is, and what has persuaded thy heart to
embrace it, open thy heart fully to God in all thy aims; and if by this means
the heart be fixed, now it is delivered from fickleness, and not fallen into
stoutnesse.

Pet. 3. 17, 18. Take heed ye fall not from your steadfastness, but grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Hearts stout
and wilful are dry and saplesse.



Many men are very stiff and wilful, unmovable when they have to deal with
men, they seem then to be the most confident men in the world; but God knows,
and their consciences know, when they solemnly set themselves in the presence
of God, and have the most real sight of God, and have to deal most
immediately with him, then they have ms-giving thoughts, they have fears that
things may not prove so sure as they bore others in hand they apprehended them
to be: But if Gods presence and thy dealings with him confirms thee in this,
thy conscience may give thee an assurance, that as thou art not fickle and
wavering, so not stout and wilful.





CHAP. XX.
The ninth dividing Distemper, The ninth distemper.
A spirit of jealousy. The tenth, A spirit of contention. The eleventh,
Covetousness. The twelfth, Falsenesse.
ENvy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 1 Timothy 6. 4. Strife and evil
surmisings are near of kin. If contentious men can get nothing against their
brethren, they will surmise there is something; if they can find nothing in
their actions to judge, they will judge their hearts; if there be nothing
above-board, they will think there may be something under-board; Justius est
occulta de manifestis praejudicare, quam manifesta de occultis praedamnaie.
Tert. Apol. c. 3.
and from thinking there may be something, they will think it is very likely
there is something; and from likely there is, they will conclude there is,
Surely there is some plot working. But this is against the law of Love, for it
thinks no evil; all the good that they see in their Brethren, is blasted by
their suspicion of evil. Love would teach us rather by what appears to judge the
best of what appears not, Quandoquidem ex scholasticis aulicus futurus es
praecepto mihi instruendus es ad omnem vitam utili, Hubnerus audire gestit,
Fidem Diabolorum tibi commendo (inquit) hoc tibi monitum semper in promptu
situm esto promissionibus aulicis credere quidem sed timide. Melch. Adam. in
vita Bucholceri.
then by what appears not to judge the worst of what appears. Suspicion is like
some jelly stuff that is got between the joints; if the bone be out of joint,
and any jelly be got in, though it be but a little soft stuff, it will hinder
the setting of the bone. I confess in these times, because we have been so
extremely deceived in those who have been used in public place, in whom we so
much confided, there is a great deal of reason that we should be very wary of
men, and believe (till we have very good grounds of confidence) with trembling.
I remember Melchior Adam in the life of Bucholcerus, tells of a witty counsel of
his to his friend Hubnerus, who being to go to the Court to teach the Prince
Electors children, at their parting, I will give you, says he, one profitable
rule for your whole life, he lissening what it should be: I commend (says he)
to you the faith of the Devils: At which Hubnerus wondering, Take heed (says
he) how you trust any at the Court, believe their promises but warily, but with
fear; you may fear they will never come to any thing. But in the mean time
while we are thus fearful of one another, while we cannot trust one another, we
cannot join one with another. I have read of Cambyses, he did but dream his
brother should be King of Persia, and he put him to death. Many amongst us do
but dream of men, Si morbo aliquo laboraret, liberaretur, masculum parreret; si
difficulter ante pariebat, facilem assequeretur partum, P. Fagius in Numb. c. 5.
with whom our hearts are not, that they have some plots working, and how do
our spirits work against them? Groundless jealousies arise from much baseness
in our own hearts. Those who have no principle of faithfulness in themselves,
are suspicious of every one; but as for those who suffer causelessly, in this
thing let them be of good comfort, God will reward them good for what evil
they suffer. We read Numb. 5. 28. that if a man were jealous of his wife, so
that he brought her to the trial by drinking the water of jealousy; if she
were clear, she should not only be freed from hurt by that water, but she
should conceive seed, if she went barren before, the Lord would recompense her
sorrow and trouble she suffered by her husbands suspicion of her. And Paulus
Fagius upon the place, says, the Jews had a tradition, not only that she
should conceive, but it should be a man-child; if she had any disease, she
should be freed; and if she brought forth before with difficulty, she should
bring forth now with ease. Let not men therefore who are of public use, having
their consciences clear, yet because they are under suspicion, throw off all in
an anger: Such a temptation many lie under, but let them know, this temptation
cannot prevail but upon the distemper of their hearts, the exceeding sinful
frowardness of their spirits; they should trust God with their names, their
esteem, their honor, and go on in their work. The only way to deliver
themselves from suspicion, is their constant industry and faithfulness in all
opportunities of service God puts into their hands, and with the more
quietness of spirit, with the less noise they go on, the sooner will the
suspicions they were under, wash off and vanish to nothing, God will make their
names break forth as the light; those weeds having no ground to take root, will
wither and dye away.

The tenth dividing Distemper, The tenth distemper.
A spirit of contention.
AS in some there is a strong inclination, a vehement impetus to whoredom,
which the Prophet calls a spirit of whoredom, so there is in others a vehement
strong disposition of heart to contention; these have a spirit of contention;
these are like Salamanders, who love, and live in the fire. They thirst after
the waters of Massah and Meribah, their temper is such, as if they drank no
other drink then wht was brewed of those waters; Contentions and strifes, that
are as tedious to other men as death, are their delight, they are most in their
element when they are over head and ears in them. A contentious spirit will
always find matter for contention. Prove. 26. 21. As coals to burning coals, and
wood to fire, so is a contentious man is kindle strife: they are ready to put
their hands to any strife they meet with: yet Prove. 26. 17. He that medleth
with strife belonging not to him, is like one that holds a dog by the cares.
Many men have no metal in any thing but contentions; like many jades who are
dull in travel, they have metal only to kick and to play jadish tricks.

If thou have any spirit, any zeal and courage, it is pity it should be laid
out in quarrels; reserve it for the cause of God, to strengthen thee in
contending for the truth and the public.

The eleventh Distemper, The 11. distemper.
Covetousness.
THis is the root of all evil, then of this; there is no greater plague to
friendship, Pestem majorem esse nullam in amicitiis, quam pecunia cupiditatem.
then desire of money, says Laelius apud Cicer. A covetous man is witty to
foresee ways of gain, and he is stiff in holding fast what may be for his
advantage. Yet know what a stir Demetrius and his fellows made in Ephesus when
their profit was endangered, they had rather set all in a tumult then let their
gain go. 1 Timothy 4. 5. Envy, strife, railings, etc. perverse disputings of men
of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness..
How will some object against men, and withdraw from them, deprive themselves of
the benefits of the gifts of God in them, of much good they have heretofore
acknowledged they have got by them, and all merely to save their purses, and
that in a poor pedling way? What a stir has this Meum and Tuum made in the
world? The sweetness of gain amongst men is like honey cast amongst Bears,
they will fight, rend and tear out one another throat for it. They that will
be eich, fall into temptations and a snare, and into many and hurtful lusts.
Cur hominios non obstruitis auro argentove? Hem Germana illa bestia pecuniam
non curat. Melch Adam. vita Lutheri.
1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. They pierce themselves and others too with many sorrows.

When divisions arose in Germany, upon Luthers Doctrine, men of base covetous
spirits, judging Luther by themselves, thought that Luther made all this stir
to get gain; Why therefore, says one, do you not stop the man's mouth with
gold or silver? Another answers, Oh, this German Beast cares not for money.

The twelfth dividing distemper, The 12. distemper.
Falsenesse.
NOthing more firmly unites and holds together the Commonwealth then fidelity,
Nulla res vehementius rempublicam continet, quam fides, Cicero.
says Cicero. Truth is a girdle. Stand therefore, having your loins girt with
truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. Truth binds, and Falseness loosen^. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
25. exhorts to put away lying, and every man to speak truth to his neighbor,
upon this ground, because we are members one of another. The Romans esteemed so
much of truth for uniting men into societies, that they built a Temple to it,
as to a Goddess; in which Temple all Leagues, Covenants, Truces, and important
bargains were made, which were so religiously observed, that whosoever broke
them, was held for a cursed, damned creature, unfit for humane society. Romans 1.
29. Full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity. A man were better be true
to false principles, then be false to true ones. Those who are false, are also
mischievous: they care not what mischief they do to any, so they may but uphold
themselves, and repair that credit which formerly they had, but now through
their base falsenesse is cracked; and if they have wronged any by their
falsnesse, they seek to keep such down, if not to ruin them, fearing lest
their falsenesse should hereafter be revenged: and if they cannot get them down
by force, they will seek to do it by adding yet more falsenesse, by flattering
them whom their hearts hate, and would gladly ruin. That Scripture, Prove. 26.
28. is very remarkable for this, A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted
by it; and a flattering mouth works ruin. Psalm. 72. 14. He shall deliver
their soul from deceit and violence. If men who are false cannot compass
their ends by deceit, they will seek to do it by violence: God has his time
to deliver his Saints from both. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

CHAP. XXI.
Dividing Practices. The 1. Dividing practice, the practice of the tongue.
The first, The Practice of the Tongue. The second, Needless Disputes.
PRovoking bitter language, is a great divider: An evil tongue in Scripture is
compared to swords, Arrows, Razors, to poison of Aspes, ^ire, yea to the fire
of hell, which sets all the world on fire, to wild beasts; it is an unruly
member that cannot be tamed. When a Philosopher saw two women of ill fame
talking together, Eo sermon Aspidem a vipera sumere venenum.
he said, By this speech the Aspe takes in poison from the Viper, which it
seems was a proverbiall speech in Tertullians time, he inveighing against
Marcion the Heretic, Let the Heretic, Definat nunc Haereticos a Judaeo
Aspis, quod aiunt, a vipera mutuare venenum.
says he, cease borrowing poison from the Jew, according to the Proverb, the
Aspe from the Viper.

Many men of moderate spirits, if let alone, yet meeting with men who tell them
stories, and speak ill of those men that heretofore they had a good opinion of,
yet now before they have examined what the truth is, Tertul. contra Marcion,
lib. 3. cap. 8.
there is a venom got into their spirits before they are aware, their hearts
begin to be hot, and to rise against those men they hear such things of, their
thoughts are altered concerning them, their spirits alienated, breaches are
made, and men who are innocent wonder from whence all comes. O take heed of
these men of evil tongues, especially at your tables, for while you are warm
with mirth and good cheer, you are in greater danger to take down the
discourse of such as are at table with you, some poison may get into your
spirits, and you not think of it. Saint Augustine could not endure such guests
at his table; he caused therefore these two verses to be writ over his Table,
it were well they were over some of yours.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit ipse sibi.
To speak ill of the absent forbear.
Or else sit not at Table here.
But if men of evil tongues do so much hurt to men of moderate spirits, what
hurt do they do one to another? when two or three, or more of them meet
together, having all of them bitter spirits and evil tongues, what hot burning
venom do they infuse one into another, inflaming one another with malice?
That proverbiall speech, (...), is true of these men; if one Serpent did not
eat another, there would be no Dragon; by taking in one another poison, they
grow to be fiery Dragons, flying up and down from place to place with their
fiery stings.

Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues, for I have seen violence and strife
in the City, Psalm. 45. 9. The same letters in the Hebrew word that is to
signify verbum a word, (...)
is also for pestis, the plague; an evil tongue has the pestilence in it.

The whisperings of an evil tongue causes divisions, Romans 1. 29. Full of envy,
debate, malignity, whisperars, 2 Cor. 1^. 20. Debates, envyings, wraths,
strifes, whisperings. Many of fidling, paltry dispositions, go up and down
whispering, they speak very secretly to you, you must tell no body by any
means, and yet themselves tell it to a second, a third, a tenth, and any one
they meet with, with whom they desire to ingratiate themselves, and to every
body they speak, yet still they must tell no body* they do not love to be
brought forth as the authors, they tell you as a friend, what they hear; and
thus carrying tales up and down in a secret way, they do what in them lies to
blast the names of their Brethren; jealousies, suspicions, envyings,
displeasure, anger is raised, and the parties against whom all this is, wonder
what is the matter, they being no ways conscious to themselves of any
miscarriage toward such from whom they find such strange carriage; at last
some nibling whispering Mouse is found to be the cause of all.

These whispering Tale-bearers have such an art, as to cause what they thus
speak in secret to sink very deeply into men's hearts: They profess themselves
very sorry for what they tell you, but it is too true, and with a deep sigh
they mischief their Neighbor; Et sic cum vultu maesto procedit maledictio,
Bern. But let men take heed of them, for they strike, they wound them as much,
if not more, then they do those against whom they speak, for they know nothing
of it; and though they suffer, yet they do not sin; but you may not only be
troubled, and that causelessly (it may be) and for nothing lose the sweetness
of your love to your friend, and the enjoyment of his to you; but withal, you
may entertain sin into your heart, and so be wounded. Prove. 18. 8. The words
of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of
the belly, beware therefore of such. Prove. 20. 19. He that goes about as a
talebearer reveals secrets, therefore meddle not with him that flattereth
with his lips. He may come glavering, and fawning, and smiling to you, as if
he accounted you a special friend, and therefore would not tell every body;
but meddle not with him; if you shall hug and embrace him, you have received a
wound even in the innermost parts of the belly. Prove. 26. 20. Where no wood is
there the fire goes out; so where there is no talebearer the strife cease.

Prove. 16. 28. A whisperer seperateth chief friends. Those who have lived in
entire friendship many years, sometime by some whispering woman, have their
hearts very much estranged, the beauty of their friendship darkened, and the
sweetness of it almost lost.

Whispering tale-bearing tongues is the cause of strife, take heed of it: And
so is a censuring tongue: I can compare this to nothing better then to a
candle, whose tallow is mixed with brine, as soon as you light it, it spits up
and down the room: Thus many have salt brine in their spirits, which when they
get a little knowledge, they spit here and there in hard and bitter censures,
which are exceedingly provoking to the spirits of men; though the censures
should prove true, yet the mixture of so much salt brine in them, cannot but
exasperate and cause men's hearts to fret; but much more if they prove to be
mere slanderers. Jer. 9. 4. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust
ye not in any brother, for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with slanders; and c. 6 28. They are all grievous
revol^ers, walking with slanders; they are brass and iron, they are all
corrupters. And yet more if this be a raging tongue, Hos. 7. 16. Their Princes
shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongue. Discontents rise high,
first by too much liberty of the tongue, then higher, by the bitterness of it;
but when it comes to the rage of it, by this many times they rise so high, that
great men, yea Princes come to fall by the sword. There is a story in the
Tripartite History of a Christian who professed he had been seven and thirty
years learning that lesson, Psalm. 39. 1. I said I will take heed to my ways,
that I offend not in my tongue, and yet had not learned it. I fear there are
many amongst us who have been Professors these seven and thirty years, and
yet have not learned this lesson; notwithstanding the Scripture says, If a man
bridleth not his tongue, he deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is in
vain, James 1. 26.

The second dividing practice, Needless Disputes. The 2. dividing practice,
needless disputes.

WHen men have got a little knowledge, they think it a fine thing to be
arguing and disputing in matters of Religion: unnecessary disputes are their
necessary practice, for otherwise they shall be accounted as no body, if they
have not something to object against almost every thing, but in this way of
theirs, they shall be accounted knowing men, men who have an insight into
things, who understand more then ordinary men do: hence they turn all their
Religion into disputes, and by them they grow giddie. Wine is good when it goes
to the heart to cheer it, but when it fumes all up into the head, it makes it
giddy. Knowledge is good when the strength of it gets to the heart to comfort
it, there to breed good spirits, for the strengthening it in the ways of
holiness; but when it flies up all into the head, it fills it with thousands
of phansies; it causes pride and giddiness. Disputes draw the best spirits
from the heart, by which it weakens it. It is a very ill sign in a man to have
a contradicting spirit, to get into a vein of disputing against any thing,
though it be good. I have read of Gregory Nazianzen, that he told his friends
that Julian would prove to be a notorious wicked man, he gave this reason,
Because be took such delight in disputing against that which was good*
Disputes are seldom without much heart-distemper; if they continue long, they
cause snarling one at another; and no marvel though those who snarle so
often, do bite at last. A man shows most parts in the matter of truth, but
most grace in the manner of handling it with reverence, holiness and modesty.
Romans 14. 1. Receive not the weak in faith to doubtful disputations. Here is a
direct injunction against those disputes I am speaking of. Let no man say every
truth is precious, the least truth is more worth then our lives, we must
contend for every truth.

The least truth is so precious, Answ.
that we must rather lose our lives, then deny it; you must do and suffer much
to maintain truth, but this in an orderly way.

First, you must be grounded in the maine Fundamentalls of Tim. 1. 4. Which
minister questions rather then edifying. To ask and discourse of questions
about the great things that concern thy soul, thy eternal estate, how thou
may live further to the honor of God, is good, when you meet together; to
confer one with another what God has done for your souls, to tell each other
the experiences of your own hearts, and Gods dealings with you, what
temptations ye meet with, and how God helps you against them; such things as
these would edify. But when your questions are about things that you are never
like to understand, and if you did understand, they little concern you, they
would not be helpful to you one whit in the ways of godliness, these the
holy Ghost would not have you spend your time in. Eccles. 7. 29. Man was made
upright and he has found out to himself many inventions, Miscuerit se
infinitis questionibus, so the old Latin reads it, he has mingled himself in
infinite questions. If we had but that great question more amongst us, What
shall we do to be saved? it would cause many unprofitable questions to
vanish. Never such ignorance came upon the Christian world, as in that age when
the Schoolmen were in the highest esteem; all Religion then was turned into
Questions, both the mystery and the power of godliness was lost. The things of
Religion are rather to be believed then disputed. We believe Fishermen, not
Logitians, Credimus piscatoribus, non Dialecticis. Ambr.
says Ambrose. The Devil at this day seeks to darken the glory of Religion
this way; he sees that in regard so much light has broke forth, he cannot get
men presently off it by profaneness, therefore he labors to eat out the
strength of it by busying them, and getting them to delight in multitudes of
questions, and that about things of lesser concernment.

1 Timothy 6. 4. He is proud, and knows nothing, but doting about questions,
and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmises,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth. These
men conceit they have more knowledge then other men, but the holy Ghost says
they know nothing; they cry out much of the truth, and they contend for the
truth, but the holy Ghost says they are destitute of the truth. 2 Timothy 2. 22,
23. Follow charity, peace, but foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing
that they do gender strifes, but the servant of the Lord must not strive. And
Titus 3. 8. 9. This is a faithful saying, these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works; these things are good and profitable unto men, but avoid
foolish questions, and Genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the
Law, for they are unprofitable and vain.

The question about the Law, whether a man be justified by it, or by free grace
in Christ, this is not one of those foolish questions and needless strivings,
this is a great question, this we are to contend for, our life is in it, but
there are other questions about the Law, which cause striving rather then
edifying, as whether the Law be a rule for our lives, as it was given by Moses;
That we are bound to do what is required in the Law, this is generally
acknowledged, as to love God, not worship Images, etc. but whether we be bound
to do it as it was the Law delivered by Moses upon Mount Sina, this question
troubles many men's heads; that we are bound to do the same things as they are
delivered by Christ in the hand of that Mediator, is acknowledged by any that
understand themselves in any measure. Now then let these two things be granted
about the Law; First, that we are not justified by it, but by the free grace of
God in Christ: Secondly, that what duties of holiness are set down in the Law,
we are bound to them by the most strong obligations: what need we contend
further about the Law? Let us be established in these two, and it will be
sufficient for our edifying; It is like when Paul wrote this Epistle to Titus,
the heads of the people were troubled about some such kind of questions about
the Law, as are amongst us; therefore says he, Avoid foolish questions, and
strivings about the Law. But now the questions about the Law are driven on to
such a dangerous issue, that we have cause not only to be careful to avoid
them, but even to tremble at the thought of them. It is now accounted a legal
thing against the grace of the Gospel to confess sin, to be humbled for sin,
to make conscience of duty, or to be troubled in conscience for neglect of it;
No, they thank God they are delivered from such things, in respect of God,
whether they sin or not it is all one: yea these things prevail with those who
have been forward in profession of Religion, who seemed to walk strictly, now
are grown loose. That says is easily wrought, which teaches men to believe
well of themselves, though their lives be ill. There is a mighty change in men's
spirits now from that which was heretofore; Times have been when any opinion
that tended to looseness, was presently distasted as unfavoury, and rejected
by such, who made profession of Religion.

Sleidan in the tenth book of his Commentaries, says, The Devil that sought
to do mischief at Munster was not a skillful Devil, but rude and simple,
because he sought to prevail by tempting men to looseness; whereas, says he,
if he had been a cunning Devil, he would rather have deceived by abstaining
from flesh, by abhorring Matrimony, by shows of wonderful lowliness of
mind, etc. he might sooner have taken men this way; but truly now the most
cunning Devil sees it to be the best way to attain his ends, to raise up and
foment opinions that ^end to the liberty of the flesh, so be it he can carry
them on under the color of magnifying free grace; he finds that these things
are exceeding suitable to men's spirits in these times, that they are taken in
by such who formerly appeared so conscientious, that he feared he should
never have been able to have prevailed with them; he never found a way like
to this to prevail with such men; yea, never a way like to this to choke the
Word, when it first begins to work upon the heart; he has blasted more young
seeming converts this way, then ever he did by any way since he was a Devil:
Heretofore the way was to stir up others to deride them for following the
Word, and for praying; now he has a way worth two of that, to make them to
deride others for their conscienciousnesse in following the Word and praying,
and this strengthened with a high persuasion, that hereby they are the great
magnifiers of the free grace of God in the Gospel, the only men who understand
the Gospel way. This Devil now looks upon himself and his fellows as simple
and foolish in all their former devices, here is an experiment beyond them all,
seeing this Christ must needs be magnified, he will magnify him too; seeing
the Gospel must go on, he will put it on too, he will find out a device
here, to strike at the practice, power, life of godliness, in a more secret
and prevailing way then ever formerly was done; it is like in this generation
the former principles of godliness will not be got out; but if this way
prevails still in proportion to what it has done, in a generation or two it is
like to bring general profaneness and licentiousness upon the face of the
Christian world more then any way of Satan ever did since the world began, for
here is a way to be loose and profane, and to satisfy Conscience too.

CHAP. XXII.
The third Dividing Practice, The 3. dividing practice.
Men no keeping within the bounds that God has set them.
FIrst, when men will be meddling with that whith concerns them not, that is
out of their sphere. 1 These. 4. 11. Study to be quiet, and do your own
business. Prove. 20. 31. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but
every fool will be wedling. Choler in the gall is useful to the body, but if
it overflow, the body grows into distemper presently; we may be all useful in
our places, if we keep to them, contenting our selves with the improvements of
our talents in them; thus both our selves and others may have quiet. When
Mannah was gathered and kept in that proportion God would have it, it was very
good; but when men must have more, and keep it longer then God would have them,
then it breeds worms. Thus it will be in all that we have, or do; let us keep
our proportion God sets us, and all will be well; but if we think to provide
better for our selves by going beyond our measure, worms are presently bred in
all.

But especially where men will not keep within their bounds in their power
over others; for what is all our contestation at this time? it is not about
men's stretching their power beyond their line both in State and Church? From
whence are our State-divisions, our Wars, but because Princes have been
persuaded their power was boundless? at least not to be kept within those
bounds the State says it ought to be. They think there is such a distance
between them and others, that the estates, liberties, lives of all men within
their country lie at their mercy; not considering how they come to be raised so
high: that what they have above others, is given to them by those above whom
they are. No man inheriteth more then was given to his forefathers, and so to
him, whereby they might see that they are not limited only by the laws of
God, but by the laws of men also, namely, The agreement between them and the
people when they are raised to such dignities. There is nothing weakens their
right more then the pleading it by conquest; Princes have little cause to thank
those who plead their right that way. The surest foundation for Princes to set
their feet on, is the agreement between the people and them, or their
progenitors; but if they will go beyond this agreement, what stirs, what
woeful disturbances do they make!

Secondly, if either they, or any Governors of the State, shall instead of
being helpful to the government of the Church, take it all from it into their
own hands, in this they go beyond those bounds Christ would have them; it is
by the Civil power that the Governors of the Church have the peaceable
exercise of what power Christ has given them, but they have not their power
from them. Civil authority cannot put any spiritual power into a man, or
company of men, which they had not before; it can only protect, encourage, and
further the exercise of that power that CHRIST has given. They are
inconsiderate men, Sed interca sunt homines inconsiderati, qui faciunt illos
nimis spirituales, hoc vitium passim regnat in Germania, in his etiam
regionibus nimium grassatur, and nunc sentimus quales fructus nascantur ex illa
radice quod scilicet principes and quicunque potiuntur imperio, putant se ita
spirituales esse, ut nullum ^it amplius ecclesiasticum regimen, and hoc
sacrilegium apud nos grassatur, quia non possunt metiri officium suum certis
and legitimis finibus.
says Calvin, who make Magistrates too spiritual; This evil, says he,
prevails in Germany, and in the Countries about us; we find what fruit
grows from this root, namely that those who are in power, think themselves so
spiritual, that there is no other ecclesiastical government; this sacrilege
comes in violently amongst us, because they cannot measure their office within
its due bounds.

And for Church Governors, if they would keep within their Limits, we might
enjoy much peace, if first they would assume to themselves no more power then
Christ has given them; Secondly, if they would not extend it over more
congregations then Christ has committed to them; Thirdly, if they would not
exercise it in more things then Christ would have them. Let us look a little
into these three, for the want of a right understanding in them has caused,
and may yet further cause much disturbance.

For the first. That Christ has appointed some to rule in his Church, and that
all the members of the Church are not in the office of ruling, is apparent in
Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Romans 12. 8, but that these Officers, preaching
Elders, or others, should so have the sole power of ruling as to do all in
their own Consistory Classis, or (whatsoever you may call their convening)
that the Church should have nothing to do with their acts of rule but to obey,
this is assuming to themselves power beyond what is given them; This has
brought tyranny into the Church, Calv. in Amos c. 7. ver. 13.
it has made the Church Officers to look upon the rest of the Church in a
contemptible way, as the common vulgar sort, men ignorant and weak, not at all
fit to meddle with matters of government, not so much as to take cognizance,
Consulo ut disciplinam quanto ocyu^ fieri poterit in vestras ecclesias
invchatis, nam si ab initio non recipiatur, cum homines fervent non facile cum
aliquod frigus obrepscrit admittetur periculum, aiunt imminere ne disciplinae
color ministri tyrannidem occupent, excommunicent pro libidine non attendunt,
ii ^omines nil a ministrorum tyrannide posse timeri, ubi evangelli regula
servatur in excludendis a fratrum societate ecclesiae consensu^ est adhi^endus,
cujus autorita^e si agatur, nemo de unius aut paucorum tyrannide ^ure poterit
conqueri. P. Mart. ep. 21.
or give any consent to what the Church Officers do; But whether they
understand or no whether they consent or dissent, it makes no matter, the
determinations of those in place must stand, their censures must be submitted
to.

Peter Martyr in an Epistle to the Ministers, and such as professed the faith
in Polonia, exhorts them to endeavor the establishing of Discipline in the
Church as soon as they could, while peoples hearts were heat with love to, and
desires after the Gospel, he tells them it will be harder to bring it in
afterward, when their hearts begin to grow more cold; and that they might not
think Discipline a small thing, he says, that those Churches cannot be said
to profess the Gospel truly nor solidly, which want it; he would have them
acknowledge it not to be the least part of Christian Religion, but must know
that the Gospel is neglected by such as shall put off from themselves such a
singular excellent portion of it. But says he, this will be the Objection,
Under the color of Discipline, the Ministers of the Church will tyrannize,
they will carry things according to their own minds.

To this he answers, Tyranny in the Ministers needs not be feared, where the
rule of the Gospel for censures is observed; for in casting out any who will
not be reclaimed, the consent of the Church must be had; and if it be done by
this authority, none can complain of the tyranny of a few.

Cyprian in his sixth Epistle professes his resolution to do nothing without
the counsel of the Elders, Statuerim nihil fine con^ilio vestro, and ^ine
consensu plebis agere. Cyp. ep. 6
and consent of the people. Our Brethren of Scotland in their opposition to the
Prelates, give very much to the people in the matter of Excommunication: It
pertains say they to the whole Church collectively taken to deny her
Christian communion to such wicked persons as add contumacie to their
disobedience, Part 3. cap. 8. digres. 4. l. 181.
therefore it pertains to the whole Church to excommunicate them. Dispute
against English Popish Ceremonies.
Again, It pertains to the whole Church to admit one into her communion,
therefore to the whole Church to cast one out of her communion. And a page or
two after, The Apostle writing to the whole Church of Corinth will have them
being gathered together, to deliver that incestuous person to Satan, therefore
every particular Church or Congregation has power to excommunicate. There they
give many arguments to prove, that the Apostle would not excommunicate by his
own authority alone, but by the authority of the Church, and that collectively
taken, (so they say) not the Ministers or Elders of the Church only.

Let no man say, this was the judgment but of one Minister, for at the
beginning of this Parliament, my self, together with a reverend Brother, asked
Master Henderson, two or three of the Ministers of Scotland being with him,
Whether we might not take that Book as the judgment of the most godly and able
of the Ministers of Scotland, for the matters of Church Discipline? They
answered, we might.

The second way of going beyond their limits, is their extending their power to
more Congregations then Christ has given them charge of. The chief
Church-controversie at this day is about this extent; I shall only show you
where the difference lies between one and the other in it. The Question is
this, Whether one that is set by Christ to take charge of a particular
Congregation, as a Pastor to feed them, by Word, Sacraments, and Rule, may keep
the Pastoral charge he has for Word and Sacraments to one Congregation, but
his charge for Rule shall extend together with others to an hundred
Congregations or more.

Some say that no Minister can have the charge of ruling over people in a large
extent then his charge over them for Word and Sacraments reaches; they think
that those people that can say to a Minister, That charge that Christ has
given you for Word and Sacraments, extends not to take care of our souls to
feed them, therefore you have no charge of our souls for ruling; if you think
you may, preach or administer Sacraments in an accidental arbitrary way only,
not as chalenging power over us for this, or looking upon us as those committed
to you, for whom you are to answer; then at the farthest you may exercise rule
over us but in this way.

But others hold this, That a Minister may answer to this people thus, I
confess I have indeed only such a particular Congregation to be my flock, and
although I being desired to help sometimes in another to preach or administer
Sacraments* yet I do it not as having the charge of their souls as being
Pastor to them: But as for that ruling power that Christ has given me, I
conceive by joining of it with others, it extends to hundreds of Congregations,
or more, according as our association shall be, so as we have not only liberty
to be helpful to those who have the special charge of the Congregations; but
we have the supreme ruling power in our hands, to challenge in the Name of
Christ, to exercise over these Congregations, as we shall see cause. I say, the
supreme power above what your Ministers or Elders in your particular
Congregations have; for though these Ministers and Elders of yours be admitted
to be members of our Court, yet if they all should be of a contrary mind from
us, in some matter that concerns your Congregation, we yet will judge and
determine, we will censure and exercise all kind of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in that congregation, as we see cause, though it may be not one of
us ever saw any of the faces of any of the men of your congregation before.
Here, I say, lies the great dividing controversy, which is right, which is
wrong is not my work to show; all I am to do, is but to show you what the
controversy is, about which there is so much dispute.

And though I determine not the case either way, yet I shall leave two
considerations to help you in your thoughts about it.

First, the extent of power of Jurisdiction must be by institution

Secondly, man naturally is of nothing more impatient then to shall be bound to
submit to. Now then here lies the division, on says his Charter does extend so
far; the other says, he does not find it so in the reading of it.

There is yet a further consideration of the stretching either Civil or
Ecclesiastical authority beyond their bounds, which has been, and may be the
cause of much division; that is, their challenging and excercising power in
things indifferent, beyond what God has given them; for the opening of which
we must know:

First, no man either in State or Church, has any authority given him by God,
to command any thing merely because he will; especially, when the things
concern the worship of God. Our Brethren of Scotland in their dispute against
English Popish Ceremonies, part 3. chap. 8. page 127. have this passage,
Princes have enjoined things pertaining to the worship of God, but those things
were the very same which Gods written Word had expressly commanded; when Princes
went beyond these limits and bounds, they took upon them to judge and command
more then God has put within the compass of their power: And page 136. of the
same Book they say, The Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 23. forbids us to be the
servants of men, that is, to do things for which we have no other warrant
beside the pleasure and will of men. This was the Doctrine in Tertullians time,
Iniquam excercetis dominationem, si ideo negatis licere quia vultis, non quia
debuit non licere, Tertul. Apol. advers. Gentes.
You exercise, says he, an unjust dominion over others, if you deny a thing
may be done, because you will, not because it ought not to be done.

It is only the Prerogative of God, of Jesus Christ, to command a thing
because they will.

God has appointed Civil Governors to be his Ministers for our good. Romans
13. Those things only which they can do in Gods Name as his Ministers, and
are for the good of a State, are the object about which their power is to be
exercised; they are not to require a thing because there is nothing against it,
but because this thing is for God: And Church Governors are to require only
such things as Christ requires, all the exercise of their power ought to be in
the Name of Christ, hence not because they will, or because nothing can be said
to the contrary.

In all they require of us, they must be able to say as Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 38.
giving rules about order and decency, If any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto
you are the Commandments of the Lord.

You will say, But are Governors always bound to show a reason of their will,
to those who are under them; or may not they obey except they know some good in
the thing, besides their doing the will of those who do command them?

Though no Governors may command but upon reason, Answ.
yet the Governors of State need not always discover the reasons of their
commands.

We may give up our Civil liberties so far as to be bound to yield to our
Governors commands, if we see nothing against what they command, but have
cause to suppose that they see some reason that we do not, which is not fit to
make known to us. This is grounded upon this reason, that there are Arcana
imperii, mysteries of State that are not fit for every man to know, the
secrecy of them conduces most to the good of the State: But it is otherwise in
the matters of the Church, which are spiritual, there are no such mysteries in
the Church, wherein any members of it can be required to be active, but it
concerns them to understand as well as to do. All the actions of the Church
as such must be done for spiritual edification; now a man cannot do a thing
for the edifying his soul, or the soul of another, but he must understand his
action and the rule of it; he must see it required by the Word, or otherwise he
cannot expect any spiritual efficacy in what he does; I may do a thing for a
civil good, wherein I may trust another man's reason, and this may be
sufficient to attain my end, the procuring of some good merely civil, but
this will never be able to reach to a spiritual good, I must see the reason,
the ground, the rule of the action my self; I must judge by the Word, that
this action at this time clothed with all its circumstances is by Christ
sitted for such a spiritual good that I aim at.

Besides, if things merely indifferent be enjoined, then is Christian liberty
violated. No, say some, Christian liberty is in the conscience, so long as a
man keeps his conscience free, the thing may be still indifferent to him in
regard of his conscience, though his practice be determined, and so Christian
liberty is preserved. This is the put off that the Prelaticall party made use
of against our Brethren of Scotland many years since, when they pleaded that
by their usurpation Christian liberty was taken from them.

To that answer of the Prelates, they thus reply: When the authority of the
Churches constitution is obtruded to bind and restrain the practice of
Christians in things indifferent, Dispute against English Popish ceremonies, p.
1. cap. 3. page 6, 7.
they are bereaved of their liberty, as well as if an opinion of necessity were
borne in upon their consciences. They urge that place, Colos. 2. 21. where the
Apostle gives instances, say they, of such humane ordinances as take away
Christian liberty; he says not, you must think that you may not touch, but
touch not; you must not practice, not be subject to such Ordinances; telling
us; That when the practice is restrained form touching, tasting, handling, by
the ordinance of men, then is Christian liberty spoiled, though conscience be
left free; if the outward man be brought in bondage, this makes up spiritual
thraldom ( say they) though there be no more.

And further, the Apostle gives these two Arguments against these things:

First, says he, they perish in the use; that is, there is no good comes of
them.

It may be you will say, What hurt is there in them? That is not enough, says
the Apostle, to justify them, though there should be no hurt in them, yet
seeing they perish in the use, seeing there comes no good by them, you must not
do them: But what if they shall be commanded by authority? may we not do
them then? No, says the Apostle, that is another argument against them; they
are after the commandments and doctrine of men; if it be a mere ordinance of
man, and there be no other reason in the thing, but because man enjoynes it in
the Church, you are not to do it. Yea, in some respect we have not so much
liberty in things indifferent, if they be enjoined by men, as we had before.
This is thought to be a very strange assertion by some; but consider this one
thing, and it will not appear so: Though I might do such a thing before, yet
if man shall take upon him this authority to command, merely because of his
will and pleasure, if I now obey I am in danger to edify him, to strengthen
him in his sin; he challenges this authority, and I seem to yield it to him,
certainly he is strengthened in it by my subjection, except I do this at least
profess against any such authority of man granted by Jesus Christ.

But say some, If you take from Governors power to command things indifferent,
you take away all their power; for things necessary are required without them,
and things sinful they may not command.

Surely this conceit comes rather from tradition then from due consideration;
Answ.
for it is not power enough to see to the keeping of the commands of God, that
the Ordinances be kept pure, that there be justice between man and man, to
reward those which do well, and to punish the evil doers.

Yet thus far must be granted to the Officers of the Church, they have
authority from Christ to declare dogmatically, when a thing in it self
indifferent, yet by reason of some circumstances, comes to be a duty, and this
is to be regarded more then the declaration of any private brother or brethren,
for they do it by way of office in the name of Christ. This we find Acts 15.
the Apostles and Elders sent their Decrees, (...), their dogmaticall
determinations about some things in themselves indifferent, but as clothed
with those circumstances they call them things necessary; they determine them
to be done from the reason of the things, not from their authority; those
things were duties before they decreed them, and had been, had they never
decreed them. Even forbearing the eating of blood was a duty in case of
offense, though their decree had never been, and otherwise it was no duty,
notwithstanding their Decree, for afterward Paul says, that whatsoever is sold
in the shambles, they might eat of it, asking no question for conscience sake,
and every creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving. Thus we
have seen what the bounds are which God has set to men in authority, or at
least the controversy about them: Let them be careful to keep within their
bounds, as they are set to keep others within theirs: by this, Church and
State, may enjoy much peace.

CHAP. XXIII.
The fourth dividing practice, The 4. Dividing practice.
Gathering of Churches disorderly.
THis is cried out of as the greatest dividing practice of all: You may speak
of this or that to be dividing amongst us, say some, but above all things, this
Gathering of Churches is the great divider amongst us.

To this I shall speak in these six things.

First, it is not absolutely unlawful for a Church to be gathered out of a
Church. Voetius that learned Professor of Viretcht, Alioquin Christiani
collecti ex Judaeis and divulsi ab eorum Ecclesia antiquissima and celeberrima
essent schismatici, Voet. Despera a causa papatus, l. 3. sect. 8.
answering Jansenius, pleading against us for seperating from the Romish
Church, which was the most ancient and famous Church: No, says he, it is not
absolutely evil to separate from such a Church, for then the Christians
gathering themselves out of the Jewish Church were Schismatics, which is false.

Doctor Jackson, a Prelaticall man, in the 14. Chapter of his Treatise of the
Church, gives two reasons which he says are just and necessary, for which men
(whether few or many) may and ought to separate themselves from any visible
Church. First, because they are urged or constrained to profess or believe,
some points of doctrine, Two causes for which a man may separate from a visible
Church.
or to adventure upon some practices which are contrary to the rule of Faith or
love of God. Second, in case they are utterly deprived of freedom of
Conscience in professing what they inwardly believe, or bereft of some other
means, either altogether necessary, or most expedient to salvation. For which
latter he quotes, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye servants
of men. Although ( says he) we were persuaded that we could communicate with
such a Church, without evident danger of damnation, yet inasmuch as we cannot
communicate with it upon any better terms, then legal servants or bondslaves
do with their Masters, we are bound in conscience and religious discretion,
when lawful occasions and opportunities ore offered, to use our liberty, and
to seek our freedom rather then to live in bondage.

This doctrine was allowed of in the Bishops times. Now suppose upon these two
grounds there be a withdrawing from a Church, Christ does no where require his
people to live without Ordinances all their days, rather then they should
join themselves together into another body.

Secondly, yet where these causes are not, but men may communicate

Thirdly, Although you cannot for the present communicate

Fourthly, If things were in that ordered and settled way, as

Fifthly, All believers who live in a place together, ought from the examples
of any of the Churches, we read of in Scripture, for them to divide themselves
into little pieces. The way of Christ all along in Scripture is, that all the
Saints in such a place, who are not more then can join in one, should join
together and make but one Church; certainly this is more for the honor of
Christ's Body then the division of Saints in the same place into several little
societies, Christ stands much upon the union of his Saints in one, in all
ways, by all means that may be.



How can this practice be so very offensive, when almost all of you think it
lawful for a man for any commodiousnesse to remove from that Church of which
now he is, to join with another, sobeit he will remove his dwelling?

But these do not set up new Churches.

If a company of men who have estates, Answ.
should not be satisfied with that Ministry that belongs to that company that
now they are joined with, and should buy a piece of ground close to the place
where they were, and build upon it, and have leave of the State to make a new
Parish of those dwellings they build; who would blame them for gathering a
Church thus? Hence it is apparent, that withdrawing from our Churches, and
gathering other, is not according to the judgments of our Brethren against any
Church Principle; the offense that is, is only against some civil
constitution.

Parish Church, but his wife or Lady is not satisfied, but must go elsewhere.

If it be said, But this was in a time when things were in great confusion, not
so reformed as now they are, and we hope may further be.

Then it is not howsoever simply unlawful. Answ. 1.


2. It continues so still in many places of this City.

3. When you have reformed further, it may be men's consciences will be further
satisfied; you may reform so far as you may prevent much of what you now
complain so much of.

But though they came for their present relief, yet they did not bind
themselves one to another by Covenant, so as men now do.

If those who came constantly to your Ministry and Sacraments had professed
their willingness to join with you in all the Ordinances of Christ so far
as they knew, Answ.
and to walk accordingly, you might the more comfortably have administered
ordinances to them, but offensive to you it could not have been.

But their Covenant binds them so, Object.
that they cannot return back again, whatsoever reformation there be.

Do you pray for and endeavor the putting on Reformation to the uttermost,
Answ.
and then see what they will do; they have not yet declared themselves, that
they hold themselves so joined by any Covenant, that they may not join with
you; that what releife they have had for the present time, or what agreement
there has been amongst themselves, should hinder them from falling into that
way all along held forth in Scripture; namely, for all the Saints that live
together, to join in one, so far as possible they can.

But these who gather Churches thus, look upon all others who are not in that
way as Heathens; and what division must this needs make?

If this were so, Answ.
it were a sad dividing practice indeed; wicked men cannot endure to be thus
judged of, to be cast out as unworthy of Church Fellowship, much less can the
Saints be able to bear it, it must needs go nearer to their hearts. Aben
Ezra says, the Ammonites and Moabites burnt the books of the Law, because of
that place, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord, even to their tenth Generation. If an Ammonite or
Moabite cannot bear the being shut out of the Congregation of the Lord, Mald.
in Lam. 1, 2.
how can the Saints bear it? But God knows, and our Brethren may know, I hope
they shall know, that the thing is not so: O no, they look upon you as the
precious Saints of God, their dear Brethren in Jesus Christ, they bless God
for the graces they see in you, and rejoice in the hope of living eternally in
Heaven with you.

But why then will they not admit them to their communion?

In all worship that belongs to Saints, Answ.
as Saints they joyfully join with them; but they think there is some that
belongs to Saints as gathered in a Society under Officers, which cannot be
performed orderly but in that way; and they think it unreasonable, that any
should have the benefit of the privileges of the Church, and be under no
power, no discipline of any Church; that they should pick and choose
Ordinances, and yet live at liberty; so that if they walk disorderly, no
Church has any power to call them to an account. Suppose this to be a reason
why they admit not of some, this is another thing then the judging of them to
be Heathens.

Let me say further, I know none of these congregated Churches, either here or
in other parts, that ever refused any who appeared to be godly, from
communicating with them, if they did but acknowledge themselves to be members
of any Church elsewhere, though that Church were in a differing way from it in
respect of government.

You will say, What need that?

If it be to prevent looseness in men who will be under no government, Answ.
if it be because they judge Sacramental communion to be a Church-Ordinance;
or if it should be through a mistake, yet howsoever this must not be judged to
be the cause that they judge all, that do not join with them to be as
Heathens* this is the most uncharitable interpretation that can be.

CHAP. XXVI.
The fifth dividing practice, The 5. dividing practice.
The aspersing and seeking to blast the credits of those men whom the Lord uses
to be instruments of good.
THis may be done you know otherwise then by the tongue: This has been an old
dividing way, if we can blast the chief of a party, we shall do well enough
with the rest, wherefore let us make as ill interpretations of what they do as
possible we can; let us fasten as ill things upon them as we can have any
color or pretense for; let reports be raised, fomented and spread, whether
they be true or no, it makes no matter, something will stick. Fortiter
calumniare, aliquid haerebit.
Jer. 20. 10. Report, say they, and we will report it; do but raise a report,
let us be able to say we heard it, or there was a Letter writ about such a
thing, and we will boldly assert it and divulge it; the very apprehension of
it will prevail with many howsoever, these men shall not have that esteem in
the hearts of men so generally as heretofore they have had, and if we once get
down their esteem, we shall do well enough with their cause; if we can meet
with any bold spirit that will venture to encounter with them in this, that
will dare to take upon him to gather up, or make, or aggravate, or wrest
reports, or do any thing that may render them otherwise in the thoughts and
hearts of men then hitherto they have been, we shall break them, it is but one
or two venturing the hard thoughts of men to make an experiment, some may be
found fit for such a business, we will find out ways to encourage them; if
their hearts begin to fail, we will apply warm clothes to them, we will one
way or other support them; this must be done, or else whatsoever we do will be
to no purpose; something or other must be found to serve our ends in this. Does
Moses prevail too much in the hearts of the people? something must be found
against him; if we can find nothing against himself, yet we will find
something against his wife, She is an Ethiopian woman, Numb. 12 1. and yet who
was she but the daughter of Jethro, to whom he had been married many years
before? for an Ethiopian and a Midianitish woman are all one; but now we are
resolved to pick out whatever we can get information of, though it be in things
done many years since, when they were in the University, when they lived in
such or such places in times of old, it will serve our turn, we may fasten it
upon them, Prove. 16. 27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil, and in his lips there
is a burning fire: If he has nothing above ground, he will dig something up,
though it be what both by God and man has been buried long since.

David was a public instrument of God for much good, yet Psalm. 31. 1. He was
a reproach amongst his enemies, but especially amongst his neighbors. Nehemiah
raised up by God for great service, what dirt was cast upon him? he was accused
of sedition and Rebellion. Existimet omnis publica calamitatis, omnis popularis
in commodi Christianos esse causam; si Tyberis ascendit in maenia; si Nilus non
ascendit in arva, si coelum ^^etit, si terra movet, si fames, si lues, statim
ad Leones acclamatur, Tertul. Apol. advers. Gentes cap. 39.
Paul a pestilent fellow, he and his company with him turned the world upside
down; what evil can be devised, but was fastened upon the Christians in the
Primitive times? They charge them for being the cause of all their misery; if
they have ill weather, if the Rivers overflow, if Nilus does not flow, if there
be any earthquake, plague, famine, hale the Christians to the Lions: At their
meetings they said they made Thyestes suppers, who invited his brother to a
supper, and presented him a dish of his own flesh, a limb of his Son: Many
such abominable things were fastened upon them as are not fit to be named.
Tertul tells the Christians, that they were Fun^mbulones, like men upon a rope,
if they went one stepped awry, they were in danger to be undone by it, so
narrowly did their enemies watch them, and so maliciously did they aggravate
all their miscarriages. Thus the most eminent after his time, as Athanasius, he
was as miserably aspersed as ever poor man in this world, by the Arrian party,
they rendered him most odious to his friends, and strangers.

In the beginning of Reformation, the Waldenses were so aspersed, that the
story says of them, there was not one Arrow in the quiver of malice, but it
was drawn forth and shot at them. Luther, Tam magnus apud ami^os ut fere deus
factus; tam vituperatus ab inimicis, ut mirum fuit ne cum terra devoraret.
Calvin, Beza, Oecolampadius, Bullinger, and the rest are by some in writing
rendered the most black and vile pieces that the earth bore, both in their lives
and deaths. I find it recorded of Zuinglius, that he was a man so eminent, as
his friends made him almost a God; and so traduced by his enemies, that one
would wonder the earth did not open and swallow up such a man. The like
dealings did that worthy instrument of God Mr. Knox find, who in Queen Mary's
time fled with diverse others to Frankford; when men of vile contentious spirits
could not prevail against him any other way, they sought to asperse him, and
that so maliciously, as his life was in danger, accusing him to the Governors
of Frankford, for a Sermon preached in England; in which the Emperor was
concerned: The words were these, O England, England, if thou will obstinately
r^^urne into Egypt, that is, if thou contracting marriage, confederacy or
league with such Princes as do maintain and advance Idolatry, such as the
Emperor who is no less enemy to Christ then Nero; if for the pleasure of such
Princes, thou return to thine old abominations, then assuredly, O England,
thou shall be plagued and be brought to desolation, by the means of those
whose favor thou seek.

The same measure did those worthy men of God meet with, who sought after
Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days, they called Mr. Cartwright an
Anabaptist, and whatsoever evil there was in any opinion in those times, they
fastened it upon him. Mr. Vdall was accused for his life, and condemned to be
hanged for writing, That if the Parliament did not bring in the Government of
Christ, Christ himself would bring it in by some means that would make their
hearts to ache; or to that effect; meaning, as he expounded the words, Christ
would in some way of judgment make way to set up his own government in the
Land, but they wrested the words to a seditious sense, as if he had meant to
conspire to raise a force, and by violence of Arms to make the Parliament to
yield to that way of Government that he conceived to be Christ's, justly like
those accusations that are amongst us at this day, that if such kind of men
cannot have the liberty of their way granted to them, seeing they have, or hope
to have the Sword in their hand, they will take it to themselves, and defend
themselves also in it.

Only in this they go beyond the bitterness of the Prelaticall party, they
wrested what was said or written, these feign what was never said or written;
who are the firebrarnds amongst us, if not such men as these? as firebrarnds
plucked out of the fire, and now they seek to fire those who plucked them out;
but if this be too hot, what will you call them? what will you say of them? O
is this the fruit of all prayers for them, relief of them, respect to them!

Tanta ne vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?
Sed motas praesta^ componere lites.
Whosoever shall read that Book of Bancroft, entitled, Dangerous Positions,
published and practiced by those who pretend Reformation for the Presbyteriall
Government, shall find the whole subject of the book to be the blasting the
names of the most eminent godly Ministers that lived in those times, rendering
them to the State, as men not fit to be suffered in any Christian
Commonwealth. The State at that time being wholly for Prelacie, and
discountenancing that way of government these men sought for, their adversaries
thought they might be bold to take what liberty they pleased, to calumniate,
traduce, and to render them as vile as possible they might, there was no such
way to keep them down as this; in this, they being like those in the
Primitive times, who put the Christians into Bears and Tigers skins, and then
cast them to the Dogs to be devoured.

Let the servants of God but appear as they are, they will gain reverentiall
respect even from the multitude; but when these ugly things are put upon them,
they are prepared to be the objects of their fury.

I have read in Suetonius of the cruelty of Tiberius, Quia more tradito nefas
esset virgins strangulari vitiatae prius a carnifice, de in strangulatae.
Suet. Tybe^^us, number. 61.
who because it was unlawful that Virgins should not be put to death, caused
the Hangman to ravish them, and then to execute them: This is the cruelty of
some amongst us, they can do some men no hurt, but by offering violence first
to their names, and if they be defiled, then they think they may do any thing
with them. Of such as these are who make divisions amongst us in so ungodly a
way as this, all that I shall further say, is, The Lord rebuke them.

As for the Servants of God they commit their names and ways to God, knowing
that the Lord takes care of their names as well as their souls. If dirt be
cast upon a mud wall it sticks, but if upon Marble, it soon washes or moulders
away. God will in time justify his servants even in your consciences, by the
constancy of their peaceable carriage toward men, and their gracious holy
walking with their God; only take you heed that you involve not your selves in
the guilt of that wrong that is done unto them by readiness of your spirits to
close with, and take content in what evil you hear of those whom God accounts
faithful.

CHAP. XXV.
The sixth Dividing Practice, The 6. dividing practice.
the giving Characterizing names to men, names of Division.
THis is an old continued practice of the Devil, he has gained much by it,
and therefore is loath to leave it: The Orthodox of old were called Cornelians,
Cyrillians, by the followers of Novatus and Nestorius, Nullum criminis nomen
nisi nominis crimen. Tertul. Apo.
in time of Reformation Lutherans, Zuinglians, Hussites, Calvinists, Hugonots.
Tertullian says in his Apology for the Christians of his time, their crime
that they are persecuted for, has no name, that for which they are hated and
persecuted is the crime of their name; such men are cried out of under such a
name, but when things come to be examined, their name is all their crime.

And among other that of Schismaticke is not only a charactising, but a
stigmatizing name, whereby of old and lately many have had a brand of reproach
upon them, which upon examination will be found to be as it is applied by many,
nothing but a scaring word, taken up by such who understand little what Schism
is; I shall therefore endeavor to open this briefly. The word Schism comes of
the Greek (...), to rend, from thence (...), Scisura, a rent; It is amongst
Divines a Tecnologicall term. Schism in the Church, is much like to what
Sedition is in the State: When the Church grew up to the state and outward
glory of an earthly Kingdom, much use was made of this term, as a brand upon
those who would not subject to the yoakes of them who loved pre-eminence in the
Church.

But the true nature of Schism is this, An uncharitable, unjust, rash, violent
breaking from union with the Church, or the Members of it.

The Church is that from which the rent is: Heresy divides from the head,
Schism from the body, Apostasy from both. This rent is either from the whole
Church, or some part, if from the whole, it is Donatisme: Donatus denied any to
be of the body of Christ, to be believers, to be such as could be saved, except
that company that joined with him, and with those in his way. This is clear
from the whole discourse of Augustine against him, in that Tract De unitate
Ecclesiae. Wherefore those who censure such as deny communion with some
particular Congregations, as Donatists, discover either ignorance or malice, if
not both. Yet Schism may be, though the rent be but from some part of the
Church, but this must needs suppose union with that part: now there may be a
twofold union with the several parts of the Church, either that which all who
are to be accounted Christians have with them as they are of the same body
Catholic; or that which is by agreement to grow up together into a special
fellowship. The rending from any of these unions in such a way as before was
mentioned, is Schism. If we separate from, or refuse that communion with such
as are to be accounted Christians, that is due to all Christians, this is the
more gross Schism. Or if we thus break off that communion which is by
special agreement, which may be either when Christians join together in a
private way for mutual edification and comfort: or when they so join together
as to make up a distinct spiritual corporation, to set up the public
ordinances of Christ, which the Scripture calls a Church: Now though there may
be Schism in the breaking the former, yet the censure of Schism is especially
applied to the undue breaking off communion in the latter.

Now this implies an union by a Church agreement; where there never was such an
agreement, there cannot be the guilt of this Schism. Although they who dwell
within such a perambulation, such a compass of ground, should not join in
some ordinances with some within that compass, whatsoever offense there may be
against some civil constitution, yet the guilt of Schism they do not
contract upon themselves, for that union they never had cannot be broke.

But you will say, Yes, they are Schismatics, though they were never so
united, because they were bound to unite thus, and they have not.

It must be granted that CHRIST by what he ordered the Apostles to do, Answ.
would have all Christians dwelling together, so far as they can, to unite into
a body, but there is no such order of Christ, that all that dwell on the one
side of the street should be of one body, and all on the other of another body:
if they be more then can join into one spiritual corporation, they are bound
to join into several, so as they may best, to their own and other Churches
edification, and if they should fail in this, not joining in the best way that
possible might be, their sin is against that edification that Christ requires,
but not therefore the sin of Schism. Who ever they were that bounded Parishes,
surely they did not so bound them to the greatest edification of the Church
that possible might be, and yet who will say they were therefore Schismatics?
But suppose you have joined with any company of Saints in a spiritual
corporation, if you now shall uncharitably, unjustly, rashly, and violently
break from communion with them, then you contract the guilt of Schism upon you.

First, the separtion must be from want of charity. By faith especially we are
united to Christ our head, and by charity to one another. If a man appears
departing from any fundamental Article of our faith which joined him to his
Head, he is to be judged an Heretic. So by his appearing to depart from that
love by which he was joined in communion with the members, Schismatis peocatum
speciale vitium est, charitati oppositum. Aquin. 2. 2 q. 29. Art. 1. conclus.
he is to be judged a Schismatic. If his departure proceeds from his love of
God, his love to his Saints, and his own soul, yea his love to that very
Church from whence he departs, as sometimes it may, witnessing in a gracious
way against evil in it, he is far from the guilt of Schism. Schismatici
discissionibus iniquis a fraterna charitate dissiliunt. Aug. lib de Fide and
Symbolo, cap. 10.


If you say, love is a secret thing, we cannot judge of what is in the heart.

We cannot judge of it while it is in the heart, but when it appears we may.
You may know whether this or other principles act men or no by their behavior
in their breaking off communion. Where this is not, bitcernesse, pride
selfe-ends, will soon appear, and carry them beyond those principles
themselves profess they go upon. Answ.


Secondly, If the cause of leaving communion be just, then those who give this
cause are the Schismatics, not those who withdraw upon it. Thus the Governors
of the Church may be the Schismatics, and a private member withdrawing may be
free. Suarez a great Jesuit, in his disputation De Schismate, says in some
cases the Pope may be a Schismatic.

If Governors shall enjoyne any thing upon the Church, or any member, that is
sin, or if they shall mingle evil in the public worship, so that there can
be no joining with their worship, but there must be likewise a joining with
sin, in this case if any withdraw from them, Culpam schismatis non debere
conferri in eos qui desertores deserunt, sed in ipsos desertores qui Christum
and antiquam fidem deserum erant, Voet. desper. causa papatus, lib. 3. sect. 3.
they are the Schismatics, not those who withdraw, they are fugati, not
fugitivi. The blame of Schism, says learned Vo^tius, must not be upon those
who forsake such as have forsaken Christ and the ancient faith; but upon those
who have thus forsaken Christ and his truth.

When the second Council of Nice set up Image Worship, many thousands could
not yield to it, but were forced to withdraw, who was the Schismatic party
there, but the Synod and those who joined with it?

Yea further, if they impose that which is not necessary, (though in it self
not sinful) and will not bear with the weaknesses of such as think it to be
evil; if upon that they be forced to withdraw; in this the Governors are the
Schismatics also; the cause of the rent is in them, they ought in such things
to bear the weaknesses of their Brethren, and not imperiously to require of
them those things that there is no necessity of. If such things be sin to
their Brethrens consciences, if they will stand upon it to enjoyne them, they
lay a necessity upon them to withdraw from them. God will not lay the
Indictment of Schism thus, Such a one departed from the communion of such a
Church, because he would not do what was lawful to be done; but thus, You
imposed that upon your Brother which there was no necessity of, and would not
forbear him in what I would have you forbear him, but caused him by your
imperiousness and stiffenesse, to depart from communion with you. It is true,
says God, the thing might have been done, but it was not necessary, it was out
of conscience to me that they forbore, the weakness is theirs, but the Schism
is yours. Answ.


This has been generally received (though it be very false) that if a man
departs from a Church because he refuses to join with it in that which is not
in it self evil, that this man's departure is Schismatic: Certainly no;
Grant there is a weakness in his conscience, and so a sin, he should inform
his conscience better, but cannot; and this inability is not without sin, yet
this arises not to that height of sin, as to make that (which (supposing him
to be in this condition) is better for him to do then not to do) to become
Schism; especially if he be willing to hold communion with that Church still
in all acts of worship, wherein he can join without sinning against his
conscience, and continues brotherly love to them as Saints in all the
expressions thereof, as he is able.

The first great Schism in the Church, that was caused by the Governors of
it, was that which Victor Bishop of Rome, and those who joined with him caused,
by that imperious way of enjoining Easter to be kept at such a time which you
have mentioned, page 15, 16, 17. The story of which you have in Eusebius, lib.
5. cap. 23. Those who denied not the lawfulness of keeping Easter, yet have
generally accused Victor, and such who so violently urged this upon the
Churches as the cause of the Schism, not such who did not conform to what was
enjoined them, because the thing was not necessary, and there should have been
a forbearance in it: No Governor ought to urge such unnecessary things which
are but under suspicion by tender consciences, if they do, the Schism is
justly charged upon them.

Thirdly, where a man cannot have his soul edified in some

It is a good speech I find Chillingworth has, what the goodness of the man
was I know not, but in that Treatise of his, The Religion of Protestants a safe
way, Cap. 5. Part. 1. Sect. 61. answering that plea of his adversary against
Protestants, that communion with a Church not erring in fundamentals, upon
pretense of erring in other matters, must not be forsaken, he has this
excellent saying: If I did not find in my self a love and desire of all
profitable truth; if I did not put away idleness, and prejudice, and worldly
affections, and so examine to the bottom all my opinions of divine matters,
being prepared in mind to follow God, and God only which way soever he shall
lead me; if I did not hope that I either do or endeavor to do these things,
certainly I should have little hope of obtaining salvation.

When I consider of these causes of departing from a particular Church, that
speech of Tertullian concerning a Martyr comes into my mind, Non poena sed
causa facit Martyrem, Not the punishment but the cause makes a Martyr. So, Non
dec^ssio sed causa facit Schismaticum, Not the departing, but the cause makes a
Schismatic. Aquinas showing that wherein the vitiousnesse of Schism lies,
Sicut in rebus naturalibus id quod est per accidens non constituit speciem; ita
in rebus moralibus, id quod est intentum. Quod sequitur praeter intentionem,
est quasi per accidens, and ideo peccatum schismatic proprie est speciale
peccatum, ex eo quod intendit se ab unitate separare quam charitas facit, and
ideo proprie Schismatici dicuntur qui propria sponte and intention se ab
unitate Ecclesiae separant. Aquinas 2da. 2dae. Quest. 39. Art. 1. C.
says, As in natural things that which is by accident does not constitute the
species, so in moral, not that which is beside the intention for that is
accidental: therefore, says he, the sin of Schism is in that it intends to
separate from that unity which charity makes, and therefore Schismatics are
properly those who of their own accord and intention do separate themselves
from the unity of the Church.

The next thing considerable in the description of Schism; is the rashness of
the separation: though the cause of separating be just, yet the manner of it
may be schismatic, if done rashly or violently. Those who are joined in
communion with others, when they differ from those with whom they have
communion, they are bound to examine, try, to make use of all means they can
to satisfy their consciences in things they scruple: and if they cannot, yet
before they break off communion they are bound to seek by all means they can
for a redress of those things which after most serious examination appear
evil to them, they are bound to wait with much forbearance, and longsuffering.
And at last if there be a necessity of departing, they must not rend away with
violence, but show themselves willing and ready in the spirit of love and
meekness to open their cause, to show their reasons to the Church why they
cannot continue in that communion with them they formerly had, and desire that
they may peaceably and lovingly depart, seeing they cannot with peace of their
conscience and love to their souls continue with them, and that they may join
with some other Church, where they may enjoy peace and further edification.

Surely here is no Schism, this is no rending away, here is no violence used,
here is only a loving and peaceable secession; notwithstanding this, were it
not the pride, envy and frowardness of men's spirits, much love and peace might
continue amongst Christians and Churches: True indeed, if men can bear no
contradiction, no kind of blame of their ways, there must needs be trouble;
but then those who do contradict or blame, though they be in the wrong, yet if
it be through weakness, and carried with meekness, they are not so much the
cause of the trouble, as those who cannot bear this weakness of their
Brethren without frowardness and contention.

There are other names of division; the name of Puritan, what a divider has it
been? but that seeing it self ready to dye, divided it self into two, Round
head and Independent; these are now the opprobrious, discriminating, scornful
names of division amongst us: For the first, there is so much folly and
absurdity in it, that surely it will soon vanish of it self if you contemn
it; it is too low and contemptible for a Pulpit, or a Pen to meddle with: But
the other carries in the face of it an open defiance to all kind of government,
a monstrous kind of liberty for men to live as they list, and to be accountable
to none, whatsoever they hold or do: Certainly such kind of people as these,
are not to be suffered; shall I say in any Christian society? no not in any
humane society; if there be any such people as these, they are one of the most
monstrous kind of people that ever lived upon the face of the earth: How many
run away with the word, and cry out of men and their ways under this name
which they know not? How far those who are for the Congregationable way, are
from such an uncontrollable liberty, has been shown, Chap. 7. Page 41. I
shall add this one thing, of all kind of governments in the Church, that
which has this name fastened upon it is most opposite to the name of any in
that sense it is ordinarily taken, for there is no Church Government that holds
forth more means to reduce from error, or any miscarriage, then this does;
examine it with the Prelaticall or Presbyteriall Government, and you shall find
it; for first, in the Prelaticall Government, if once the Prelates determine
any case, you must there rest, there is no Church help for you, except you
will say it is in a Convocation, where we know they ruled both in the choice of
members, and ordering all things as they list. In the Presbyteriall way, if so
many associated Elders determine any case, it must in them receive the final
determination, you must rest in it, although the greater part of the Churches,
and the greater number of Elders in a Kingdom should be of another mind; for
if you rise to a National Assembly, there are not the twentieth part of Elders
of the Kingdom in it: But those who men call Independents say, that if any
thing be done by them that is offensive, not only those associated Elders, but
all or any Elders or Churches whatsoever may require account, may in the name
of Christ do all in effect, for the reducing of them, that those associated
Elders can do, still remembering that Church Power in one or the other, goes no
further then men's consciences; if men will not conscientiously regard what is
done to reduce them from evil, there is no help within the Church, but to
appeal to CHRIST; as for the external help by the Magistrate, that concerns
not the controversy about Church Government, and yet for subjection to that
Ordinance of God, the principles and profession of those you call Independents
leave as much to the Magistrate, as the principle or profession of those who
are Presbyteriall do, if not more. Toll ^am nominis crimen and nihil restat
nisi criminis nomen; Now take away the crime of the name, and there remains
nothing but the name of a crime.

CHAP. XXVI.
The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth dividing Practices.
The seventh, Whatsoever personal evil there is in any one who is in a
differing way from others, is cast upon all that are in that way.
THis you know was the practice of former times, whatsoever evil any forward
Professor was guilty of, that was cast upon all, they are all thus; Do you
not see that Hypocrites they are? whatsoever their shows be, yet if they have
opportunity they will be as vile as any men; enough may be found against the
best of them all, if they were narrowly watched; this is their way, they are a
company of dissemblers: Such kind of imputations are carried upon the
miscarriage of any one, upon all, on purpose to enrage the people against them:
We accounted this hard dealing heretofore, let us not now be guilty of such
things our selves.

Some such practice it is like there was amonst the Corinthians, when that
foul fact of the incestuous person brake forth, some of them were puffed up,
so the Apostle charge them; it is a very strange charge that any should be
puffed up upon such a thing as that; what was there in it to occasion puffing
up? The Answer is this, It is clear there were great divisions in Corinth,
some sided one way, some onother; now one of them who was of such a side, fell
into this foul and scandalous sin, upon that the other side thought they had
an advantage against the whole party, and this puffed them up; nay do you not
see what one of them has done? you may by him see what kind of men they are;
this made the whole party low in their eyes; they cast the contempt of this one
upon all that were associated with him in such a way differing from others:
This could not but widen the divisions amongst them.

It is an evil advantage that men take, if they see some very erroneous many
ways, and obnoxious in their lives, yet if these agree but in some one thing
with those whom themselves differ from; all the odium of these errors and
loose lives must be cast upon such as they thus agree with, in that one thing
though their consciences cannot but tell them, that those Brethren who are in a
differing way from them, do abominate such errourrs and looseness of life as
much as themselves.

After God used Luther to bring light into Germany, Vide Stanis^^um Reschium in
centur. Evang. sect.
there arose many Sects; Papists say, there were grown in the Church after
Luthers time, in one hundred years, two hundred and seventy Sects, whereas
from Christ's time to his, there cannot be reckoned above a hundred eighty one.
Now this was the practice of the Papists, that they might cast an odium upon
the Lutheran party, which they looked upon as standing most in their light;
whatsoever errors were held, or miscarriages of life appeared in any of these
Sects, all was cast upon the Lutheran party, upon this ground, because the
Lutherans and these sects agreed in this, that they were all against the
Papacy.

There are many amongst us, who contend for several ways, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Socinians, Separatists, those that are for the Congregationall
way, Seekers, with many others, they all agree in this, that they are against
the Prelacie; Do you now think it were a just thing for the Prelates to
gather together all the errors, opinions, and miscarriages in life, in all
these sorts of men, and cast the ignominy and odium of all upon our Brethren,
who contend for the Presbytery? if they should say, Look what vile opinions are
held by those who are against Episcopacie, how scandalously many of them live,
but they all concenter in this, they would have the Prelacie down, they are
enemies to Bishops: You would presently answer, What though they agree in this
one thing? yet such as are for the Presbytery, they are as much against the
errors and disorders of those who join with them in this one thing, as your
selves are.

We read Ier. 29. 26. Shemajah sent Letters to Zephaniah against Jeremiah;
mark the Argument he uses why Jeremiah should be dealt severely withal. The
Lord, says he to Zephaniah, has made thee Priest instead of Iehojadah. Why,
what then? where lies the force of his Argument, that Jeremiah must therefore
be punished? It lay here, Iehojadah had punished one Matthan an Idolatrous
Priest; therefore, says Shemajah, you must do as Iehojadah did; as if he
should say, they are both in one way, Jer. 1. 1.
This Jeremiah was a Priest, and so was Matthan; such kind of men must be
looked to, they are all alike. Matthan was odious to the people, they all said
he was not to be suffered, and they being in some things alike, therefore all
the evil which was found in Matthan, all the odium that was upon him, must be
cast upon Jeremiah. Certainly this is a very sinful, unjust, uncharitable
practice of men, (especially such as profess godliness) against their
brethren: it widens, heightens, and lengthens our divisions very much.

The eighth dividing practice is an innordinate cleaving to some, so as denying
due respect to others.
THis was the practice amongst the Corinthians, which caused great divisions
amongst them; some were of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Cephas. No question a
man may in his heart more reverence, and prize, and outwardly show more respect
to those whom God makes the greatest instruments of good ( ^ateris paribus)
then to others. David showed more respect to Nathan than to God; Nathan was by
far more intimate with him: The intimacy was such between them, that Nathan
thought it a very strange thing that David should do any thing about the
disposing of his Crown, and not make him acquainted with it. So Valentinean
the Emperor upon this ground honored Ambrose above any of the Bishops in his
time. Ethnici Philosophi hoc ambierunt, ut discipulos quos habuerunt suo
cognomine a reliquis distinguerent, ut aliqui Platonici, aliqui Pythagorici,
alii Epicurci vocarentur.
Such men as God is not pleased to make so isntrumental for good as others,
should not envy this; let them be willing that those should be honored whom
God honors: but yet people should take heed that they give not so much honor
to one, that they deny due respect to others; and Ministers and others in
public place should not entertain, much less seek for, or rejoice in any
honor or respect given to them, which they see detracts from that esteem and
countenance that is due to others.

Peter Martyr upon that place, 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5. observes, that Heathen
Philosophers were ambitious that their Disciples should receive denomination
from them: Christiani esse desierunt, qui Christi nomine omisso, humana and
externa vocabula indu^runt. Lactant. lib. 4. c* 30.
hence some were called Platonici, others Pythagorici, others Epicures, but
this should be abominated amongst Christians* Lanctantius has a notable speech
against this, Those (says he) cease to be Christians* who take upon them the
names of men, and are not called by the name of Christ.

Peter Martyr upon the forenamed place, Attamen Socrates visus est modestior
caeleris, quod se non faceret authorem doctrinae quam docebat ut qui diceret se
fimilem obstetricis quae parientibus opem ferret ita is existimavit suis
interrogationibus, juvenibus adesse ut scientias quas babu issent in animo, in
lucem exire faceret.
says of Secrates, that he was more modest then the rest, he refused to be
accounted the author of that learning he taught others, but said of himself,
that he was a but a Midwife to be helpful to the bringing forth of that,
which was in the minds of men before.

The weakness and folly of people in their inordinate giving or denying
respects, is often caused, but more ordinarily fomented and increased by the
pride and vanity of teachers, in seeking for, or at least in a pleasing
embracing such inordinate respects given to them, whereby others suffer much;
siding of parties is made, and more hurt comes to the public, then their
honors are worth a thousand times over: This evil many times comes of it,
that reason and truth from one man is little regarded, and error and weakness
from another man is greedily embraced, and stiffly maintained; whereas it should
be with Reason and Truth, as it is with money, one man's money in a market is as
good as another, so should one man's reason and truth spoken by him be as good
as another.

The ninth dividing practice. Because men cannot join in all things with
others, they will join in nothing.
SOme men are of such dividing dispositions, that if they be offended with a
man in any one thing, in hearing, or otherwise, they will go away in a tetchy
mood, resolving never to hear him more. You think you have liberty in any
froward mood to cast off that means of good which God offers to you, to refuse
to partake of such men's gifts and graces as you please; It may be your stomach
is so high and great on a sudden, or your spirit is fallen into such a sullen
humor, as you will not so much as go or send to him, to see if upon a serious
and quiet examination of things, you may not have satisfaction in what for the
present offends you. No, men's spirits are carried on with present rash heady
resolutions. I believe there was never such a kind of spirit prevailing
amongst such as profess godliness, since Christian Religion was in the world;
never did so many withdraw from hearing even those by whom they acknowledge God
has spoken to their hearts and that before they have gone to them, to impart
what it is that scruples them, to try whether they may not get some
satisfaction. Certainly if you have no need of the Word, the Word has no
need of you. You may easily express your discontents one to another; you may
easily say you are resolved you will never hear such an one any more, but you
cannot so easily answer this to Jesus Christ. When your weaknesses, the
prevailing of your distempers shall grate upon your consciences, this will be a
great aggravation of the evil of them, You neglected in a humorous way, and
selfe-willed resolution, those means that might have done your soul good, even
such as many hundred, if not thousands of souls bless God for all the days
of their lives, yea are now blessing God in heaven for. Heretofore you would
have been glad of that, which now you slight and reject; this is not from more
light or strength that you have now which you had not then, but from more
vanity, pride, and wantonness.

Others deny hearing, not from such a distempered spirit, but out of
tenderness, because they think the Minister is no true Minister of Christ,
because he had no true call, because he was ordained by the Prelates, etc. I
confess though for mine own part I never yet doubted of the lawfulness of the
call of many of the Ministers of the parishionall congregations in England,
though they had something superadded which was sinful, yet it did not nullify
what call they had by the Church, that communion of Saints, amongst whom they
exercised their Ministry, yet I do not think it the shortest way to convince
those which refuse to hear, to stand to prove to them the lawfulness of the
call of those Ministers whom they refuse to hear, but rather to make it out to
them, that though their call be not right to the Ministry, yet they have not
sufficient ground of withdrawing from hearing them. For they hold it is lawful
for a man to preach the Word as a gifted man, and that these men from whom they
withdraw are gifted and faithful, and preach excellent truths they deny not.

But they will say, If they did this as gifted men, it were another matter, but
they preach by virtue of their call.

The answer to that is, if they be acted by that principle, and therein
mistake, this is their personal sin, not the sin of those who join with
them in a good thing, which they do upon an ill ground. When I join with a
man in an action, I am to look to the action, and to the principle that I go
upon, but let him with whom I join look to the principle that he goes upon.

Your hearing a man does no way justify his call to the office of the
Ministry.

If a man does a thing that he may do by virtue of two relations or either of
them, it may be he thinks he stands in one of those relations which indeed he
does not, yet he does the action by virtue of it in his own thoughts, in this
he sins; but there is another relation wherein he stands, that is enough to
warrant the action that he does to be lawful. Now though he does not intend
the acting by this relation, the action may be sin to him, but not at all
sin to those who join with him in it. If he will go upon a false ground,
when he may go upon a true, let him look to it. I will join with him in that
action as warranted for him to do by virtue of his second relation, which it
may be he will not own himself.

Take an instance in some other thing, and the case perhaps will be more clear.

Giving alms is a work that a man may do either by virtue of Church office,
as a Deacon, or as a Christian whom God has blessed in his estate, or
betrusted with the distribution of what others betrust him with. Now suppose a
man is in the place of a Deacon, he thinks himself to be in that office by a
right call into it, and he gives out the alms of his Church by virtue of his
call; but I am persuaded his call to that office is not right, he is not a true
Deacon; yet if I be in want, I knowing that both he and those who have given
him money to dispose, may and ought to distribute to those that are in need, by
virtue of another relation, as men, as Christians, enabled by God, surely then
I may receive alms from him lawfully, though his principle by which he gives
them me is sin to him. I may communicate with him in this thing, though he
acts by virtue of that office that he had no true call unto; why may I not as
well communicate with a man in his gifts, though he acts thus sinfully himself?

This consideration will answer all those objections against hearing men, that
they say are not baptized; grant they are not, and so you think they cannot be
Ministers; yet they are men gifted by God, and thereby enabled to dispense many
truths of God to your soul.

The tenth dividing Practice, Fastening upon those who are in any error, all
those false things and dangerous consequences, that by strength of reason and
subtilty may be drawn from that error.
THis imbitters the spirits of men one against another, it is true, grant one
false thing, and a thousand may follow, but I must not judge of a man that
holds that one false opinion, as if he had the malignity of those thousand
evil things in his spirit. I find our Divines who have been of peaceable
spirits have condemned very much this fastening of dangerous consequences of
men's opinions, upon those who hold the opinions, and yet whose hearts are as
much against such consequences, as possibly may be deduced from them, as any:
In their giving rules for peace, they advise to take heed of this, as a thing
which makes Brethren, who are different in their opinions unlikely ever to
become one. Abhorret a charitate, im^ a recta ratione, ut quis propter
consequentias, rec intellectas, nec a se co^^esas putetur fundamentale^
articulum negasse aut regecisse quem s^^mit^ credit, explicit (...) ejusdem
vel sanguine suo obsigna^et: verio^ and (...) est non quid ex quov^s sequata^
(...) Daven. fentintia de pace in^er (...) page 6^.
Davenant says, It is abhorrent to charity and right reason, that any because
of consequences from what he holds, neither understood nor granted by him,
should be thought to deny or reject a fundamental Article, which he firmly
believes, expressly asserts, and if he were called to it, whould seal the truth
of it with his blood: Truer, and more gentle, says he, is the judgment of that
great and peacemaking Divine, Bucer, who says, It is our part not to look at
what may follow from an opinion, but at what follows in the consciences of
those who hold it.

The eleventh dividing Practice, To commend and countenance what we care not
for, in opposition to what we dislike.
WHen such as profess godliness shall make much of wicked men, shall commend
them, join with them, embrace them; yea, be well pleased with the bitterness,
boisterousnesse, boldness of their daring spirits, because there may be use
made of them against those men and ways they differ from, this is an evil
which brings guilt upon themselves, and makes the division between them and
their Brethren very great: If your hearts be right, and your cause be good, you
need not make use of any thing that is evil, to comfort your hearts, or to
maintain your cause: The Lord will not be beholding to the evil, the
bitterness of men's spirits, for the furtherance of his cause; and why should
you? God will not take the wicked by the hand, neither should thou: Are not
your spirits strengthened against your adversaries, when you see them calling in
Papists, and all manner of the refuse of men wicked and treacherous: Can you
think that these are the most likely to maintain the Protestant Religion, and
the liberty of the Subject? Why do you seek to strengthen your selves by
stirring up vile men to join with you, such as heretofore your hearts were
opposite to? How comes it to pass, you can close so lovingly now? You can
smile one upon another, and shake hands together: How comes it to pass, you
do rejoice the hearts of evil men; they encourage you, and you encourage
them? Those unsavory bitter expressions that come from them, you can smile at,
and be well pleased with, because they are against such as differ from you;
blow up that sparkle of ingenuity that heretofore has been in you; lay your
hands upon your hearts, bethink your selves, is it the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
that acts us in such a way wherein we are? Surely, this is not the way of
peace, but of division and confusion.

The last dividing Practice, The Practice of Revenge.
WHen any provoke you, you say you will be even with him, there is a way
whereby you may be, not even with him, but above him; that is, forgive him.

Practicing revenge is the way to continue divisions to the end of the world;
such offend me, therefore I will offend them; and therefore they offend me
again, me again, and I them, and so it may run in infinitum; they deny me a
kindness, therefore I will deny them, and therefore they will deny me; so
these unkindnesses run on endlesly; divisions will have a line of succession,
where will it, where can it stop, if this be the way of men?

Paulus Fagius in his Notes upon Leviticus, cap. 19. v. 18. says, Hae^ est
ultio, cum Reuben dicit ad Simeonem, Da mihi accomodatam securim tuam,
respondet, Non accommodabo, in posterum Sime^n dicit, Da accommodatam securim
tuam, and respondet Reuben, Nequaquam; siquidem tu mihi non accomodasti.
If Reuben should say to Simeon, Lend me thy Axe, and he should answer, I will
not; the next day Simeon has need of an Axe, and he comes to Reuben, and
says, I pray lend me your Axe, and Reuben answers, No, you would not lend me
yours yesterday; the Jews accounted this to be Revenge: There is much more
malignity in our revengefull practices one upon another then this.

Basil invelghing against requiting evil for evil, (...). Basil. Hom. 10. De
ira.
in his tenth Sermon, speaks thus to a revengefull heart; Do not make your
Adversary your Master, do not imitate him whom you hate; be not you his
looking-glass, to present his form and fashion in your self.

Revenge God challenges to himself as his, presume not to encroach upon Gods
propriety, to get up into Gods seat, and do his work, thou have enough to
do of thine own. And it is very observable, how God stands upon his challenge
of revenge as his own; as that which he by no means will suffer others to
meddle with: in those Scriptures where this is mentioned, the challenge is
doubled, yea, sometimes treble^, as Psalm. 94. 1. O Lord God to whom vengeance
belongs, O God to whom vengeance belongs: So Nahum. 1. 2. The Lord
revengeth, the Lord revengeth, the Lord will take vengeance on his Adversaries,
Heb. 10. 30. Vengeance belongs to me, I will recompense says the Lord; and
again, the Lord will judge his people: You must not think revenge to be so
light a matter.

How unbeseeming are revengefull practices to Christian profession! Plut^^ch.
vitae Ph^cion.
Many of the Heathens were above such things. Plutarch reports of Phocion, That
when he had done notable service for the Athenians, yet was put to death by
them; but being asked a little before his death whether he had any thing to say
to his son; Yes, says he, that I have, I require of thee my son, that thou
never wishest ill to the Athenians for this they do to me.

How far are most of us from this? we can hardly pass by an ill look
without revenge; but if we conceive our selves to be wronged in words or
actions, then revenge rises high, such things must not be born.

A Gentleman of very good credit, who lived at Court many years, told me that
himself once heard a great man in this Kingdom say, He never forgave man in
his life: and I am moved the rather to believe it to be so, because I have been
told by some other Gentlemen, that the same man would when he was walking
alone, speak to himself, and clap his hand upon his breast, and swear by the
Name of God, that he would be revenged, he would be revenged; and that she who
lay in his bosom, was wont to sit alone, and sing to her self, Revenge,
Revenge, O how sweet is Revenge,! If they get power into their own hands, and
are so uxorious, as they must needs give way to have things managed according
to the will of their revengefull wives: what peace, what security is there like
to be? Rawleigh Hist. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 10.
Sir Walter Rawleigh in his History of the World, tells of the sad case of the
Lacedaemonians, when Nabis having power in his hands, having a wife, Apega, a
woman full of cruelty and revenge, her husband delighting in her, caused her
Image to be made, lively representing her, and apparelled with costly garments;
but indeed, it was an Engine to torment men withal; he made use of it thus,
when he could not have his will upon men by his own persuasions, he took them
by the hand, telling them, that perhaps his wife Apega, who sat by in a chair
could persuade more effectually, so he led them to the Image, that rose up and
opened the arms, as it were for embracement* those arms were full of sharp
iron nails, the like whereof were also sticking in the breasts, though hidden
with her clothes, and herewith she griped these men to death: At which Nabis
standing by, laughed to see the cruel death of these miserable men. The Lord
deliver us from revengefull spirits.

CHAP. XXVII.
The evil of Divisions, They hinder much good.
EVsebius reports of Constantine, Eus^b l ^. de (...) Constantin.
That he was more troubled with the dissentions of the Church, then with all
the wars in his dominions, that he took them so to heart, that he could not
sleep quietly for them; yea, although he had a spirit full of heroic valor,
yet the dissentions of the Church were such evils to him, as to cause him to
cry and sob: Thus he writes in an Epistle to Alexander and Arius, Eus^b l. 2.
de v^t. C^n^t.
Let me enjoy the days in peace, and the nights without mol^station, that the
pleasure which rises out of the pure light of concord and quiet life, may
henceforth inviolably be conserved; if it otherwise happen, it behooves us to
sob and sigh, and to shed many a salt tear.

What heart that has any tenderness in it, bleeds not in the sense of those
sore and dreadful heart-divisions there are amongst us! The evil there is in
them, is beyond what tongue or pen can express: Take a view of it under these
three Heads.

1. The good they hinder. 2. The sin they cause. 3. The misery they bring.
First, the quiet, comfort, sweetness of our spirits is hindered by divisions:
They put the spirit out of tune; men who heretofore have had sweet spirit full
of ingenuity, since they have interessed themselves in these Divisions, have
lost their sweetness, their ingenuity is gone. When the Be stings, she leaves
her sting behind her, and never gathers Honey more; men by stinging one
another, do not lose their stings, but they lose their honey, they are never
like to have that sweetness in their hearts, that heretofore they had, Shall I
lose my sweetness, says the Fig Tree, and go to be promoted over the trees?
Why do thou not reason thus with thy spirit? Shall I lose my sweetness in
contending, to get my will to be above others? God sorbid. There was a time
that both my my self and others found much sweetness in the temper of spirit;
there was nothing but peaceablenesse, quiet, calmnesse, contentedness in it,
and how comfortable was such a temper of spirit! me thought when my spirit was
in that sweet frame, all things were sweet to me; but since I have been
interested in quarrels and contentions, it has been far otherwise with me.
Prove. 15. 4. Perverseness in the tongue causes a breach in the spirit.
Contentions cause much perverseness in men's tongues, and this causes a breach
in their spirits. Your contending costs you dear: though it were in nothing
else, yet the loss of this sweetness of spirit makes it very costly to you.
All the wrong that you should have put up if you had not contended, had not
been so great an evil to you, as this one thing is. There is nothing more
contrary to ingenuity then quarrelsomnesse. It is reported of Melancthon, that
when he was to dye he had this speech, and Strigelius at his death had the
same: Cupio ex hic vit^ migrarc propter duas causas: ut f^uir desiderat^
conspectu F^lii Dei. and coles^^^ Ecclesiae. (...) ut liber^r^^ab im^^a nibus
and implacabilibus od^is Theologorum. Melchi^r Adam in vita Strigehi.
I desire to depart this life for two causes: First, that I may enjoy the
desired sight of the Son of God, and the Church in heaven. Secondly, that I
may be delivered from the fierce and implacable hatred of Divines. There was
much disputing, contending, quarrelling in those times, which was so tedious to
the spirits of these good men, as it made them the willinger to dye, that they
might be where their souls should be at rest. That Saint of God old M. Dod,
never loved to meddle with controversies; he gave that reason, He found his
heart the worse when he did. Men seldom come away from hot disputes, or any
other contentions, but their spirits are altered for the worse. They find it
so, and others find it in them. If a man has been abroad, and met with
company with whom he has been contending, his wife, children, servants, find
that he comes not home with the same spirit that he went out with.

he wishes he had never meddled with it, he is weary of it, but knows not how
to come off fairly. I have read of Francis the first, King of France,
consulting with his Captains how to lead his Army over the Alps, into Italy,
whether this way or that way; Amarill his Fool sprung out of a corner where he
sat unseene, and bad them rather take care which way they should bring their
Army out of Italy back again. It is easy for one to interest himself in
quarrels, but the difficulty is to be disengaged from them when you are in.

Thirdly, they hinder the good of the body; many men contending (...).
broke thy sleep so much as the thoughts of breaches between thee and thy
neighbors and brethren? We read of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. that he was an hundred
and twenty years old when he died, his eye was not dim, nor his natural
force abated. Some give this to be one reason of such a wonderful preservation
of his health and strength, the meekness of his spirit: God witnesses of him,
Numb. 12. 3. That he was the meekest man upon the face of the earth. That good
old man Mr. Dod came very near to Moses in the one and in the other.

Fourthly, they hinder men's judgments: if the water be muddie, we cannot see
what lies at the bottom. These dissentions disturb the medium of our sight:
you cannot weigh gold in the midst of blustering winds: you cannot consider
and give a judgment upon truth, except the heart be calm. Gregory Nazianzen
has this similitude: As the earth, says he, is fixed to men whose brains and
eyes are sound, but to those who have a vertigo in their heads it seems to
turn round: so we are deceived in our apprehensions of things, Greg. Naz.
orat. 14.
we have not the same judgment of things when we love, and when we do not love.

Fifthly, they hinder the sweetness of Christian converse and Ipse aspectus
boni viri delectat, says Seneca, The very sight of a good man delights, the
sight of a godly man was wont to delight us otherwise then now it does: you
look one upon another now sowrely, with lowering countenance, and withdraw from
one another: your comforts were wont to be double, treble, seven fold, an
hundred fold, according to that society of Saints you conversed withal; one
godly man accounted it the joy of his heart, that he had any thing that he
could communicate to another godly man, and the other had the like joy that he
had any thing to communicate to him; thus comforts were multiplied; but now
your comforts are single, Oh the sweetness, the sutablenesse there was wont to
be in the spirits of Christians! Shall I say sutablenesse? it was a blessed
oneness of heart: they did as it were exchange souls one with another every
day; their souls did close claspe one with, and cleave one to another. Oh how
did they love to open their hearts one to another! what delight was there in
pouring forth their spirits one into another! What cheerfulness was there wont
to be in their meeting! they eat their bread together with singleness of
heart and joy, praising the Lord. There were no such merry meetings in the
world, as the meetings of the Saints were wont to be: They parted one from
another with their souls bound up one in another; their hearts warmed,
enlarged, resolved, strengthened in Gods ways. But now they cannot meet
together but they fall a jarring, contending one with another, and part with
spirits estranged from, sowred, and imbittered one against another: their
hearts weakened, and more unsettled in the things of God then before. Heretofore
when they were absent one from another, yet the remembrance one of another was
joyful; but these days seem to be gone. Where is there that opening of
secrets one to another as formerly? every one is afraid of another. What sweet
visits were there wont to be? what bearing one another burdens? what
heart-encouraging Letters? It was with the Saints as in Tertulli^ns time, (...).
Christians called Brethren, and were ready to dye for one another: but now
they are burdens to one another spirits, they bring evils one upon another.
Those who heretofore were forward Professors, whose society was only amongst
the Saints, now they can suit well enough with those who are carnal, they close
with them, their converse is most amongst them. Oh Lord, what fire is it that
is kindled amongst us! The nature of fire is, Congregare homogenea, and
segregare heterogenea, to gather things of a like nature together, and separate
things of a different: but our fire does quite contrary, it separates things
that are Homogeneall, and joins things Heterogeneall. Surely this is no other
then the fire of hell.

Sixthly, they hinder our time. Abundance of time is spent

Seventhly, they hinder our prayers. If two or three agree together touching
any thing they shall ask, it shall be done for them by my Father, says
Christ, Mat. 18. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that men pray, lifting up their hands
without wrath. When Daniel was in a strait, he goes to his companions, and
desires them to lift up prayers to God for him, Dan. 2. 17. There was a a sweet
agreement between them. Hence their stock and trade in prayer went in common,
but divisions do exceedingly hinder prayer, either one with another, or one for
another. 1 Pet. 3. 7. the Apostle giving rules for a peaceable loving life
between man and wife, the woman must be meek, and the man live with his wife as
a man of knowledge; and they must walk together as the heirs of life. Why so?
That your prayers may not be hindered. Private contentions in families are
great hindrances of family-prayers: So our public divisions and contentions
are the great hindrances of the prayers of Christians in a more public way.
How were they wont to pour forth their hearts in prayer together? then their
hearts closed, but now it is otherwise. Men do not walk now together as the
heirs of life, therefore their prayers are hindered. God accepts not of our
gift, if we offer it when our hearts are at a distance from our brethren. When
breaches continue, and we are not reconciled, you know Christ requires us to
leave our gift at the Altar till reconciliation be made. It is the Spirit of
God in the Saints that is the spirit of prayer: now Gods Spirit is a Dove-like,
meek, quiet, and peaceable spirit.



1. In these times of division, many men exercise their gifts and parts in
little or nothing else but in matters of division; do you think that God has
given you such parts for no other end but this?

2. They have no hearts to impart to their Brethren their gifts in counselling,
admonishing, strengthening, comforting: No, their hearts are estranged from
them, they care not to have any thing to do with them: but do you think, that
you are so far your own men, that you may keep in, or employ your talents as
you please? Are you not the Stewards of Christ, are they not given to you for
the edification of your Brethren, as well as for good to your selves? Can this
satisfy your consciences? such a one differs from you, he has angered you,
therefore though you have opportunity of being useful to him, yet you refuse
it, as if it were at your liberty to lay out your abilities for good, or not,
Certainly, this is not according to the mind of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 7. The
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal.

3. If you do make use of your gifts for the good of others, yet dissentions
between you will hinder the profit of them, you are not like to do any good by
them, except they be carried on by the oil of love, they will not soak into men's
hearts. When did you ever know a wrangling contentious Minister (though his
gifts were never so excellent) do good amongst his people? And what comfort can
a man have of his life, if he be laid aside by God as a useless man?

4. These divisions cause men to make the gifts of others useless to
themselves, whereas God puts opportunity into men's hands, to get much good by
those excellent gifts their Brethren have, yet if there be any difference
between them, either they will not acknowledge the gifts of GOD in them, or
otherwise they have no mind to receive from them that good they might have,
because their hearts are not with them.

Ninthly, they hinder our graces; how little of God and Augustine) are not
quickened, except they be joined, so even the members of Christ do not receive
of the quickening virtue of Christ, except they be joined: Here is the reason of
the deadness, coldness, emptiness, barrenness, vanity of your spirits, you are
not joined: O where are the heavenly Christians that were wont to be, those
humble, those holy gracious souls, who lived by faith, who were able to deny
themselves, their whole lives were nothing else but a continual exercise of
self-denial, who were not only patient, but joyful under afflictions? Where
are those watchful Christians who walked close with God, who enjoyed such
spiritual communion with him, as made their faces shine in their holy heavenly
conversations? Where are those tender, brokenhearted Christians that were wont
to be, who lived upon the Word, to whom the Word was more sweet then honey and
the honey comb? Now there is another kind of face of Professors of Religion,
as if there were godliness in these days, not of the same kind with that which
was formerly. If our forefathers, who were the most holy and gracious, should
rise again, they would not own those for Professors of Religion who now make
a great noise, keep a great stir about Religion, as if they had got up higher
then their forefathers had, and yet are loose, vain, frothy, false in their
way. Certainly, those holy, gracious Saints, whom these new Professors
slight, were they alive, they would abominate them, as the great disgrace of,
and dishonor to Jesus Christ and his Saints.

Take but away their disputes, and for any else, how empty and dry are they? If
they ever had any grace, it is under a deal of rubbish, we cannot see it, and
can these men be any other but an empty vine, seeing their hearts are so
divided? The graces that they seemed to have had, are quite blasted; and if
there were any in truth, Pli^y Not. hist. l. 9* ^. 35.
they are exceedingly weakened; Vinegar will dissolve Pearls. Pliny tells of
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, that in her wanton bravery, at a Supper she made for
Marcus Antonius, she dissolved a Pearl in Vinegar, and drank it off, and
prepared another, both which were valued worth near five thousand pounds: Oh
the many precious Pearls worth thousands of gold and silver, that are dissolved
by the Vinegar sowreness of men's spirits in these sharp dissentions that are
amongst us!



The fire of our contentions raises such a smoke, that it all besmothers us, it
takes away our comeliness, it makes us look black, no amiableness appears in the
ways of Religion to convince men of the excellency of them. Scratched faces,
rent and torn garments we account a shame to us; distracted, divided spirits,
rending and tearing one another, and from one another in our divided ways, O
how uncomely does it render us, Bidul^h in his travel to Jerusalem. p. 98.
and that profession of Religion that we take upon us! The Turks were wont to
wonder much at our English men for pinking and cutting their clothes, counting
them little better then mad men, for making holes in whole cloth, which time of
it self would tear too soon: the cuts, rents, slashes that are in our spirit,
in our divisions at this day, are much more uncomely, and may justly render us
foolish and mad in the eyes of all that do behold us.

Plutarch reports to the King of Scythia, Scilurus, toward his Sons has been
very famous, to set out how divisions weaken wheresoever they are; he says he
had eighty Sons, and when he was near death, he caused a bundle of Arrows to be
brought and given them one by one, bidding each of them to break it; they all
answered, it was impossible for any man to do it; Plutarch in Regu^ and
I^p^rat. apoth. Stob. Sermon 82.
then he causes the Arrows to be taken out one by one, and bade one of his Sons
break them, this any of them could easily do; upon this he speaks to his Sons
thus, If ye agree together, ye shall abide strong and unconquerable; but if ye
divide your selves, contending one with another, ye will be weak and easily
overcome.

They hinder our doing good in public; that which concerns Babel, he comes
down and confounds their tongues, so as they could not join together in it:
Thus when the Devil would hinder the work of Jerusalem, he knows no way more
likely then by dividing the hearts of those who are employed, if he can
possibly, that thereby he might bring confusion.

They hinder our own ends; none are more crossed in their

They hinder the blessing of God, Psalm. 133. The Psalmist There the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. There! that is, where the love
of Brethren is, there is a blessing, a blessing commanded by God; it comes with
power, and this no less then life, and this life for evermore. God dwells in
Salem, says Luther, not in Babylon; where there is peace, not where there is
confusion.

Lastly, yea they hinder all good. They are like the Torrid Town, the bells ring
backward. When fires of contention are kindled in places, all things go awke.
There is little joy in any thing.

Thus you see how great evil there is in our divisions in respect of what good
we lose by them: now then consider whether it be possible that any gain we can
get by them can recompense this loss; can any thing got by them quit the cost?
But if it could be supposed our loss may be recompensed, yet I am sure nothing
can countervail the evil there is in them, in respect of the sinfulness of
them. That is the next head.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The sinfulness of our Divisions.
THough there be sin in many things mentioned, yet we considered them in
reference to our good that was hindered: but now let us consider what venom of
sin there is in them.

The number 2. has been accounted accursed, because it was the first that
departed from unity. The departure from that unity God would have, is a very
cursed thing, for it has much sin in it. Peccatum, poe^a peecati, causa
peccatj.
That which S. Aug. says of original sin, we may well apply to our divisions,
They are sin, the punishment of sin, the cause of sin, nothing but a heap of
sin.

John 3. 23. This is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment. It is
not an arbitrary thing that we should love one another, but it is the command
of God, and a great command joined to that of believing in his Son Jesus
Christ. The one is as truly necessary to salvation as the other. Let men talk
of faith, of believing on the Son of God, of trusting to free grace in Christ,
yet if they have dividing, contending spirits, no love, no sweetness, no grace
of union with the Saints, their faith is a dead faith: And because God stands
much upon this to have his people live together in love, at the beginning of
the verse he says, it is his commandment; at the end of the verse he says,
he gave us commandment; And it is also observable, that he says of the
commandment of love, that he gave us that commandment. It is a gift, for it
is a sweet commandment. We should not only submit to it, as being bound by
the authority of it: but we should open our hearts to it, and embrace it
joyfully as a gift from God. The commandment of love God gives us as a gift
from his love. The excellency of these commandments are further amplified,
ver. 24. And he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him.
I do not think that you can find in all the Scripture any command of God in
one ver. and a piece of another so inculcated and commended. Again, chap. 4.
21. This commandment have we from him, that he who loves God loves his
brother also. If you think you have any command to love God, or to believe in
Jesus Christ, know the same authority lays a command upon you, to love your
brother also. Joh. 15. 12. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as
I have loved you. And ver. 17. These things I cowmand you, that ye love one
another. Christ you see likewise makes a great matter of the Saints loving one
another. Surely the sin then must needs be great that breaks such a great
commandment as this, upon which God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son lays
so much weight.

Secondly, these unkind and unloving divisions are against Joh. 17. 21. he
prays to his Father, that all who did believe, and should after believe on
him, might be one, as his Father is in him, and he is in his Father; and that
they may be one in the Father and him: as if he should say, Oh Father, I am now
going out of the world, and I foresee, when I am gone, even those whom thou
have given me, who are one in me, and in thee, will meet with strong
temptations to divide them one from another: but oh Father I beseech thee, let
thy fatherly care be over them, to keep their hearts together, that they might
be united in the strongest union that is possible for creatures to be united
in. Oh Father, let them be one, as thou and I am one. Would we not be loath to
lose the benefit of that heavenly prayer of Christ for us in that 17. of Joh.
read it over, see what soul-ravishing excellency there is in it, seeing he has
expressly said he intended us who live now, in it, as well as those Disciples
who then lived with him; let us prize this prayer, as being more to us then ten
thousand worlds. Luther writes a chiding Letter to Melancthon; By those sinful
distrustful fears and carking thoughts of yours, says he, you do irritas
facere praeces nostras, you make void our prayers. How great then is the evil
of our divisions? by them we do what in us lies to make void as concerning us
the prayer, that blessed prayer of Jesus Christ. Satan, says Christ to Peter,
has desired to winnow you like Wheat, but I have prayed for you that your
faith fail not. He shall not prevail, says Christ: Why? Because I have prayed
for you. Oh blessed Savior, is not thy prayer against our divisions, as
strong? Can not thou prevail with thy Father as well in this as in that? We
know thy Father did and does ever hear thee: some way or other this prayer of
CHRIST is, and shall be heard; yet our sin is not the less, for it tends to the
frustrating of Christ's prayer. Satan desires to winnow us in our divisions,
but he desires not to have the Chafe divided from the Wheat, he rather would
have the Chafe mixed with the Wheat. The mixing the Chafe with the Wheat
makes a great stir amongst us: But Christ's prayer which helped Peter in his
winnowing, we hope will help us in ours: only let not us do any thing that
makes against it.

in a Map, such times as these are to our view; could we have believed that it
were possible that there should be such a distance in our spirits as now there
is?

Fourthly, our Divisions are very dishonorable to Jesus Alexander Severus,
seeing two Christians contending one with another, commanded them that they
should not presume to take the name of Christians upon themselves any longer;
For (says he) you dishonor your Master Christ, whose Disciples you profess
to be. It is dishonor to a General to have his Army routed, and run into
confusion. The Devil seems to prevail against us in these our divisions, so
as to rout us. John 17. 21. 23. is a notable Scripture, to show the sinfulness
of our divisions, in the dishonor they put upon Christ, and it may be as
strong an argument against them as any I know in the Book of God; Christ
praying to the Father for the union of his Saints, uses this argument, O Father
let this be granted, that the world may believe that thou have sent me: And
again, ver. 23. Let them be perfect in one, that the world may know that thou
have sent me. If they be not united one to another in love and peace, but have
a spirit of Division ruling amongst them, what will the world think? surely,
that thou did not send me; that I who am their head, their teacher and Lord,
never came from thee, for thou art wisdom, holiness and love, and if I had come
from thee, then those who own me to be theirs, and whom I own to be mine, would
hold forth in their conversations something of that spirit of holiness,
wisdom and love there is in thee; but when the world does not see this in
them, but the clean contrary, they will never believe, that I came from thee;
those truths that I came into the world to make known as from thee, O Father
will not be believed, but rather persecuted, if those who profess them by
their divisions one from another, and oppositions one against another, show
forth a spirit of pride, folly, envy, frowardness; therefore, O Father, let
them be one as thou and I am one; if this Petition be not granted, how shall I
look the world in the face; I shall be contemned in the world: what am I come
down from thee, for such glorious ends as indeed those were, for which I came
into the world, and when I should come to attain those ends, for which I came,
shall there be such a carriage in those who do profess my Name, that by it
the world shall persuade themselves, that thou did never send me? O what a
sore evil would this be! surely any Christian heart must needs tremble at the
least thought of having a hand in so great an evil as this is.

Ephesians. 4. 30, 31. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to
the day of redemption. Surely, there is no godly heart, but will say, O God
forbid that I should do any thing to grieve the good spirit of God, it is the
Spirit that has enlightened me, that has revealed the great mysteries of God,
of Christ, of eternal life unto me; it is that Spirit that has drawn my Soul
to Jesus Christ, that has comforted it, with those consolations that are more
to me then ten thousand worlds; the Spirit that has strengthened me, that
helps me against temptations, that carries me through difficulties, that
enables me to rejoice in tribulations; the Spirit that is an earnest, to assure
me of Gods electing love; the spirit thet has sealed me up to the day of
Redemption; and now shall I be g^ily of so great a sin as to grieve this
blessed Spirit of the Lord? If I did but know wherein I have grieved it, it
could not but make my soul to bleed within me, that I should have such a
wretched heart, to grieve this holy Spirit, by whom my soul has enjoyed so
much good: I hope should for ever hereafter take heed of that thing, I would
rather suffer any grief in the world, to mine own spirit, then be any
occasion of grief to that blessed Spirit of God. But would you know what it is
that has grieved it, and what it is that is like to grieve it further? mark
what follows, ver. 31. Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you with all malice: And would you do that which may
rejoice it? Oh! God knows it would be the greatest joy in the world for me to
do it, then ver. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

evil to offend one of his little ones: We may think it a little matter to
give offense to some of Gods people who are poor and mean in the world, so
long as we have the bravery of it, and the countenance of great men, no matter
for them. But (friend) whatsoever slight thoughts thou have of it, Christ
thinks it a great matter; you may look upon them as under you, the times favor
you more then them; but if you shall give them cause to go to God, to make
their moanes to him, of any ill usage they have had from you; Lord thou know
I was for peace to the uttermost that I could, so far as I was able to see
thy Word for my guide; but these who heretofore were as Brethren to me, now
their spirits are estranged, their hearts are imbittered, their words, their
carriages are very grievous, and all because I cannot come up to what their
opinions, their ways are; certainly this would prove very ill to you, regard it
as lightly as you will; it may be when others carry themselves toward you
otherwise then you expected, you vent your selves against them in quarelling,
in giving ill language, in vilifying and scorning, your strength runs out this
way; but there are a generation of men, who being wronged, improve their
strength in patient bearing, yet in making their moan to God in the exercise of
faith, in committing their cause to him.

Mat. 18. from 24. to 31. you have the story of the servant who had ten
thousand talents forgiven him, who yet took his fellow servants by the throat
who ought him a hundred pence, and put him into prison; the Text says, When
his fellow servants saw what was done, they were sorry, and came and told their
Lord what was done. You do not hear them cry out of their fellow servants, O
what a vile base wretch was he, who would deal thus with his fellow! No, but
they went and told their Lord. It is not the way of Christians when they
apprehend wrong done, to give ill language, to seek to right themselves or
others by bitter provoking expressions; but their hearts being filled with
grief, if they must needs vent it, if quiet debates with their Brethren will
not ease them, let them vent themselves in the pouring forth their complaints
to the Lord.

Seventhly, there is much sin in our divisions, for they stir dirt spreads it
self all over: so does the dirty stuff in our hearts, these divisions causing
a commotion in them; that corruption is now discovered, that neither our selves
nor others had thought had been in us: Do not you say in your hearts, and it
may be one to another, Who would have thought it possible, that so much filthy
staff should lie so long in such men's hearts undiscovered, which now appears
since these unhappy divisions have been amongst us? James 3. 16. Where there is
envying and strife, there is confusion and every evil work. When Snakes are
cold, they lie still; but if the heat of fire come to them, then they hiss and
put forth their stings: Thus men's corruptions heat by the fire of contention
that is kindled amongst us, begin to stir, to act, yea, to rise very high.
The reason that some give of that prohibition of the Apostles, Ephesians. 4. Let
not the Sun go down upon your wrath, which also I find Chrysostom upon
the place gives, is, because when men's wrath is stirred by contending, if it
continues in the heat of it till night, as they lie upon their beds their
corruptions will be boiling, they will lie musing and plotting against those
that contend with them; their thoughts in the night season will work up their
corruptions to a great height; have you not found it so, when the Sun was
gone down upon your wrath, you could hardly sleep that night? William the
Conqueror in his first year commanded, that every night at eight a clock a
Bell should be rung, and that all people should then put out their fire, which
was called the Curfew Bell: it were well that some were admonished every night,
to cover the fire of their passions.

We stir up likewise the corruptions of others, in these our divisions; do
you not see those distempers formerly mentioned, working and breaking forth in
your Brethren when you provoke them in your contending with them? O pity,
pity thy Brother, if thou can not pity thy self; does it not grieve thee,
that thy Brother should bring sin upon himself? Were it not better for thee
to suffer; then for thy Brother to sin? It is an evil thing to be an
occasion of grief to our Brethren, The Lord does not willingly grieve the
children of men, but to be occasion of sin to them is much worse: When did
you ever meet with your Brethren, and had your spirits put into any heat, but
after your parting when you began to be cool, you then saw canse to grieve for
unbeseeming words, carriages, breakings forth of passion, that there was either
in you or them: Sometimes in a froward debate there is more sin committed in
one hour, then there is otherwise in a whole twelvemonth, between those who
live lovingly and sweetly together: yea, sometimes such corruptions are stirred
by differences and divisions, that one would think were not competible to a
Saint; namely, the rejoicing in the evil of other men, yea of godly men. David
said, his zeal had ever consumed him, because his enemies had forgotten Gods
word; but some men's zeal do even consume them, because their friends do
remember Gods Word; the more inoffensive they walk, the more are they
troubled; it were endless to mention the uncharitableness, wrong, malice,
injustice, oppression, cruelty, with the abundance of other sins that are
caused by our divisions.

Eighthly, Yet further, as they stir up sin, so they harden Ezekiel. 11. God
promises to give his people one heart, and this heart should be a heart of
flesh: While the hearts of the Saints are united, they are tender; but when
they divide, they grow hard.

Hence is the reason why Brethren being fallen out, it is so hard to convince
either of them of any ill carriage, they are angry, and they think they do well
to be angry, and all because their hearts are hardened. Jonah was in a pettish
mood, his heart was hardened with it, let God himself come now to convince him,
he stands it out, he will by no means acknowledge himself faulty; no, what he
does he will justify, he does well to be angry.

Ninthly, there is much sin in them, for they are a means Paul says, 1 Cor.
14. If men speak with strange tongues, and there comes in one unlearned, will
they not be to him as Barbarians, will they not say they are mad? Thus when the
men of the world look upon those who profess Religion, and see their
carriages, their ways strange, divided amongst themselves, will they not think
them even mad people? I charge you, says the Church, Cant. 3. 5. by the Roes
and by the Hindes, that you stir not up my Beloved till he please. This by some
is interpreted thus, The Roes and Hindes are shy and fearful creatures, by
them are signified such as are observers of the ways of the Church, and ready
to take offense at any thing they see amiss in them, therefore I charge you,
say those who are faithful, that you do nothing that may make any disturbance
in the Church, whereby such as are observers of your ways shall be offended:
If they see miscarriages in you, they will fly off, and of all miscarriages
there are none more offensive to the lookers on, then wranglings and
contendings; when they see this, they will conclude, Surely this is not the way
of Christ.



11. They make very much against the Cause of Christ now

You will say, That is true indeed, things would go on a pace, if those who
differ from others would give up their judgments and practices to them, to
believe what they believe, and to do what they do. But how can this be? you
would not have them give up their judgments or practices to them till they
know they be right, and how can that be, till they by discussing, praying,
reading, meditating, find that out? If some men had certainly found out the
right, and other men knew certainly that they had done so, then the work were
at an end.

But when we complain of our divisions for making much against the Cause of
Christ, or work of Reformation, we do not complain against men, because they
cannot all understand things alike. But this we complain of,

1. That all men who profess godliness, have not joined in opposing that
which they believe cannot stand with godliness, by all the ways that God has
put into their hands.

2. That they have not joined to promote those ways of godliness, which they
are convinced to be so.

3. That they have not joined to study what ways and means may be found out to
ease the hearts and consciences one of another, to bear with one another, so
far as Christ would have them be helpful to, and bear with one another. It is
this that has made such a stop in the work of Reformation. A peaceable,
humble, and quiet discussing of things, furthers that Reformation that Christ
would have. Do you think that Christ would be pleased with such a Reformation
wherein the lesser part should give up their consciences and practices to the
Judgments of the greater? such a kind of slubbering over matters might soon be,
but Christ must have all the matters of his worship and doctrine consented to,
and practiced from a principle of faith. Let us join with all our might in all
we know, and with peaceable, quiet, humble spirits seek to know more, and in
the mean time carry our selves humbly and peaceably toward those we differ
from, and Christ will not charge us at the Great Day for retarding his Cause,
the great work of Reformation in hand.

Joh. 4. 3. Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist. Many men talk much
of Antichrist, bet such as profess the Gospel, and yet are of unpeaceable,
snarling, contending spirits, they have the spirit of Antichrist, and they do
not confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. It is the Argument the
Jews have against Christ, say they, If he were come, then that Prophecy Esaias
11. 6. would be fulfilled, The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the cow and the bear shall feed
together, etc. But this is not so, they bring many other places where Peace is
prophesied of, as Esaias 9. 7. Of the increase of his government and peace shall
be no end. Those who seek for his Government, should seek for his Peace also.

Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis, spends diverse Chapters in answering
the Jews objections against Christ from these places with others, as Lib. 5.
the 6, 7, 8. Chapters. A special part of the Covenant of Grace is in that
promise, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit
within them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, ver. 20. And
Jer. 32. 38, 39. They shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will
give them one heart and one way. Many men speak much of the Covenant of Grace,
who manifest little of this part of it in them. If that which is against any
command of God be sinful, much more is that which is so directly against Gods
Covenant with his people, that which tends to make even the Covenant of Grace
to be of none effect; if it be of no effect in one part of it, it will be of
none in the other.

13. By our divisions we cross that end that God aimed at in

The Aggravations of the sinfulness of our Divisions.
FIrst, That we that are Christians should be thus divided, it Hereby shall ye
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, says Christ. Love and
Unity are Christ's badge, the Arms of a Christian, whereby he shows of what
House he is: But by these divisions of ours, what do we but rend the very
Arms that Christ has honored us with, and cast them under our feet?

Secondly, that we who were so lately in bondage, should upon

Thirdly, The union of our enemies is an aggravation of the Psalm. 83. 5. 6. we
read of ten or eleven sorts of men who could all agree in that which was evil;
the Text says, (...)
They consulted together with one consent, it is in the Hebrew, with one heart;
there was Edom, the Ishmaelites, the Moabites, the Hagarens, Gebus, Ammon,
Amaleck, the Phylistines, with the inhabitants of Tire; Assure is joined with
the children of Lot: these were of several opinions and ways in matters of
Religion, and yet could join. I remember GreGregory Nazianzen in one of his
Orations makes a bitter complaint of this, (...), etc.
Who is there, says he, that is of a right mind, that does not deplore the
present state of things? Who can find out expressions to set out this calamity
of ours, that thieves and robbers, tyrants and whoremasters should be at peace
amongst themselves, (...), etc. Greg. Naz. Orat. 14.
yet we cannot be at peace? Revel. 17. 13. we read of ten Kings of the earth,
that they are of one mind to give their power to the Beast, and to make war
with the Lamb; shall not we be of one mind to fight against the Beast for the
Lamb?

Fourthly, that such as God has joined in so many bands of Mallem me solis
Romanistarum manibus perire, ne Carolus in hanc causam involveretur, scio quae
miseria Sigismundum consequuta est, etc. Melchior Adam in vita Lutheri.
Luther in an Epistle of his to his friend Spalatinus, tells him, that if he
must perish, he would not that the Emperor Charles should have a hand in it,
out of respect to him, but let me rather, says he, perish by those of Rome,
for I know says he, what misery followed Sigismund the Emperor after the
death of John Husse. Although we should desire that we might be no occasion of
evil to any, yet if it must needs be, better a thousand times that the evil
fall upon wicked men, and those who are at the greatest distance from us, then
upon those who are godly, and so near unto us.



Jer. 4. 18. Their wickedness is better, for it reaches to the heart. This
makes the wickedness of our divisions bitter; the heart commands the head, but
the head cannot command the heart.

7. They are the worse, because they break not so much as they

8. That our divisions are in the presence of wicked men, that Genesis 13. 7. the
Text says, There was a strife between the herdmen of Abraham and the herdmen
of Lot, (...). Naz. Orat. 14.
and the Canaanite and the Perizite dwelt in the land. Their strife was the
more vile, because it was before them. Let us remember when we are striving,
that the Canaanite and Perizite dwell in the Land. It is not safe, says
Nazianzen, to be trust him that hates a Christian, with the hearing any thing
against a Christian.

9. Our divisions are long continued divisions, nothing can quiet us, as if
they were irreconcilable. There is, says Nazianzen, a satiety in all things
amongst men but in contentions; (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 14. 10.
in meat, in drink, in singing, in all things otherwise most delightful, but
men have never adone in mischieving one another. We are like cocks, who are
easily set a fighting, and when they are in, they will never leave till they
kill one another.

10. The late Covenant that should be a means to unite us, is made a means of
widening our divisions, by making false interpretations of it, by drawing the
sense of it to what may serve men's turns, by charging men of perjury, because
they come not up fully to what they would have them, by which abuse some seek
to make it to be a very snare to their brethren.



afflicted, (...)
signifies meek, to note, that afflicted ones should be meek ones. When the
storm is coming, the Bees flock together to the hive. Ier. 50. 4. In those
days, says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping they shall go and seek the Lord their God.
Judah and Israel could not agree at other times, but when they are in a weeping
condition, then they shall come together.

England never knew what such Fasting and Prayer meant, as it has known of
late: No nation in the world that we know of ever knew the like; and shall we
in such times as these, when we are casting down our selves before Almighty
God, when we are judging our selves before him, in the pride and frowardness of
our hearts contend against one another? Esaias 58 4. Behold, ye fast for strife
and debate, and to fight with the fist of wickedness. It is a fist of
wickedness indeed, that fights in times of Fasts. Is it such a Fast that I have
chosen? How do we in the days of our Fasts, acknowledge our vileness, our
unworthyness of the least mercy, our pride, our self-love, our envy, our
passions, all those distempers that are dividing distempers, yet still we
continue in them, and they break forth into dividing practices? Surely our
Fasts will rise up in judgment against us, to make the sin of our divisions
out of measure sinful.

We are afflicted, but not forsaken; and mercies should sweeten our spirits.
This Summer has been a continued miracle of mercies; if our agreeing together,
our love to one another were now beyond the expectation of all men, as Gods
mercies to us have been beyond, and above all expectation, even such a fruit of
mercies would be the greatest mercy of all. But if instead of being sweetened by
mercies we are the more imbittered one against another, how great is this
sin? If we shall take occasion from our victories at Nazeby, Taunton,
Bridgewater, Sherburne, Bristol, to seek to drive out of the Kingdom thousands
of godly men whom God used as instruments of so great mercy to us; will not
this be sin unto us? God brought us indeed into a wilderness, but he has
there spoke comfortably to us; our wilderness is our way to Canaan. It was the
charge of Joseph to his brethren, Genesis 45. 24. when they were going from Egypt
to Canaan, See that ye fall not out by the way: We hope God is leading us to
Canaan, oh that we could see Christ looking upon us, and charging us, saying,
See that you fall not out by the way, do not grudg one against another, let not
one say, You are the cause of our trouble, and another say, Nay, but you are
the cause of our trouble; let every one charge his own heart, let every man
fall out with his own sin as much as he will, but let not brethren fall out by
the way.

Fourthly, it is a time of Service; God never put such opportunities England;
and shall this opportunity be lost with our wranglings and contendings? Oh how
unworthy are we to live in such times as these are! When a Master sets his
servants to work, and that in such a piece of work as is of great concernment,
the opportunity of which if lost, will be a great loss to him: if these
servants shall trifle away this opportunity with wrangling one with another
about their work, one opposing another in it, will this be a good account to
their Master? So much time was spent in work, but so much in quarelling,
whereby there is little of the work done. We read of Nehemiah, cap. 6. 3. when
Sanballat and Tobiah, those quarelsome companions sent to him to meet them,
intending to quarrel with him, he answered them, I am doing a work, so that I
cannot come, why should the work cease? If we see men set upon strife and
contention, we should not meddle with them, to spend our time in answering what
comes from them; our case were miserable, if we were at the mercy of every
quarreller, bound to answer whatsoever he pleases to put forth. But let us tend
our work; these opportunities of service that now we have are too precious to
give away to them, to be spent, to be lost upon them. How just were it with God
to take these opportunities from us, to bring us again into such a condition
as we should be glad of a days employment in public service, and then oh how
would our consciences wring us, and grate upon us for such ill improvement of
them, for such unworthy loss of them when we had them!

Phara^hs Butler toward Joseph, was when he was out of prison, enjoying his
preferment at the Court, and Joseph remained still in prison. Perhaps while they
were fellow prisoners he might tell Joseph that his heart did close much with
him, and if he had any opportunity to be useful to him, oh what a happiness
should he think it to himself! Surely it should be improved for the good of
Joseph to the uttermost. But when he was preferred, when he had respect amongst
great ones, and Joseph still was kept low, then he is not the same man that he
was when he was Joseph's fellow-sufferer. Now he has other things in his head:
Joseph is forgotten by him. Where this evil is, be sure God will find it out:
for it is an evil very grievous to his Spirit. Put these together, and it will
appear that it is no time now to contend, whatsoever we do at other times. I
remember I have read of Sir Francis Drake, having a dear friend of his slain
by a bullet as he sat with him at supper, Ah says he, I could grieve for
thee, but now is no time for me to let down my spirits. So when any shall do
such things as might cause contention, do you speak to your own heart, Ah I
find my anger stirred; I could contend, but now is no time for me to let my
spirits rise in a contending way; these times call for peace and union, not for
strife and debate. This is the 11. aggravation we are divided in such a time as
this.

The twelfth is, we are divided, notwithstanding we are all

13. We have complained of others who are in place of power, on in their work!
How would they be edified, praising the Lord! What a heaven upon earth should
we have! And yet we find it otherwise. We may say, we looked for light, and
behold, (I will not say darkness) but behold dimnesse even from them: for
brightness, but behold obscurity. Oh how do the carriages of these men in
some degree justify the harshnesse, sowernesse, domineering and cruelty of
some of the Prelates! We hope nothing shall ever befall us as to be such a
temptation to us, as to justify their places. But some of their persons are so
far justified, as there is occasion given to think they were not such vile
men as heretofore we thought they were. For now we see what a temptation there
is in having the times shine upon me, in having power put into men's hands. We
see now that men who have other manner of principles then ever they had, yet
how sadly they miscarry when they come under the like temptations. How can we
answer Christ Jesus for these things?

Frankford, but his heart must needs bleed within him? And of late what evils
have almost all the Protestant party in Germany and through the Christian
world, suffered by divisions! And yet we engage our selves in them, and are
every day engaging our selves more and more, How deep we shall sink the Lord
knows.

(...). Naz. Orat. 12.
Nazianzen in his 12. Oration rebuking this strange miscarriage of men, has
this notable expression, While we would have charity, we study hatred, while we
seek to set up the corner stone which unites the sides together, we are loosned
our selves, we are for peace, and yet we fight one with another. Our ways of
late have been little else but doing and undoing; yea we cross our selves in
what we would do, by doing what we do. We are all full of contradictions in
our own spirits and actions, and we cry out of others, that they are not
consistent to their own principles.

Religion to patronize them. We divide from one another, and all under a
pretense of Religion. Surely this Virgin is forced, for there is nothing more
contrary to the name or nature of Religion, then to cause or further divisions.
The name carries union, strong union with it: Religio a Religando, from binding
us again to God, and to one another, after we were divided by our sin. To
father our wicked divisions upon Religion, is no other then to bring down the
Holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove to be like a Vultur or a Raven. What
spirit is it that we profess our selves to be acted by when we are working for
Religion? is it not the Spirit of God? and is not that a Dovelike spirit?
although we dishonor our selves by discovering the baseness of our own
spirits by our divisions, yet let us not put dishonor upon the blessed Spirit
of God; this makes the sin to be abominable. (...).
Nazianzen in his forenamed Oration, inveighs against this in those in his
time, In our pleadings for the truth, we (says he) belie one another; as if
this were the way to maintain truth.

CHAP. XXIX.
The woeful miseries that our divisions bring upon us.
THey are themselves fruits of the curse, therefore there can come no other but
cursed fruits from them, except God, contrary to their nature, be pleased to
overruled them, which he only is able to do. It was the curse of God upon the
ground, Briars and thorns shall it bring forth; It is no less curse of God
upon men's hearts, that they bring forth such briars and thorns, by which they
tear one another.

First, our divisions provoke the wrath of God against us; Esaias 9. 21. Manasseh
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and they together against Judah;
for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
When we are thus one against another, the anger of God is not turned away from
us, we may fear his hand will yet be further stretched out against us; so long
as our wrath one against another continue so hot, certainly Gods wrath is not
appeased.

We read of Abraham, when he was about sacrificing Isaac, he found a Ram
entangled in the briars, which God had prepared for him to be a sacrifice: We
are this day entangled in the briars, and we know not how to get out, it is a
sign that we are prepared to be a sacrifice even to the wrath of God.



Hoc Ithacus velit, and magna mercentur Atridae. We have often said that some
who have kept at the Parliament have served the designs of the King and those
about him better then they who were with him. Certainly those who foment
divisions amongst us, do serve our enemies turn more then many that are with
them. When in our contentions our spirits rise one against another, and we
reproach one another, we do not consider, (...). Naz. Orat. 14.
says Nazianzen, how unsafe it is to put weapons into our enemies hands. Yea
he thought in his time, though near thirteen hundred years since, the divisions
of the Churches to be a great means to further and hasten the coming of
Antichrist: for so he says in the same Oration before quoted, I verily fear
lest Antichrist should come suddenly upon these our divisions, (...). Naz.
Orat. 14.
and lest he should take the advantage of these our offenses and distempers to
raise his power over us. Let those therefore who cry down Antichrist so much,
cry down divisions also, lest they prove to serve the designs of Antichrist in
a very great-measure, though they think not so.

Thirdly, by these we make our selves a scorn to our enemies. Hosea 17. ult.
The rage of their tongue shall be their division in the land of Egypt. When
Malignants hear our rage one against another, we are a derision amongst them;
these Egyptians jeere us, they contemn us, and all the power we can make
against them. I find in one of Melancthons Epistles, a story of one Bessarion,
exhorting the Princes to concord, that they might join against the Turks he
brings in this Apologue: There was a war between the wolves and the dogs;
Bellum erat inter lupos and canes; cumque nunciatum esset lupis venire ingentem
exercitum canum ad lacerandos lupos, missus est speculator unus ex vetulis
lupis, renuntiat esse quidem multitudinem canum long majorem quam luporum, sed
been sperandum esse quia v^derit multas esse dissimilitudines col^rum in
canibus, hac voce confirmati lupi dissimiles facile pelli posse sperebant.
Melancthon. Epist. 108.
news came to the wolves that there was a h^ge army of dogs coming against
them, intending to tear them in pieces; the wolves sent an old wolf out to be
a scout, he comes and tells them there were indeed a great company of dogs more
then themselves were, but they need not fear, for he perceived they were of
different colors: Upon this the wolves made nothing of them, accounting it an
easy matter to deal with them who were so differing amongst themselves. In
the same manner, says Melancthon, do Staphilus, and Canisius, and others of
the pogish faction, triumph in respect of us; upon which he folls to prayer,
That the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, would govern them, and make all
in our Churches to be one in him.

Fourthly, yea by these we are like to be made a prey to our enemies. Kings 17.
afterward the divisions of the other tribes made them a prey to the Romans.
When the Turks have prevailed over Christians, do not all stories tell us it
has been through the divisions of Christians? When Normans, Danes prevailed in
England, it was by the advantage they had of our divisions; if we will still
divide and contend, our condition may prove to be like two birds pe^king at one
another, in the mean time the Kite comes and catches them both away.

Fifthly, if God should free us from our enemies, yet we are like Gal. 5. 15. If
ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another.
What biting and devouring was this? It was not in an open hostile way, they did
not take up Arms one against another, but by their different opinions and
contentious carriages in matters of Religion. Their differences in the matters
of Religion were very great, Non de finibus, sed de haereditate, not about the
bounds, but the inheritance it self; yet unpeaceablenesse and violence in
their carriages one toward another, though the matter of their difference was
so great, is condemned and threatened by the Apostle. Do not our Adversaries
say, Let them alone and they will devour one another? God gives us good hope
that he will deliver us from our enemies; but the hearts of many godly and wise
men tremble within them, fearing lest that wolvish distemper of ours should
feed upon our own flesh, when the matter that it had to feed upon from without
is taken away.

Insecta, which after they are cut asunder, yet the several parts live, they
wriggle up and down a little while, but they cannot hold long. So it is like to
be with us; except we join we cannot live.



be as troubled waters full of soil. In the beginning of this Parliament there
was as hopeful a generation of young ones coming up as ever the Sun saw, but
many of them have lost their lives in this public Cause; God will certainly
take a valuable consideration at the hands of the adversaries for their blood
especially; we have cause to bless God for them: God made use of them to stop
the rage, the overflowing of the proud adversaries upon us; they have served
their generation, and have been more useful in it, then others who have lived
70. or 80. years formerly: but for those who are preserved, these divisions in
the things of Religion have spoiled many of them, they are carried away with
such a strange kind of spirit of error, of conceitednesse, folly, wilfulness,
bitterness, licentiousness, and boldness, that their hopeful beginnings are
lost, so that the next generation is like to reap very sour, bitter, and
unwholesome fruits of these our quarrels and contentions. By what has been said
you may see why the Spirit of God, Prove. 6. 19. puts the sowers of discord
amonst those whom God hates: What the harvest of such seed is like to be, we
shall see in the next Head.

Aggravations of the misery that comes by our divisions.
FIrst, our misery is the greater, because it is still increasing; England the
year after the great mortality 1349. wanted some of their cheek teeth; T.
Walsingham in eodem anno.
if we should judge of men's teeth by their biting, one would think that now men
had more teeth, or at least far sharper then they were wont to have; there
was never such biting as now there is. Yet thanks be to God this increase is
not in all places, not in our Armies; time was when we were much afraid of
divisions there, but now we hear they are comfortably united, Dividing terms
are not heard amongst them as formerly; though there be differing judgments,
their hearts and arms are open one to another, they love one another, they are
willing to live and dye one with another. The blessing of the Almighty be upon
you; go on and prosper, the Lord is with you; he has done great things by you,
and delights to use you in great services, for the honor of his Name and good
of his people. You have had, and have the prayers of the Saints, they bless
you, and bless God for you. Soldiers united in love, and hating that which is
vile, are exceedingly strengthened in valor.

Plutarch reports of a Theban band that were but three hundred, yet were the
most terrible to the enemies, of any, and did the greatest services: They were
called the Holy Band, because they hated dishonest things, and were willing to
venture their lives for honest causes, fearing dishonorable reproach more then
honorable danger. But though this was one cause why it had that name, Plutarch
in the life of Pelopidas.
yet Plutarch thinks that the first cause why it was called the Holy Band, was
from their entire love one to another. By the self same reason (says he) that
Plato calls a lover a divine friend by Gods appointment, These Thebans,
together with other of their Countrymen, had a great power of the
Lacedaemonians to resist such a power as the Athenians, for fear of it, left
off to protect them, renouncing that league that they had before with them.
Every man, said the Thebans, were undone. But these despised Thebans meeting
with the Lacedaemonians about the City of Tegyra, where according to the
compute of some they were six to one, and a warlike valiant people, one came
running to Pelopidas the Captain of the Thebans, saying, Sir, we are fallen into
the hands of the Lacedaemonians. Nay, are they not fallen into ours? says
Pelopidas. And so it fell out, for they utterly routed them. In all the wars
that the Lacaedemonians ever had, as well with the Grecians as with the
barbarous people, no Chronicle ever mentioned that they were overcome by any
number equal in battle. Whereupon these Thebans grew so terrible to their
enemies, that none durst for a long time encounter with them. After this
battle Pelopidas would never separate them one from another, but keeping them
together he would always begin with them, to give a charge in his most
dangerous battles. Yet notwithstanding all this service they had ill requital
from the people, for when their Captain Pelopidas came home, they stirred up a
party against him, that sought to break him, though they could not prevail. It
is farther reported of this Band, that it was never broken nor overthrown till
the battle of Choeronea, where it seems they had some added to them. And see
what love and valor will do in an Army unto death. Philip taking a view of
the slain bodies there, he saw four hundred dead on the ground, one hard by
another, all of them thrust through with Pikes on their breasts, and being told
that it was the Lovers Band, he fell a weeping for pity, saying, Woe be to
them that think these men did or suffered any evil or dishonest thing.

Ever since our Armies have been united, God has wonderfully blessed them.
Shall men of war be at peace? and is this comely? and shall men of peace be
at war? how uncomely will this be? Yet so it is, The seeds of dissentions
never sprung up more against us then of late they have done. The spirits of men
seem to be heat and ready to boil one against another in this City more then
heretofore they have done. The Lord has made London a blessing to the whole
Kingdom, and the neighbor Kingdoms too. The children not yet borne will have
cause to bless God for London, for their union, their faithfulness, their
courage, their bounty: and shall now, when God is about bringing in rest to us
from the rage of our enemies, a fire of dissension be kindled amongst us? Shall
the comfort of all our former mercies and future hopes be lost, by raising up
of new quarrels? and must this come from the City? The Lord forbid. The Lord
make you like Jerusalem, a City Compact, at unity within it self. Your very
name carries unity in the face of it. Civis a coeundo, says Cicer: quod vinculo
quodi societatis in unu^ coeunt quasi Coivis. I remember I have read in Livy a
notable speech of Scipio to the Citizens at Carthage. By what name, says he,
shall I call you? Live* Hist: l. 28.
I know not: Shall I call you Cives, qui a patria vestra descivistis? Things
are not come to this pass in this City. The Lord forbid that there should ever
be that degenerating from that unity and love heretofore has been, that there
should be cause to say, Shall you still be called Cives? qui a pristina
unitate, a pristino amore mutuo descivistis, who have departed from your former
unity and mutual love. Oh no, Let brotherly love continue, Heb. 13. 1. Let
none take your crown, but abide glorious in the eyes of the whole Nation about
you, and all strangers that come in to you. We pray for the peace of London,
Let them prosper that love it, Peace be within her walls, and prosperity within
her Palaces. If any shall say, the City is not guilty herein, it is but some
few private men: I gladly answer as Scipio in his forenamed speech did to the
Carthaginians, making such an objection, Libenter credam negantibus, I am very
willing to believe it. Only do you make it appear to be so, by knitting your
selves so much the more strongly together, by how much any amongst you seeks to
disunite you.





Judah came up to Samson, to deliver him to the Philistines, Judge. 15. 11, 12.
says Samson to them, But swear to me that ye will not fall upon me your
selves. He thought it a very grievous thing for the men of Judah to fall upon
him. He did not so much regard what the Philistines could do against him.
Certainly there is nothing in the world more sad then for one brother to make
another miserable. The History of that War between Sylla and Marius tells of
one having slain a man not knowing him, but after he looked and found it was
his brother, in the anguish of his heart, because he had slain his brother, he
took his sword and ran it into his own bowels. It is a great evil to be an
instrument of evil to our brethren, and to suffer evil from our brethren.

This consideration might be enough to stop us in our divisions, and cause us
to think of ways of joining. Plutarch in the forecited place, the life of
Pelopidas, says, that the Poets write that the misfortune of Laias who was
slain by his brother Oedipus, was the first original cause that the Thebans
began to be in such love one with another, to join in that Holy Band before
mentioned. If this were cause enough to take us off from our contentions, we
have enough of this amongst us. The Lord be merciful to us.

Fifthly, the misery of our contentions in the Civil State is such, Nullos
habitura triumphos, there was no triumph, but sadness even in the victory.

Sixthly, what help can there be? for we wilfully make our

Thus you have seen what evil and bitter things our divisions are; their root
is evil and bitter, and they are the root of much evil and bitter fruit. We
read Genesis 38. 29. that Pharez was the son of Tamar; Pharez signifies division,
fraction, from whence he had his name; (...)
Tamar signifies a Palm tree, Ab amaritudine, says Pagnine, according to some,
from bitterness; Division comes from bitterness, and begets, like it self,
nothing but bitterness.

CHAP. XXX.
Cautions about our Divisions, that we may not make an ill use of them, but try
if it be possible to get good out of them.
OUr Divisions are very evil, yet let us not make them worse then they are,
and let us take heed that we be not made morse by them. Wherefore we shall*

First, show what are those ill uses which many make of them.

Secondly, that it is no such strange thing as some would make it, that there
should be divisions in times of Reformation.

Thirdly, how it comes to pass that godly men are divided, who above all men,
one would think, should agree.

Fourthly, why these differences are so strong, and sometimes so sharp amongst
those men who seem to come very near together in the maine, the matter of whose
difference lies in smaller things.

Fifthly, how far God himself, and Christ, and the Gospel may be said to have a
hand in our Divisions.

Sixthly, What good uses we should make of our Divisions.

For the first. The ill uses that many make of our Divisions, are,

Number. 16. 13. out of discontent with their present condition, they commend the
Land of Egypt, wherein they were Bondslaves, to be a Land that flowed with
milk and honey, murmuring at Moses that brought them out of such a Land. The
Land of Canaan that God promised to carry them to, was a Land that flowed with
milk and honey, but out of the perverseness of their spirits they despised
that Land, and Egypt now in this froward humor of theirs, must be the Land
that flowed with milk and honey. Oh the perversenss of men's hearts! if they be
but a little crossed, how hard is it for God or man to please them! how
unworthy are such froward spir^ts as these, to live in such a time as this, to
see the great work of God that he has done for his people. It is true,
heretofore men seemed to be more united then now, there appears more
differences in men's opinions and ways then formerly; but whence was it that
men formerly were not at such a distance? was it not because they were chained
together? two prisoners chained to a block keep together all day long; men that
are at liberty walk in the streets at a distance; if the prisoners should
commend their life as more comfortable then yours, because they keep closer
together all the day then you do, would you envy their happiness? time has
been that a tyrannical chain has been upon us, we dared not then discuss any
matters of differerence with freedom; if a Convocation determined it, there was
a chain upon us to fasten us to it; now God has given us more liberty to
debate things freely, that we may find out the truth more clearly; and though
men while they are in their debates be at some distance one from another, do
not say it was better with us heretofore then it is now, thou do not speak
wisely concerning this thing.

Surely these men who are so desirous of former times, are ad servitudinem
nati, born to be slaves; it is pity but they should have their ears bored for
slaves.

Secondly, the ill use that others make of these divisions is to

Thirdly, because of these divisions, many resolve they will stand Neuters,
they see it is doubtful which way things may go; seeing there are such
differences, we will stand by and look on till we see how they will agree; by
this means they do not only disert the public Cause that is now on foot, but
they are in danger to be for any thing at the last, or to turn Atheists.
Chrysostom in his Sermons upon the Acts, (...), etc. Chrystost. in Act. c. 15.
Chap. 15. inveighs against such men as these; he there makes an Apology for
the dissentions of the Christians, the Heathens objected, We would come to you,
but we know not to whom we should come; one is of one mind, another is of
another, we cannot tell what you hold, you are so different from your selves.
Chrysostomes answer is, This is but a cavil; for first, this hinders you not
in other matters, where there is difference amongst men, yet you will take
pains and enquire which is the right; Yea secondly, if you did know what you
should hold, yet you would not embrace it, for you do know what you should do,
and yet you do not do it; do what you know, and then ask of God, and he will
reveal more to you.

perverse patient, Nova atque ina^dita est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus
exigit fidem. Gr. lib. 2. Ep* 52.
who flies in the face of his Physician, because his Physic makes him sick.

Fifthly, others seeing much evil come of the divisions amongst us, they think
there is no way to help them but by violence, forcing men to yield to what they
think is right. They think they do God good service in compelling men to the
same judgment and way that themselves are of. A verbo ad serrum, ab atramento
ad armamenta, a pennis ad bipe^^nes confugere. Gerard.
This is a very ill use of them. It is a new and unheard of way of preaching,
says Gregory, to require men to believe by blows. To go from the Divine Word
to an iron Sword, from the Pen to the Halbert, to persuade men to believe, Nec
religionis est cogere religionem quae sponte sus^pi debeat non vt; and si nos
compulernis ad sacrificandum, nihil praestab it is d^is vestris, ab invitis enim
sacrificia non desiaerabunt, nisi contentiosi sunt; contentiosus autem Deus non
est. Tertul.
is a way that Gerard. confess. Cath. l. 1. p. 809. exclaims against.

Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 3. cap. 21. reports of the
Macedonians petitioning Jovianus the Emperor for the banishing of those who
were not of their judgment in matters of religion of great moment. The
Emperor receiving their supplication gave them no other answer but this, I
tell you truly, I cannot away with contention, but such as embrace unity and
concord I do honor and reverence them. Tertullian in his book ad Scapulam,
cap. 2. says, It is not the way of Religion to compel Religion, which ought
to be taken up willingly, not by force. If you should compel us, says he, to
sacrifice, what did you in this for your gods? none desire sacrifice from those
who are unwilling, but such as are contentious: but God is not contentious. I
find in Thuanus his History, Cum mini^e aequum censcret Senatus, suarum
partium esse duxit ut ad te racionibus referretur, quibus adductus fuit quo
minus et subscriberet, suppliciis id tantum effectum est ut ^rimen potius
detestabile esset, quam erro^es ipsi corrigerentur, aequum videri ut potius
^eteris Ecclesiae vestigiis (...), quae non ferro and flammis in religione
constituenda ac propaganda, sed puriore doctrina and honestis vitae antistitum
exemplis (...) confecis, hic vivant and sincere Dei verbum doceant, hac ratione
pravarum de religione opinionum luxueris co^^ceatur, haec remedia si
spernaantur, nullae leges, nulla edicta huic malo curando satis erunt. Th^anus
hist. lib. 16.
lib. 16. a notable passage in a writing that the Senate of Paris sent to their
King in the year 1555. after he had sent forth an Edict requiring great
severity against those who differed in matters of Religion: They professed to
him they did not think his Edict equal, and that they could not subscribe to
it: for, say they, we see that such severe punishments, for matters of
Religion, render men detestible to the people, but their errors abide the same
still, they are not at all altered in their opinions by severity but for their
parts they give their judgments, that it were better to go in the old way of
the Church, which did not propagate Religion by sword and fire, but by pure
doctrine, and the good examples of the lives of their Bishops. Let them live
piously, and teach the word of God sincerely, this is the way to root out
errors that increase so fast: but if this be not done, no Laws, no Edicts of
men will do any good. Sleidan. lib. 26. anno 155.
Sleidan in his Commentaries has set down a Decree of the Emperor, King
Ferdinando, and the rest of the Princes and States, that the controversy of
Religion should be appeased by none other but by godly, friendly, and quiet
means. But a few pages after he relates the effect of a Petition of those in
Austria for their freedom in Religion, to King Ferdinando, with an answer of
the King to them: In which there was this passage, That such as shall not like
that Religion which the Prince has chosen, may have free liberty to sell that
they have, and go dwell in another place, without any blemish to their
estimation. To which the Ambassadors of Austria reply: What discommoditie were
herein, how heavy and sorrowful news this would be to the people, who sees
not? When they shall hear that they which have been ever most ready to spend
their blood and life for the preservation and dignity of the House of Austria,
must now forsake their most sweet native Country, so many years inhabited and
enriched by their forefathers? Therefore we admit not that Answer in this
behalf: but as we have done heretofore, for the honor of God we beseech you,
that you would suffer us to have no let in this matter, etc.

But you will say, What does all this tend to, but to plead for an absolute
Toleration, which you seemed before to be against?

I answer, In quoting these Authors I own not such a judgment that possibly you
may think to be in some of them for an absolute Toleration. How a Toleration
should be limited and granted, I have spoke to before: but I produce the
Authors to this end, that the rigidnesse of the judgments of some amongst us
that think all differences in religion thot cannot be quelled by argument, must
be quelled b^ violence, may be mollified. I am sure if any of these men go too
far one way, those which I am now reproving go as wide another. Fierce
violence in matters of Religion is dangerous; as the Surgeons rigorous
handling his patients arm, breaks that bone quite, which before was but out of
joint.

6. Some take advantage by them to give themselves to loosenes Ezekiel. 44. 10.
The Levites that are gone from me, which went astray when Israel forsook me,
they shall also bear their iniquity. The commonnesse of a sin is an aggravation
of it.

7. Some make no other use of them, then to observe which Dioclesians time,
they could be Pagans; if in Constantines, Christians; if in Constantius,
Arrians; if in Julians, Apostates; if in Jovians, Christians again; and all
this within less then the age of a man.

8. Some have their spirits in a base manner subjugated by

9. Others are discouraged, upon the sight of the great evils that daily ^low
from our divisions, and are like still to flow, their hearts sink in despair.
They call into question whether it be the cause of God that we now undertake.
When the Temple was building, there was no noise of hammer, axe, or any tool
of iron heard in the house while it was in building. But oh Lord is our work
Temple-work! We hear the noise not of hammer and axe, but of swords and
spears, of drumms and cannons, of railings and revilings; these are dreadful
in our ears: but let us not be discouraged, for though there was no noise
heard in the House, yet in preparation for the House there was. It may be all
we are yet about is only preparatory work for the House of our God. If God will
use us in this only, yet blessed be his name. Wherefore though our divisions be
many and very evil, yet they are not so evil nor many, but that there may be
hope in Israel concerning this thing. For consider,


THe Apostle would not have us think it strange concerning the fiery trial, he
means there of persecution. The fiery contentions amongst us, are another fiery
trial. We should not think strange of this neither; as if such a thing had
befaln us that nev^r yet befell any. I think for all circumstances it is every
hard to parallel, but the Church in all ages has been sorely afflicted with
divisions. Act. 15. 39. Paul and Barnabas, two great Apostles, were so divided,
that they could not keep company together, but went one from another in anger.
The Text says, The contentions were so sharp between them, that they
departed asunder one from another. (...) of (...) and (...), acetum.
The word signifies such a sharpness as there is in vinegar. It is used by
Physicians to signify the sharpness of the feverish humor when it is acting
in a fit. Their dissension put them as it were into the fit of a Fever. You
will say, Surely it was some very great matter that should cause such eminent
and holy men to be in such a passion one against another, to be so hot as not
to company together. Truly no: the matter was not great, it was whether Mark
should go with them or no; the one would have him, the other would not have
him, and about this the contention arose to this height. Read the Epistle to
the Romans, to the Corinthians, to the Galathians, you shall find very great
dissentions in these Churches: And in aftertimes especially, when God
delivered them from those ten bloody Persecutions, the contentions of the
Church were very great. When Constantine came to the Nicene Council, Socrat.
Eccles. hist. lib. 1. c. 5.
diverse of the Members of that Council accused one another to the Emperor,
and put up Libels one against another, which Libels Constantine caused to be
burned. After all the debates of the Council, with the presence of the
Emperor, who labored all he could for peace and union amongst them, making
large speeches to that purpose, to them, yet there were five of them dissented
from the rest in matters of greater consequence then any amongst us dissent
from our Brethren, namely, in that point of Christ's being of the same substance
with the Father. I find in Eusebius this grievous complaint: Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. lib. 8. c* 1.
After our affairs, through too much liberty, ease and security, degenerated
from the rule of piety, one pursued another with open contumely and hatred; we
impugned our selves by no other then our selves with the armor of spite and
sharp spears, of opprobrious words, so that Bishops against Bishops, and
people against people raised sedition; and they which seemed our Shepherds,
laying aside the rule of piety, practiced contention and schism among
themselves; and whilst they aggravated contention, threatenings, mutual
hatred, and enmity, and every one proceeded in ambition, much like tyranny it
self, then the Lord according to the saying of Jeremy, made the daughter of
Sion obscure, and overthrew from above the glory of Israel. The contentions of
the Church caused by those four grand Heresies of Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, one after another, exercised the Church a long time. There was much
siding, some cleaving to one part, some to another in all these four. The first
denied Christ's divinity, upon which the first Nicene Council was called. The
second, the personality of the Spirit, upon which the second General Council
was called at Constantinople. The third, the distinction of persons in Christ,
upon which the third General Council was called at Ephesus. The fourth
confounded Christ's natures, upon which the fourth was called at Chalcedon.
About this time Pelagius and Donatus caused much disturbance in Europe and
Africa. Epiphanius who lived in the third Century, reekons threescore several
Heresies that had got head, many followers of them all, which caused great
breaches in the Church from the time of the Apostles to the time wherein he
lived. After the division of the Empire into the Eastern and Western parts,
then arose mighty contention for the Primacy between the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople, that put the Church into woeful contentions for many years,
one part excommunicating the other, writing and opposing one another to the
uttermost. When this heat is at the hottest then on the one side, upon the
Western parts God let out the Goths, Hunnes, Vandals, those barbarous people,
and Mahomet upon the Eastern, so that all learning was almost extinct in the
Christian world, and gross darkness came upon the face of all Churches. The
Church having lost her lights, men of learning and worth, then the great
contention about Images arose that (...), the Eastern Churches demolishing
Images in Temples, the Western maintaining them with extreme contention against
the Eastern. There were not only excommunications thundered one against another,
but much blood was shed in that quarrel. In this condition have the Churches
been from time to time divided, yea fighting with one another about opinions.
And for the divisions and contentions between particular men, and most eminent
Lights in the Church, in those times, after they came to have rest from
persecutions. We find most lamentable complaints in the writings of the
Ancients, (...). Nazian. Apologet. Orat. 1.
of the extreme offense these dissentions were to the Heathen. Nazianzen in his
first Apologeticall Oration: We are made a spectacle (says he) to Angels and
Men, not as that valiant champion Paul, who fought against Principalities and
Powers, but we are made a scorn to wicked men, in their Markets, their Feasts,
their Plays, in all their meetings. The most vile people jeer us, and all this
for contending and warring one with another. Basil makes this complaint: I have
lived now (says he) the age of a man, and see more union in Arts and Sciences
then in Divinity: for in the the Church I see such dissentions as do divide it
assunder, and dissipates it.

Chrysostom and Epiphanius fell out so bitt^rly, that the one wished the other
might never dye a Bishop, Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 13.
and the other wished that he might never go home alive. And it fell out to
either of them as each one had wished to the other, for Epiphanius came not to
Cyprus, he dyed on the Seas by the way, neither did Chrysostom dye a Bishop,
for he was deposed and banished the Church. The contentions between Jerome and
Ruffinus were bery bitter, who had been formerly great friends. Augustine in
his 15. Epistle says, Quae agit arguit, quae detestat^r ^peratur. Invect. 2.
cont.
Their friendship had been famous in all the Churches. If such things may fall
out between Jerome and Ruffinus, (says he) who that is now a friend may not
fear to be an enemy? Yet Ruffinus writes two Books against Jerome, which are
entitled Ruffini Invectiva in Hieronymum. Hieron. (...) vanae intelliget, ut
complete iniquitates, and lequatur contra Deum mendacium. So Jerome ^eads the
words.
He begins his first invective, applying that of the Psalmist to Jerome, Ps.
57. 4. I lie among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose
teeth are spears, arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. In the beginning of
his second, he accuses him of lying, and that he does himself what he reproves
in others; with abundance of such kind of bitter stuff. And Jerome pays him
again in the same kind. In his 16. Epist. ad Principiam Virginem, he calls
him a Scorpion, in regard of the poison that came from him. And in his Apology
against him, lib. 3. in the beginning of it he applies that Scripture to
Ruffinus, Prove. 14. 3. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride. And that
of Isay, Isa. 32. 6. The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will
work iniquity, to utter error against the Lord. And I find in an Epistle of
Augustine to Jerome, a great complaint he makes to him of those differences
there were between Ruffinus and him: with very patheticall expressions to move
Jerome to peace. Cum legissem contabui dotore, and obrigai timore, O misera, O
mistranda conditio, conjunctissimi and familiarissimi mella Scripturarum
sanctarum pariter lamberitis, tantae amaritudinis irrepsisse perniciem Heu mihi
quivos ali^ubi simul invenire non possum, procid^rem ad pedes (...), fierem
quantum valerem, rogarem quantum amarem, etc. August. ep. 15.
When I read your Epistles, I pined away with grief, my heart was cold within
me for fear. Oh miserable, oh lamentable condition that we are in! You who
were wont to be most familiar, joined in the strongest bands; you who are wont
to lick up the honey of the holy Scriptures, now there is bitterness amongst
you. Woe is me that I cannot meet you together, that I might fall down at your
feet, and weep my fill! that I might beg of you as strongly as I love you,
sometime either of you for your own sake, sometime both of you for eithers
sake, and especially for the sake of those that are weak, for whom Christ
died, who look upon you with a great deal of danger; that you would not in
your writings spread such things one against another, which though you should
agree you could not wipe off from one another; or such things as if ye were
agreed ye would be afraid to read.

Yea many times there was very hot contest between Jerome and Augustine
himself. Sometimes I find some of their writings one against another to be
very sharp.

If we can debate things without bitterness of discord, well and good; Rogo
te, si fieri potest ut inter, nos d^sseramus fine amaritudine discordiae, Diat.
Si autem non p^ssum dicere quod emendatum videatur in scriptis, tuis, nec tu in
meis, nisi eum suspicione invidiae, aut laefione amicitiae, quiescamus, and
nostra vitae salutiqus parcanus. August. Hieronymo, ep. 15.
but if I cannot tell you what should be mended in your writings, and you tell
me what should be mended in mine without suspicion of envy and breach of
friendship, let us meddle no more, but favor our healths and lives.

In aftertimes when God stirred up a spirit in Luther, and others, to set
themselves against the tyranny of Antichrist, to throw off that heavy yoke of
bondage, the dissentions between the chief public instruments of God to the
Church was very great, Nihil est scolerum aut oredulitatis cujus me non reum
agat. Lu^h ep. ad Michaelem Stifelinum. Infensior mihi est, quam ulli bactenus
sucrunt inimici. Luth. ad Spalatinum
as Luther, and Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, and Corolostadius.

Luther in one of his Epistles says, that there was no wickedness, no
cruelty, that Zuinglius did not charge him with. And in another Epistle he
complains that Corolostadius was more malicious against him then ever any of
his enemies yet had been. And as for Oecolompadius, Luther was so provoked
against him, as he called him the black Devil. We may see what strange
corruptions are working-sometimes in the hearts of godly men.

As for the many sects and rents in and presently after Luthers time, they
would fill up a large volume to name them, with their several opinions and
ways. There is one Schlusselburgius a Protestant Divine, that has gathered
the chief of them together in twelve or thirteen several Books that he wrote
about them. There is not any one strange opinion amongst us now, but you shall
find it amongst them in terminis, and that so prevailing as to get a strong
party to join with it. Only I remember not that one that has taken some, who
though they acknowledge the Scripture, yet think there is no visible Church upon
the earth. In aftertimes whosoever shall read Junius his Comment upon Psalm.
122. will find the state of the Church in his time miserably distracted and
distressed with contentions. I cannot ( says he): but be exceedingly moved,
Non possun quin vehementissime commovear quotie, haec mala apud me reputo: quid
agam? taceam ne in tanta perturbatione publica, tantoque incendo, quod S^tanas
ex it wit? Certe incondium est in orb Christiano, nisi Deus e caelo
prospixerit omnia, conumturum animi huma^i foci sunt, in quibus peccatum
fl^g^ati linguae hae folles sunt, illae fomites. quilius incandium magis ac
magis ina ^descit: linguis succedunt chartarum virulentissimarum plaustra
quibus perrumpit incondium in omnes parts, qu^^unquae linguae p^stari non
possunt bona pars Christiani orbis, bustum videtur potius quam Christiani
gregis domicilium: an his pastores? an hae oves Christi, quas in suo mi erabili
hust^ misere (...) contab. ^scere? Sunt certe pastores adhuc, sunt oves
Christi, and Christi sunt, sed in hoc tetro and lethali incendio, nec se essc
Christi, nec pastores nec oves esse meminerani. Ju 1. Ps. 112.
when I think of these evils. What shall I do? Shall I hold my peace when
the Devil has stirred up so great a perturbation, has kindled so great a fire?
Certainly there is such a fire kindled in the Christian world, that unless God
looks from heaven upon us, it will consume all: the minds of men are as
hearths for this fire, upon which sin burns; the tongues of men, some are the
bellows that blow this fire, others as fuel by which this fire burns more
and more. That the tongue cannot do to blow up and down this fire, that
virulent papers do, dungcarts of virulent papers, that is his expression. Yea a
great part of the Christian world at this time, seems to be rather like the
place of the burning of dead bodies, then the house of Christ's flock: are these
Shepherds? are these the Sheep of Christ, whom I see to consume away in their
miserable burning? Surely they are Shepherds still, they are the Sheep of
Christ, and anointed ones still: but many of them in this horrible and deadly
burning, remember not that they are Sheep or Shepherds. And thus he proceeds
further in pouring forth his soul in most grivious complaints.

This fiery trial of dissentions in the Church then is no new thing; we are to
be sensible of it, to account it a great affiction; but not to look upon it as
if some strange thing had befalne us, that never befell the Churches before.

But you will say, How can we do less but account it a very strange thing,
that those who fear God should be thus divided? that dogs should snarle one at
another, is no marvel: but that sheep, that those who are godly should do
thus, this we cannot but wonder at: for what reason can there be given for it,
yea what show of reason can there be imagined?

If we consider of things wisely, Answ. Reasons why godly men differ so much
one from another.
we have no such cause to wonder that godly men in this their estate of
imperfection should differ so much one from another as they do; For

First, every godly man prizes and seeks after knowledge; others mind little
but their profit and pleasure; they trouble not themselves about the knowing
the things of God, except ambition puts them upon it; they care not which way
truths go: But the Godly man prizes every truth at a high rate, worth the
contending for, to the uttermost, rather then to deny it or lose it. In the
dark, all colors be alike, but in the light they appear diverse. While the
Egyptians were in the dark, they all sat still, but they moved with various
motions when the light brake out upon them: when men discuss things, and
desire to see farther into them, it is impossible, considering the weaknesses
of the best, and the variety of men's apprehensions, but there must needs be
much difference in men's judgments, and then considering that every thing they
apprehend to be a truth, their consciences are engaged in it, at least thus
far, that they must not deny it for a world; this puts men's spirits at
distance, although both be godly, both love the truth equally.



The less distance men apprehend between themselves and others in regard of
power, the more differences there are amongst them, as they say the greatest
and sorest storms are about the Equinoctial: Men are kept more at peace in
the Commonwealth then in the Church, because there is a greater subjection of
one to another there, then may be admitted in the Church.

enough to the spiritual part, but in regard of our corruptions, it is a
narrow pent way; they dare not give way to themselves to decline a hairs
breadth from the rule, to gratify others; they dare not bend to them, that they
might suit more with them, but must keep themselves to the straight rule; they
must keep just in their path; they cannot go aside to give way to others; hence
there is clashing, every one not having the same thoughts of the rule and way
that others have; those who walk by loose rules, in ways that are broad, even
to their flesh, they can sure themselves one to another easily, they can
gratify their friends, yea the corruptions of their friends more then others
can do; godly men cannot yield for peace sake to such terms as other men can.

Fourthly, the things that the Saints are conversant about, are

Fifthly, the things of Religion are hidden mysteries, they are

Sixthly, the Saints are bound to watch over one another, each great evil, a
shame to those who are godly, that it should be so upon any terms.



Thus you see it is no such wonder why there are dissentions amongst men that
truly fear God; Suppose they should live all together, yet so long as they
live here in this muddy world, it cannot be but there will be sometimes foul
weather amongst them; but if you look into the Church, and consider of the
dissentions there, there is a farther reason for them, for usually there are
many hypocrites mingled with the godly there, they taking up a profession of
religion and so creep into the Church, they find spiritual things unsuitable
to them, hence they fly off, Hypocritis nihil est crudelius, impatientius, and
vindictae cupidius, plane sunt serpents, quo nullum est animal vindictae
cupidius.
their spirits not being brought under the yoke of Christ, they fling against
those things that pinch them. We read Number. 11. 4. that the great trouble the
Children of Israel had among them, after they were got out of Egypt, was from
the mixed multitude that was among them; these are as ill humors in the body,
that do much disturb the quiet of it. None have more turbulent, cruel,
impatient spirits, then hypocrites; none are so desirous of revenge as they,
says Luther.

(...). Epiph lib 1. Tom. 2. Haeres. 9. vel. 29. Montague Act. and Mon. c. 7.
p. 471.
the fourth thing propounded, is to show, that those that come nearest
together, yet differing in some things, are many times at greater variance one
with another, then those who differ in more things from them. The Jews and
Samaritans were at greater variance then Jews and Heathens.

Epiphanius tells of a sect of the Jews, the Nazarites, who continued the
Customs and Ceremonies of the Jews, but acknowledged Christ also; and the
Jews in hatred to them cursed them solemnly three times a day, morning, noon,
and evening, when they went into their Synagogue to pray.

The Turks have a honorable esteem of Christ, which the Tartars have not; yet
they say, that the Tartars turn. Christians sooner then the Turks: The Turks
and Persians are both Mahometans, they are both circumcised, but the Turks
follow the way of Ebubezer, and the Persians are of the Schohle of Haly; they
detest one another more then they do the Christians; they will both tolerate
Christians to live amongst them, but they will not tolerate Mahometans, who are
in a different order from themselves. Neque tantum nocent pontificii quantum
falsi fratres, qui eandem spem, fidem, doctrinam, invocationem jactant, and
sunt nobis simillimi; ideo Papistae ridcut, and dicunt, Mordent se invicem, and
invicem consumuntur. Luth. in Genesis c. 37.


Luther complains much of those who acknowledged the same doctrine, professed
the same faith with himself, came to the same Sacraments, yet were worse
enemies then the Papists, so that the Papists laughed at them, and said, They
bite one another, and are consumed one of another.

I have read of a profane speech of one Cosmus Duke of Florence, against some
perfidious friends, You shall read ( says he) that we are commanded to
forgive our enemies, but you never read that we are commanded to forgive our
friends. Breaches of friends of such as are otherwise nearest are the greatest.
Prove. 18. 19. A brother offended is harder to be won then a City, and their
contertione are like the bars of a Castle.

1. We see it in nature, the nerrer the union is, the more grievous

2. Those who agree in many things, have hope it may be to get

3. Those who agree in many and great things, and yet stand

4. Those who come up near to others, and yet dissent, seem then those do who
are at a greater distance: it makes men think such a one is not in the right,
if he were, those who come so near to him would see it; they who think
themselves got beyond others, cannot enjoy that comfort and content in what
they are beyond others in, as otherwise they might, because such as are so near
them are against it, if they did not agree in most things, and those of
greatest moment, their opposition would not be much regarded: but because they
are such men who for their judgments and lives are so unblameable, their
differing in such a thing is more then if a hundred times as many, who were at
a greater distance in their principles and lives, should differ from us.




GOd had a great stroke in the division of these ten Tribes from the two, 1.
Kings 1^. 23, 24. The word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Return every man to hits house, for this thing is from the Lord. In the sense
of the Prophet there, we may say that our Divisions are from the Lord. We are
wrangling, devising, plotting, working one against another, minding nothing but
to get the day one of another: but God is working out ends above our reach, for
his glory and the good of his Saints. What God aims at in our divisions.
There must be Heresies, says the Apostle, I Cor. 11. 19. So there must be
Divisions.

That word Haeresis is used to signify several opinions, Non sum in eadem cum
illo haeresi. Tul. paradox. (...).
several ways, Haereses Platonicae, Haereses Peripateticae. Chrysostom
interprets the place of the Apostle, There must be Heresies, of such Divisions
as we are treating of.

But why must there be Divisions, what does God aim at in them?

Answ. First, the discovery of men's spirits, that they which are approved may
be manifest, says the Apostle. By those divisions in Corinth, Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 11. 9. (...).
wherein the rich divided from the poor, whereby the poor were condemned, the
graces of the poor in bearing this were manifested. Thus Chrysostom upon the
place: The Apostle says this, That he might comfort the poor which were able
with a generous mind to bear that contempt. The melting of the metal
discovers the dross, for they divide the one from the other. These are melting
times, and thereby discovering times. If Reformation had gone on without
opposition, we had not seen what drossie spirits we had amongst us. Those who
have kept upright without warping in these times are honorable before God, and
his holy Angels and Saints. Chrysostom in 1. Cor. 11. 2.


2. By these Divisions God exercises the graces of his servants. A little skill
in a Mariner is enough to guide his Ship in fair weather: but when storms
arise, when the Seas swell and grow troublesome, then his skill is put to it.
In these stormy troublesome times there had need be much wisdom, faith, love,
humility, patience, self-denial, meekness, all graces are put to it now,
they had need put forth all their strength, act with all their vigor; our
graces had need be stirring, full of life and quickness now. God prizeth the
exercise of the graces of his Saints at a very high rate. He thinks it worth
their suffering much trouble. It is a good evidence of grace, yea of much
grace, to account the trouble of many afflictions to be recompensed by the
exercise of graces. In times of division men had need stir up all their
graces, and be very watchful over their ways, and walk exactly, be
circumspect, accurate in their lives. Those who have not their hearts with
them, have their eyes upon them, prying into them, watching for their halting.
When there is siding there is much observing. Lord (says David, Psalm. 27. 11.)
teach me thy way, and lead me in a plain path because of mine enemies, so it is
in your books; but you may read it because of mine observers: enemies are
observers. Hence it was the policy of the Lacedaemonians always to send two
Ambassadors together which disagreed among themselves, Aristot. polit. lib. 2.
c. 7.
that so they might mutually have an eye upon the actions of each other.

Non peri^^it^dicere ipsas (...) subministrarent. Tertul.
that thou may stumble upon them and break thy self for ever. God has no
need of thee. If thou will be froward and perverse against his truths, if thou
have a mind to take offense, you shall have matter enough before you to take
offense at. Stumble and break your necks, as a just reward of the perverseness
of your hearts. These divisions which you rejoice in, which you can speak of as
glad that you have such an objection against my people and ways that your
hearts are opposite to, shall cost you dear, even the perdition of your souls
everlastingly.

It was a speech of Tertullian, I account it no danger to affirm, that God has
so ordered the revelation of truth in Scriptures, that he might administer
matter for Heretics.

Dan. 12. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. To
some these divisions darken truths, to others they enlighten them. We may well
behold men's weakness in these divisions, but better admire Gods strength and
wisdom in ordering them to his glory, and his childrens good.

Be not discouraged ye Saints of the Lord, at these divisions, your Father has
a hand in them, he will bring good out of them. Yea Christ, who is the Prince of
peace, has a ^and in them. Matthew. 10. 34, 35. he says, Think not that I am
come to send peace on the earth, I came to bring a sword. I am come to set a
man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother. One
would think it to be the strangest speech that could be, to come from the mouth
of him who is the great peacemaker. Oh blessed Savior, must we not think that
thou art come to send peace? Thou art our peace. Is not thine Embassage from
thy Father, an Embassage of peace? True: peace with my Father, but not peace on
the earth; not an earthly peace; do not think that I came from heaven to work
this for men, that they should live at ease in plenty and pleasure, that they
should have no disturbance, no trouble to the flesh: no, the event of my
coming you will find to be a sword, divisions, and that between those of the
nearest relation. A child who is wicked will despise and break with his godly
father, and the daughter with her godly mother. And Luke 12. 53. the carnal
father and mother will have their hearts rise against their godly son and
daughter. I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I if it be already
kindled? Let it kindle as soon as it will, I am contented, I know much good
will come of it. These Scriptures are enough to take away for ever the offense
of divisions.

First, Christ himself is the greatest offense to wicked men that ever was in
the world: he is the stumbling stone and rock of offense, thousand thousands
being offended at him miscarry everlastingly. Christ foreseeing how many would
be offended at him, Mat. 11. 6. blesses the man who shall not be offended.
Some are offended at what they see in Christ; others apprehend whatsoever is in
him to be most excellent and lovely, that which they cannot but defend and
stand for to the death. He is disallowed of men, rejected by the builders, a
stone of stumbling to them: but to the Saints the chief corner stone, elect,
precious, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Such different apprehensions of Christ must
needs divide men.

2. Christ comes to make the greatest alteration that ever was or can be in the
world, and do we not find that troubles accompany alterations, and above all
alterations, alterations in government, and especially such a government as
gives no composition, yields no compliance with any thing else? When Christ
comes he brings his fan in his hand, he must have his floor thoroughly
purged; he gathers his wheat into his garner, and severs the chafe to be burnt
in unquenchable fire. If he comes thus, who shall abide his coming? Mal. 3. 2.
Who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a Refiners fire, and Fullers
soap, he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, he shall purify the
sons of Levi. Certainly there will be much ado when they come to be purified.
No men in the world are like to make so much stir when they come to be
purified as the Clergy will. Christ comes to cast out Devils, they will foam,
fret, vex, rend and tear when they are a casting out. The Gospel likewise
divides. The word of the Gospel is a dividing word. Heb. 4. 11. It is quick,
powerful, sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow. It divides in a man's own
heart, and divides between man and man. The light of it divides. The first
division we ever read of was of Gods making, Genesis 1. 3, 4. When he said, Let
there be light, and God divided the light from the darkness. The doctrine of
the Gospel shows the spiritualness of Gods commands, the sinfulness of
thoughts, of the first stirrings of sin, Mat. 5. this touches to the quick.

The heat of the Gospel divides: it is like fire when it comes, Is not my word
like fire? The preaching of the Gospel with power heaps coals of fire upon
men's heads, which will either melt them, or burn them. In it there is a
separation of the precious from the vile.

The Ordinances of the Gospel divide, they difference men. Some they will
receive, others they will not. They must bring men to a higher, to a stricter
way then the sluggish, dead, vain, slight, drossie hearts of men are willing to
come up unto.

The godliness that is in Christ Jesus divides, therefore whosoever will live
godly so, must expect to suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12.

1. Those who hold forth the life and power of godliness, seem to challenge a
more special peculiar interest in God then others which cannot be endured, 1 John 5. 19. We are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness.

2. Their lives condemn others, which they cannot abide, as Noah is said to
condemn the world, Heb. 11. 7.

3. In godliness there is an excellency. They whose hearts are naught cannot
look upon that has any appearance of excellency, without a spirit of envy. If
they judge men only to be conceited with it as an excellency, but for their
parts they think it not to be so, then they look upon them with a spirit of
indignation.

4. Godliness makes men zealous in such things as others can see no reason why
they should. They think they do incalescere in re frigida, and that the ground
of their zeal is vanity, and turbulency of spirit.

5. It makes men constant: nothing can turn them out of their way. The Son
yields not to his Father, the Servant not to his Master; this is judged to be
stoutnesse and wilfulness, though God knows it is far otherwise, it must
needs therefore enrage others at them.

The good uses that we are to make of our Divisions.
WHy may not meat come out of the eater, and sweet out of these bitter things?
The Heavens can draw up salt vapors from the Sea, and send them down again in
sweet refreshing showers. Why may not heavenly hearts change the very nature of
these sour brinish things, and make them sweet to themselves and others? This
is the excellency of grace; it does not only preserve the soul from the evil
of temptations, but it gets advantage by them, it turns the evil into good.
Luther upon the Galat. c. 5. v. 17. has a notable expression to set forth the
power of grace: By this a Christian (says he) comes to be a mighty workman,
and a wonderful creator, who of heaviness can make joy, of terrors comfort,
of sin righteousness, of death life. And why may not I add, of division and
contention, peace and union? Wherefore

First, by these Divisions men may come to see the vileness men heretofore?
Oh, had we but liberty and opportunity to be isntrumental for God, we hope we
should improve all to the uttermost for him, now God has granted these to us,
we abuse them, we grow wanton, we jarre one against another: we are like some
Mariners, who are calm in a storm, But storm in a calm. Surely every man
is vanity. The untowardnesse of the spirits of those who heretofore longed
after ordinances, freed from these defilements they mourned under, when they
have their desires in great measure satisfied, discovers so much evil in the
hearts of men, that it justifies those whom themselves have had hard thoughts
of, men who seemed carnal and naught, that you looked upon as very evil, men
of bitter spirits against good men, you thought such things apparently argued
them void of grace, and yet when you are got into Church Fellowship, that way
of freedom, that your souls mourned after a long time, now though you be
joined in covenant one to another, yet if your brethren differ any thing from
you, though they be otherwise godly, what a bitterness of spirit is there in
some of you against them! what pride! what frowardness do you manifest
against them! Oh what a poor creature is man! if once he gets power and
liberty, what a deal of filth appears in him! we may learn by this to have
charitable thoughts of some, of whom we have had hard thoughts before; we see
if these men have any grace, grace may be in a man's heart lying under much
corruption.

(...), etc. Greg. Naz. Orat.


Thirdly, let these divisions confirm us in the maine, and settle us there
more then ever; for do we not see that those many sorts of men who are divided,
who oppose one another much, yet they all join in the things of the greatest
consequence, they all witness against the common enemy? This, says Nazianzen,
is the greatest argument of the truth, that it is not overcome by time, neither
can enmity one against another put out that little spark of the love of it
that is in us, etc. If a man's house stands after many shakings of strong
winds, he concludes the foundation is good, this satisfies him, though some
tiles be shaken off.

Fourthly, let us bless God who has carried on the work

Fifthly, let us hence raise our hopes in this, that Satan's time is

Sixthly, let us from these stirs without, be put upon the laboring Adams sin,
it was Faelix* peccatum, a happy sin, because it occasioned so much good in
Man's Redemption: So I may say of that strife and contention there is among us,
it is faelix contentio, a happy contention, that God has turned to so much
good unto you.

I have read of Robert Holgate, who was Archbishop of York, because he could
not peaceably enjoy his small living in Lincolne-shire, in regard of the
litigiousnesse of a neigbouring Knight, coming to London to right himself, he
came into the favor of King Hen. the 8. and so got by degrees the
Archbishopric of York, he thought he got well by the litigiousnesse of this
Knight; but if the strifes of men shall put thee upon those providence and
duties which shall be so blessed unto thee, as to further thy getting into the
favor of the high God, and the enjoyment of the soule-satisfying sweetness
there is in peace with him; what cause shall thou have of admiring free grace,
which has brought to thee so great a good from so great an evil? and if these
strifes have been a means to move thy heart Godward for thy making thy peace
with him, let them also put thee on still to further, to confirm, to settle,
to maintain thy peace with him. When the wind and storm rises, the
Traveller plucks his cloak the closer about him; these dividing times are
stormy times, labor to get your souls to the harbor under shelter, labor to
make sure of that one thing necessary; the more strangely men look upon you,
let your hearts be stirred up to seek with the more strength the face of God,
that you may never look upon it but with joy. You hear harsh notes abroad, such
things as grieve you at the heart, labor so much the more to keep the bird
always singing in your bosom.





Antiperistas, let us labor to be so much the more united with the Saints, by
how much we see others to be divided: Men make void thy Law, says David,
therefore do I love it above gold. We use to put a price upon things that are
rare: what makes Jewels to be of that worth, but for the rarity of them? Unity,
hearty love, sweetness of communion among brethren, is now a very rare thing, a
scarce commodity, let us prize it the more, and you who do enjoy it, bless God
for it.

10. The more confused, broken, and troublesome we see thou will give them one
heart? have thou not said that they shall serve thee with one shoulder? have
thou not told us that thou will make Jerusalem a quiet habitation, that thou will take away violence, that there should be no pricking bryar nor grieving
thorn?

11. Those whose consciences can witness to them, that it Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Of Levi
he said, Let thy Vrim and Thummim be with thy holy One, whom thou did prove
at Massah, and with whom thou did strive at the waters of Meribah. Massah
signifies tentation, and Meribah, contention. Places and times of contention
are places and times of tentation. Now if God shall prove us at those places in
those times, and we be found upright, this will bring a blessing upon us. At
those waters where the people murmured, contending even with God himself,
Aaron (though there was some weakness in him) yet kept himself from being
involved in the guilt of that sin of contending with God. And Sol-Jarchi,
with other of the Hebrews, say, that the Levites were not in that sin
neither; which they think that place Malachie 2. 5. refers unto, My covenant
was with him of life and peace, for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was
afraid before my name. The fear of God was upon Levi, at that time he dared
not contend as then others did, and therefore my covenant of life and peace was
and is with him. We have been these three or four years at these waters of
Massah and Meribah, God has tried us. How happy are those who have held out,
who have kept their consciences free, upon whom the fear of God has been, and
through that fear of his, have walked before him in the ways of truth and
equity? The blessing of the Covenant of Life and Peace be upon them for ever.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Cure of our Divisions.
What gracious heart is not cut asunder with grief for those sore and
fearful evils that there are in, and come from our divisions, and is not even
the second time cut asunder with careful thoughts in it self, what may be
done to heal them? Mat. 6. 25. Christ forbids that carking care that cuts our
hearts, when it is in matters concerning our selves, yea for our lives, (...),
take no thought for your life, so it is in your books: but the word signifies,
Do not take such thought as should cut your hearts asunder: so v. 28. (...);
why do you divide your hearts? and ver. 31. (...), and ver. 34. (...) again.
But though this charge of Christ be doubled and doubled again, against our
careful dividing cutting thoughts about our selves, yet for the uniting the
hearts of the Saints together for the good of the Church, this heart-cutting
care is not only allowed, but required, 1 Cor. 12. 25. That there should be no
schism in the body, (...).
but that the members should have the same care one for another. The words are,
That the members may care, the same thing one for another, and that with
dividing, cutting care, that there might be no schism in the body. The word
that is here for care, is the same that in the former places in the 6. of Mat.
is forbidden. The expressions of my thoughtfull cares about this work, is the
subject at this time: When I set my self about it, my heart does even ache
within me at the apprehension of the difficulty of it. There are some diseases
that are called opprobria medicorum, the disgraces of Physicians, because they
know not what to say or do to them; or if they do any thing it is to little
purpose. If there be any soule-disease that is opprobrium Theologorum, the
disgrace of Divines, it is this of contention and division. How little has all
that they have studied and endeavored to do, prevailed with the hearts of men?
What shall we do? Shall we but join in this one thing, to sit down together,
and mourn one over another, one for another, till we have dissolved our hearts
into tears, and see if we can thus get them to run one into another? Oh that
it might be, what sorrow soever it costs us!

We read Judges 2. 12. 3, 4, 5. the Lord sent an Angel from Gilgal to the men
of Israel, who told them how graciously he had dealt with them, yet they had
contrary to the command of God made a league with the inhabitants of the Land,
for which the Lord threatened that they should be as thorns in their sides. When
the Angel spoke these words to the children of Israel, the people lift up
their voice and wept. And they called the name of that place Boehim, a place of
tears. Their sin was too much joining, joining in league where God would not
have them: those whom they joined with, God told them should be thorns in
their sides. Upon this they wept, and that so sore, that the place received its
name from their weeping. But oh that the Lord would send his Angel, yea his
Spirit to us, to convince us of our evil, that we to this day have not joined
in sure league one with another, but are thorns in the sides of one another:
and that after so many mercies, such great deliverances from our bondage, from
the rage of ungodly men, yea that we are so false one to another, though the
Lord has never broke covenant with us, which was the heartbreaking argument
the Angel used, ver. 1. Yea the Lord has done abundantly for us, beyond our
hopes, desires, thoughts, and that after all this there should be nothing but
breaches and divisions amongst us, that we should be not only thorns, but
spears and swords in one another sides, piercing to one another hearts. Are
we the children of Israel? Let our hearts then break for the breaches of our
hearts. Let them break, and melt, and mourn, and bleed, and resolve that
nothing shall comfort them, but peace with our God, and peace one with another.

That one Text, 1 These. 4. 9. were enough alone to pierce our hearts through
and through. As touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you,
says the Apostle, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. Oh
Lord, what are we in these days such kind of Christians as these were? Oh
that it were so with us, that we had no need to be wrote to, to be preached to,
concerning this. Does it appear by our carriages one toward another, that we
are taught of God to love one another? But that God may teach us this day,
attend to what shall be said to you in his name, which I shall cast into these
five heads: 2. Joining Principles. 2. Joining Considerations. 3. Joining
Graces. 4. Joining Practices. 5. Conclude with Exhortation.


Wherein we shall endeavor to set before you the beauty and excellency there
is in the heart, union, and mutual love of Christians. I shall not need to be
long in these: For take away Dividing Principles, Dividing Distempers. Dividing
Practices, and be thoroughly convinced of the evil of divisions, and one would
think our hearts should of themselves run into one another. But that I may not
seem to leave our wounds open, so that air should get into them, but
endeavor the closing of them, and so the healing, I shall speak something to
these five Heads:

The first joining Principle.
In the midst of all differences of judgment, and weaknesses of the Saints,
it is not impossible but that they may live in peace and love together.
IF notwithstanding the differences from Gods mind, and many weaknesses, there
may be peace and love between God and his Saints: then surely notwithstanding
these things, the Saints may be at love and peace among themselves. Let this be
laid for a ground, and let our hearts be much possessed with it, we shall find
it very helpful to our closing. Away with that vain conceit which has been
the great disturber of Churches in all ages, if men differ in their judgment
and practice in matters of religion, though it be in things that are but the
weakness of godly men, yet there must needs be heart-burning and division. Let
all peaceable men deny this consequence, Let us not say it will be so, and that
our words may be made good afterward indeed make it so: certainly the
connection of them, if there be any, is rather from the corruption of our
hearts, then from the nature of the things.

I have read of two Rivers in the East, Sava and Danuby, that run along in one
channel threescore miles together, without any noise, and yet they keep
themselves distinct, the color of the waters remain distinct, all along: why
should we not think it possible for us to go along close together in love and
peace, though in some things our judgments and practices be apparently
different one from another? I will give you who are Scholars a sentence to
write upon your Study doors, as needful an one in these times as any; it is
this: Opinionum varietas, and opinantium unitas non sunt (...).

Variety of opinions, and unity of those that hold them, may stand together.

There has been much ado to get us to agree: we labored to get our opinions
into one, but they will not come together. It may be in our endeavors for
agreement we have begun at the wrong end. Let us try what we can do at the
other end: it may be we shall have better success there. Let us labor to join
our hearts to engage our affections one to another: if we cannot be of one mind
that we may agree, let us agree that we may be of one mind.

Eusebius records a Letter that Constantine sent to Alexander and Arius, Eusebius.
of the life of Constant. l* 2 cited by Socrates Eccl. Hist. lib. 1 cap. 4.
before he apprehended the grossness of Arius his heresy, conceiving them to
differ but in smaller things, he endeavors to reconcile them: For that ( says
he) the things wherein you differ, concerns not any weighty substance of our
Religion, there is no reason why it should breed at all any division in mind,
or discord in doctrine; and this Isay not to compel you in this light
question, of what sort soever it be, altogether to condescend unto the same
sentence: and though you dissent amongst your selves about a matter of small
importance, (for neither truly are we all in all things like minded, neither
have we all the same nature and gift engrafted in us) nevertheless for all
that the sacred unity may be soundly and inviolably retained among you,
Quanquam in t^r no^ hactenus non potuit plane convenire number verum corpus and
sanguis Christi pane and vino corporaliter infit, debebat nihilominus utraque
pars altera erga alteram declarare Christianam charitatem, quatenus id omnio
eujusque conscientia s^rre potest. Coll. qu. Ma purgen^. This subscribed by
Luther, Melancthon, O colampadius, Brentius, Osiander, Zuinglius, Bucer, and
others.
and one consent and fellowship conversed between all.

I have read of the like peaceable disposition in diverse German Divines,
meeting to confer about matters of Religion in difference, in Marpurg. The
conclusion of their Conference was this: Although we see we cannot hitherto
fully agree about the corporal presence of the body and blood of Christ in the
bread and wine, yet both parts ought to declare Christian love one to another,
as far as every one can with a good conscience. Oh that this were the
conclusion of all our debates and conference, wherein we cannot come up fully
to one another judgments. If we stay for peace and love till we come to the
unity of the faith in all things, we must stay for it, for ought I know, till
we come to another world. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. He gave some Apostles, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry, till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man. The unity of the faith, and the perfect man will be both together;
and when they are, there will be no more need of any ministry, there shall be
no more preaching after we are all come to this unity: when that is done, our
work is done for this world.

The second joining Principle.
That shall never be got by strife, that may be had by love and peace.
WE would all fain have our wills: now that which lies uppermost upon many
men's hearts, that which is the first thing they do, if their wills be crossed,
is presently to strive and contend: but this should be the last thing, after
all other means are tried: this should never be made use of but in case of pure
necessity. We should first think, Is there any way in the world whereby it is
possible we may have our desires satisfied with peace, let us try this, and
another way, a third, a fourth, yea a hundred ways, if they lie between us and
the way of strife, before we come to meddle with that. This rule you will find
of very great use to order all our businesses in Churches and Commonwealths,
of Towns, Families, yea whatsoever concerns any of your persons in reference
to any other. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. rebuking the divisions of that Church, of
which they are guilty more then any, for they had many among them of raised
parts, of eminent gifts, and therefore puffed up more then others. Except God
joins eminency of grace, men of eminent gifts join less then others, whose
gifts are meaner. Among those means he directs for union, when he speaks of
love: I will show you, says he, a more excellent way, ver. last; (...), a way
of the highest excellency, beyond any expression. The way of love, of the
engaging hearts one to another, is the only way to bring men to unity of
judgment: yea the only way when all is done, for men to have their wills. I
may give you this or the other rule to bring you to think and do the same
thing, but that which has an excellency in it with an Hyperbole, is the way of
love. If you could get your minds by other ways, certainly you cannot enjoy
it with that sweetness and comfort as you may if you have got it this way.

Marcus Cato repented that ever he went by sea when he might have gone by land
(it seems the skill of those times for Navigation was not great) but certainly
there is no man living but has cause to repent him that ever he got that by
strife and contention that he might have got by love and peace. Plutarch in his
life.
What hinders why soft and gentle words may not prevail, as well as hard and
bitter language? Why may not a loving winning carriage do as much as severe
rigid violence? If it may, thou providest ill for thine own peace and comfort,
to leave this way and betake thy self to the other. Tell me, were it a sign of
valor in a man to draw his sword at every Whappet that comes near him? yea at
every Fly that lights upon him? Were it not folly and madness? Why? he may by
putting forth his finger put them off from him. Thy froward choleric spirit is
ready to draw at every thing that thou likest not. This is thy folly: thou
may with less ado have what thou have a mind to. If I would put a Feather
from me, I need not strike violently at it, a soft gentle breath will do it
better. Why should a man labor and toil till he sweats again, to take up a
pin? Have none of you sometimes made a great stir in your families about that
which when the stir is a little over you plainly see you might have had as well
with a word speaking: and has not your heart secretly upbraided you then? Try
the next time what you can do by fair and gentle means. Why should we let the
strength of our spirits run waste? Let this be a constant rule; never make use
of severity till you have tried what clemency will do: there is more power in
that to conquer the hearts of men you would feign have yield to you, then you
are aware of.

Plutarch reports of Philip of Macedon, that when one Arcadion railed on him,
the Courtiers would have had him dealt severely with; but Philip took another
course, he sends for him, and spoke gently to him, and showed great love and
respect to him: upon this Arcadions heart was turned, so as there was no man in
the world that Arcadion spoke more honorably of then of Philip, wheresoever he
came. After a while Philip met with those who would have him to have revenged
himself upon Arcadion, What say you now of Arcadion? says he: How does he now
behave himself? There is no man living, say they, speaks better of you now then
he. Well then, says Philip, I am a better Physician then you; my physic has
done that which yours never would have done.

The like he reports of Fabius, Plutarch in the life of Fabius.
who was called the Romans Target: When he heard of a soldier who was valiant,
yet practiced with some others to go and serve the enemy, he calls him to him,
and in stead of dealing with him in rigor, tells him he had not had recompense
according to his desert, and gives him honorable gifts, and so gains him to
be faithful for ever. And says he, As Hunters, Riders of Horses, and such as
tame wild beasts shall sooner make them leave their savage and churlish nature
by gentle usage and manning of them, then by beating and shackling them; so a
governor of men should rather correct by patience, gentleness, and clemency,
then by rigor, violence, and severity. None but a cruel, harsh, sordid
spirited man, will say, I had rather men should fear me then love me: God
prizes most what he has from us by love.

The third joining Principle.
It is better to do good, then to receive good.
ACtive good is better then passive; only God himself, his Angels and Saints
do good; all creatures can receive good. This principle would quickly join us;
for if this were in men's hearts, they would study to do all the good they could
to one another, and so gain upon one another hearts: and the more good we do
to any, the more will our hearts be inclinable to love them. The very
communication of goodness, if it be out of a good spirit, carries the heart
along with it to the subject this good is communicated to: the more good God
does to any, the more he loves them. God hates nothing that he has made, but
loves what there is in any thing of his work: but when he communicates his
grace, his Spirit, when he gives his Christ in these gifts, he gives his heart:
they do not only come from love, but they make the subject further lovely in
his eyes. So it is with us in our proportion: if you take a poor child from
the dunghill, or out of the Almes-house, and make him your heir, you do not
only do this good to him because you love dim, but you also love him more,
Hodie non regnavimus, quia neminem affecimus beneficio.
because you look upon him as an object of your goodness as one raised by you.
Titus accounted that day lost, a day wherein he had not reigned, if he had done
no good. This principle would make men great as well as good. It is the glory
of God that he does so much good. And if men could account this greatness,
satisfying greatness, the most and greatest contentions that are in the world
would be laid down: for what do men contend so much for as for greatness?

The fourth joining Principle.
The good of other men is my good as well as theirs.
WE are all of one body: whatsoever good others have, it is the good of the
body; it makes them some way able to do that good that we would have done, or
at least that we should desire to have done. Plutarch says that Solon made a
law whereby every man was enabled to sue whosoever wronged his neighbor, as if
he had wronged himself; he gave this reason for it, There is no good that one
man has in a Commonwealth, but it is another man's as well as his.

Community in the Church is more. 1 Cor. 3. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. If you be godly you have an
interest in all the eminent godly men in the world, in all their gifts, their
graces, in all they have or do; all that is in the world that has any good in
it, is yours, yea what is evil shall be serviceable to you for good. This is
brought by the Apostle to quiet the jarrings and contentions that were amongst
the Corinthians. One would be for Paul, another for Apollos, says the Apostle,
What need this contention, who you are for, and who another is for? they are
all yours, all the excellency there is in them is the good of every one of you.
A special reason why men contend so much, is, they think the good that other
men have is their evil, therefore they must either get it to themselves, or
darken it in those that have it. But such men acted by such a principle are
poor, low-spirited men. A man of a raised, enlarged spirit, opens his heart
that it may be filled with that infinite good in which there is all good. Now
if it be that good my soul closes with, and is satisfied in, then whatsoever
has any goodness in it, be it where it will, it flows from this Infinite
Ocean of good that my soul is launched into, and some way or other flows into
this again; though thorough men's corruptions, there may be windings and
turnings in the course of it, yet hither it comes at last, and therefore it is
mine as really and truly as any I have in mine own hand: my soul then shall
rejoice in all the good I see my brethren have, in all they do, I will bless
God for it, and seek the furtherance of it what I can. Surely this man must
needs be a man of peace and love.

The fifth joining Principle.
My good is more in the public then in my self.
THe strength, safety, excellency of a Cabin in a Ship consists not so much in
the boards of the Cabin, or the fine painting of it, as in the strength and
excellency of the ship.

It is because we have such private spirits that there are such contentions
among us: were we more public spirited, our contentions would vanish. When I
read of what public spirits many of the Heathen were, I am ashamed to look
upon many Christians. Paulus Aemilius hearing of the death of his children,
spoke with an un aunted courage thus, That the Gods had heard his prayer, which
was, that calamities should rather befall his family, then the Commonwealth.
The publikeness of his spirit made it very sweet and lovely: the story says of
him, he entreated them gently and graciously whom he had subdued, setting
forward their causes, even as they had bin his confederates, very friends and
near kinsmen. Public spirited men are men of sweet and peaceable spirits.

The sixth joining Principle.
What I would have others do to me, that will I endeavor to do to them.
Would not I have others bear with me? I then will bear with them. I would
have others do offices of kindnesses to me, I will then do offices of
kindnesses to them. I would have the carriages of others lovely, amiable to me,
mine shall be so to them. I would have others live peaceably with me, I will do
so with them. This rule of doing to others as I would be done to, is a law of
justice; such justice as keeps the peace. Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor,
Petro Mex^a in the lives of the Roman Emperors.
was much taken with this: he says he learned it from the Christians, if he
had to deal with his common Soldiers that did wrong, he punished them: but
when he had to deal with men of worth and dignity, he thought it sufficient to
reprove them with this sentence, Do as ye would be done by.

Chrysostom in his 13. Sermon to the people of Antioch, makes use of this
principle, thus, After Christ had spoken of many blessednesses, (...), etc.
( says he) then he says, Those things you would have others to do to you, do
you to them: as if he should say, There needs not many words, let thine own
will be thy law: would you receive benefits? bestow benefits then: would you
have mercy? be merciful then: would you be commended? commend others: would
you be loved? then love. Be you the Judge your self, be you the Lawgiver of
your own life. That which you hate, do not to another. Cannot you endure
reproach? do not you reproach others. Cannot you endure to have others envy
you? do not you envy others. Cannot you endure to be deceived? do not you
deceive others.

The seventh joining Principle.
It is as great an honor to have my will by yielding, as by overcomming.
MAny men in their anger will say, I will be even with him. I will tell you a
way how you may be above him: forgive him. By yiedling, pardoning, putting up
the wrong, you show you have power over your self, and this is a greater thing
then to have power over another. Numb. 14. 17, 18. Now I beseech thee let the
power of my Lord be great, pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people,
ver: 19. and by this thou may honorably prevail with thy Brother: hereby
shall thou heap coals of fire upon his head.

I have read of two famous Philosophers falling at variance Aristippus and
Aeschines, Plutarch. de cohibenda ira.
Aristippus comes to Aeschines, Shall we not be friends? says he. Yes with all
my heart says Aeschines. Remember, says Aristippus, that though I am your
elder, yet I sought for peace. True, says Aeschines, and for this I will
always acknowledge you the more worthy man; for I began the strife, and you
the peace.

The eighth joining Principle.
I will never meddle with any strife but that which shall have peace to the end
of it.
NO war is good upon any terms, taken up upon the justest ground, except it
aims at peace. Bellum minime bellum: that Soldier is a murderer that sheds
blood not in reference to peace. The Swords and Ensigns of Soldiers should
have this Motto upon them, Sic quaenimus pacem, Thus we seek Peace. Hercules
his Club was made of the Olive, the emblem of Peace.

The ninth joining Principle.
No man shall ever be mine enemy, that is not more his own then mine, yea more
the enemy of God then mine.
IF a man offends me merely through weakness, this is his affliction, in this
he is neither an enemy to himself nor me; he mourns for it, and I will pity
him in his mourning; he is more troubled for what he has done, then I have
cause to be for what I have suffered. If he offends willingly and purposely, he
is his own enemy more then mine. When Latimer was cousened in buying a
commodity, his friends telling him how he was cheated of his money, he fell a
mourning for him that had cheated him, He has the worst of it, says he. If my
heart rises against a man in this, and I seek to oppose him in his way, it may
very well be interpreted to be out of love to him, for my heart rises against
his enemy, I oppose his enemy, even himself, but an enemy to himself, more then
to me; he has hurt me a little, but himself more. I am troubled a little for
the wrong I suffer, but more for the evil he has done. If his ways be enmity
to God, In aliis mansue^us ero, in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. Zuingl. in
ep. ad Servet.
I will oppose him, because I love God, and no farther then wherein I may
manifest my love to God rather then hatred of him. When Servetus condemned
Zuinglius for his harshness, he answers, In other things I will be mild, but
not so in Blasphemies against God. Let us keep our enmity within these bounds,
and the peace of God will not be broke.

The tenth joining Principle.
I had rather suffer the greatest evil, then do the least.
IF when others wrong you, you care not what you do to right your self: This is
your folly and madness, Such a one hurt me, and I will therefore mischief my
self; he has pricked me with a pin, and I will therefore in an anger run my
knife into my side. If in all we suffer we be sure to keep from righting our
selves by any ways of sin, there will not be much peace broke. Such an one is
thine enemy, and will thou of one enemy make two? will thou also be an enemy to
thy self, yea a greater enemy then he or any man living can be to thee? for all
the men in the world cannot make thee sin, except thou will thy self.

The eleventh joining Principle.
I will labor to do good to all, but provoke none.
A Father has not so much power over his child, as to provoke him. Col. 3. 21.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath. Surely if a man has not this power
over his child, he has it not over his friend, his neighbor, much less his
superior: yet how many take delight in this, Such a thing I know will anger
him, and he shall be sure to have it! Oh wicked heart! do thou see that this
will be a temptation to thy brother, and will thou lay it before him? do thou
not pray for thy self and for him, Lord lead us not into temptation? we should
accout it the greatest evil to us of all the evil of afflictions, Non
curiositate vel ae nulatione is eos invidiose deferamus, aut reprehendamus,
unde protervia, fastus, od^a, dissidia, factiones possent oriri, etc. Hyper. in
Heb. c. 10. v. 24.
to be any occasion of sin to our brother; but what an evil should this be to
us, to provoke our brother to sin? if we will needs be provoking, then let the
Apostles exhortation prevail with us, Heb. 10. 24. Let us consider one another
to provoke unto love, and to good works: Let us not consider one another in a
way of curiosity and emulation, to envy, or find fault with one another, from
whence frowardness, pride, hatred, dissentions, factions may arise, says
Hyperius upon the place, but consider one another, so as we may further the
good of one another, so as to make one another quick and active in that which
is good.

The twelfth joining Principle.
Peace with all men it is good, but with God and mine own conscience it is
necessary.
BUt how will this join us one to another?

Answ. Very much, both as it holds forth the goodness of peace with all men,
and as it carries the heart strongly to the making and keeping peace with God
and a man's own conscience. This peace with God and a man's own conscience will
so sweeten the heart, that it cannot but be sweet toward every one; a man who
has satisfaction enough within, can easily bear afflictions and troubles that
come without. When Saul had made great breaches between God and his soul, and
in his own conscience, then he grew to be of a very froward spirit toward
every man, before his Apostasy he was of a very meek and quiet spirit, but this
sowred his spirit, and made it grow harsh, rugged, and cruel; This is the
cause of the frowardness of many men and women in their families, and with
their neighbors, there are secret breaches between God and their own
consciences.

The thirteenth joining Principle.
If I must needs err, considering what our condition is here in this world, I
will rather err by too much gentleness and mildness, then by too much rigor
and severity.
Man's nature is more propense to rigor, Melius est propter misericordiam
rationem reddere, quam propter crudelitatem.
then to lenity; but the account of overmuch lenity is easier then of too much
rigor. Men who are of harsh, sour spirits themselves, are ready to think that
God is so too. As the Lacedaemonians because they were of a warlike
disposition, they represented their Gods all armed. But God is love: there is
anger and hatred in God as well as love: but God is never said to be anger or
hatred, no not justice it self; but he loves that expression of himself to the
children of men, God is love. If God intended that all things amongst men,
either in Church or Commonwealth, should be carried with strictness of
justice, he would rather have governed his Church and the World by Angels, who
have right apprehensions of justice, who are themselves perfect, altogether
free from those evils that are to be punished, then by men, whose apprehensions
of justice are exceeding weak, unconstant, partial, as often false as true,
and have much of that evil in themselves that they judge in others.

The last joining Principle.
Peace is never bought too dear, but by sin and baseness.
WE use to say, We may buy Gold too dear, and so we may Peace: but whatsoever
we pay for it beside sin and baseness, we have a good bargain. Suidas tells
of the Emperor Trajan, that he would cut his own clothes to bind up the
wounds of his Soldiers. We should be very pitiful to soldiers, who are
wounded to keep us whole. We should bind up their wounds, though it cost us
dear: but especially our care should be to bind up those wounds that by
divisions are made in Church and Commonwealth: and well may we be willing to
cut our clothes to bind them up, when the evil of them is such as either
does or should cut our hearts. But though peace be a rich merchandise, yet we
must not sail too far for it, not so far as to sin. We read 2 Kings 23.
13. Mount Olivet is called the Mount of corruption, because of the Idolatry
committed upon it. Though we are to prize Mount Olivet at a very high rate,
with the Olives growing upon it, yet we must take heed that we make it not a
Mount of corruption. We may give peace to buy truth, but we may not give truth
to buy peace. We may be bold with that which is our own to purchase peace, but
not with that which is Gods: yet we must not be base in our yielding in things
natural or civil for peace sake, that is,

Irene, his heart was so taken with her that he grevv remiss in his regard to
the Stern of the State. Nothing must be done but as Irene would have it:
whatsoever resolutions there were of any good to the State, yet Irene must be
consulted vvithall before they were put in execution, and if they pleased not
her all was dashed, so much did he dote upon Irene. This the Nobles and State
could not bear: he therefore at last so far considered the public, as he
overcame his doting affections. He brought Irene before them, and says, That
ye may see how much I prize the content of my people, I sacrifice her to them,
and so drew his sword, and slew her with his own hands before their eyes. If
according to her demerits for drawing his heart away from the good of the
Commonwealth, she had bin given up to the sword of justice, it might have
satisfied as well. But lest I be thought to be too literal, give me leave to
allegorize upon this Irene. Her name is a Greek name, (...), it signifies
peace: we must not so dote upon our Irene, our private peace, that the public
should suffer for the sake of it. This is baseness: let her be sacrificed for
public good; this is true generousness.

Secondly, that is baseness, when our yiedling is thorough

CHAP. XXXII.
Joining Considerations.
The first. The consideration of the many things wherein God has joined us.
GOd has joined us together as we are men: we are not dogs, not wolves, let us
not be so one to another. Act. 7. 26. Moses speaks thus to those who strove one
with another: Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one another? The words in
the Greek are, (...), men yet are brethren. There is a consideration in this,
that ye are men: if there were no more, yet ye should not strive one with
another, but much more considering ye are brethren. If we be men, let us be
humane. What is the meaning of humanity, but courteousness, gentleness,
pleasantness in our carriages one toward another? But still the consideration
grows higher, as we are the same Countrymen, of old acquaintance, in the same
employment, of the same family and kindred, but above all, joined in such a
blessed root, the fountain of all love and peace. Ephesians. 4. 4. presents this
consideration most fully to us. The reason the Apostle gives why we must keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, is, because there is one body,
and one spirit, ye are called in one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all. Here you have seven Ones together in two or three
lines. It is very much that the spirit of God should join so close together
seven Ones; surely it is to be a strong argument for us to unity.

First, one Body. The meanest member yet it is in the body. Is it comely for
the body of Christ to be rent and torn? any reference to Christ might persuade
unity, but union with Christ as the members with the body, what heart can stand
against the strength of this? What can cause one member to tear and rend
another, but madness?

2. One Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 11. that one and the self same spirit: he does not
only say, The same spirit; but, The self same spirit: and as if that not
enough, he adds One to the self same; and that yet not enough, he says, That
one, all this is in the Greek, (...). The repeating the Article has a great
elegancy in it. And is not this one Spirit the Spirit of love and meekness?
What does a froward contentious spirit do in thee, who professt thy self to be
a Christian? What, says Cyprian, does the fierceness of Wolves, Quid facit
inpectore Christiano luporum feritas? canum rabies? vinenum lethale serpenium?
cruenta sevitia bestiarum? Cypr. de unitate Eccles. Number. 29.
the madness of Dogs, the deadly poison of Serpents, the bloody rage of
Beasts, in a Christians breast?

3. Called in one hope. Are not you heirs, joint heirs of the same Kingdom,
and do you contend as if one belonged to the kingdom of light, and the other
to the kingdom of darkness?

4. One Lord. You serve the same Lord and Master. Is it for the credit of a
Master, that his servants are always wrangling and fighting one with another?
Is it not a tedious thing in a family that the servants can never agree? Mark
how ill the Lord takes this, Mat. 24. 49. 50, 51. that evil servant who begins
to smite his fellow servants, provokes his Lord against him so as to come upon
him with such severity as to cut him asunder, and to appoint his portion with
the Hypocrites; (...), he will dichotomize him, divide him in two; he by his
smiting his fellow servants makes divisions, but his Lord will divide him. It
may be he pretends that his fellow servants do not do their duty as they ought;
as if he were more careful of the honor of his Lord then others who are of a
different way from him. But in the mean while he inveighs against others,
smiting them with the tongue, and otherwise as he is able. He sits at full
Tables, eats and drinks of the best, with such as are carnal and sensual, but
they are great men, to have their countenance is brave; this is extreme suitable
to a carnal heart, who yet keeps up a profession of Religion, has some form
of godliness, he is afraid to lose his fleshly contentment, therefore he
smites those who stand in his way: Thus divisions and troubles are made in Gods
family: The Lord the master of it will reward accordingly; he will divide such
by cutting them asunder, and appointing them their portion with the Hypocrites.

5. One Faith. What though we agree not together in some things of lesser
moment, yet we agree in one faith. Why should we not then keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace? The agreement in the faith one would think should
swallow up all other disagreements. We should rather bless God for keeping men
found in the faith, then contend with them for lesser mistakes. When the
Pharisees, Acts 23. 9. understood that Paul agreed with them in that great
doctrine of the Resurrection, they presently overlooked his other differences,
saying, We find no evil in this man. Our Brethren agree with us in more
Fundamentals then this, and yet we can find evil in them, and aggravate their
evil beyond what it is, and improve it all we can against them. This is worse
then Pharisaicall.

Master Calvin in his Epistle to our Countrymen at Frankford, Hoc vero me
garviter excruciat, and valde absurdum est, inter fratres ab eandem fidem a
patria, exules, ac profugos, dissidium oriri, and quidem haec de eausa quae
sola debuerat in bac vestra dispersione quasi sacrum vinculam vos simul
devinctos tenere, etc. Calv. Anglis Francford.
fled for their lives in witness to the truth, yet miserably jarring and
contending one against another there, to the scandal of all the Churches of
God in those parts, begins his Epstle thus: This does grievously torment me; it
is extremely absurd that dissentions should arise amongst brethren, exiles,
fled from their country for the same faith, and for that cause which alone in
this your scattering, ought to be to you as a holy band, to keep you fast
bound together. Their contentions were about Church-worship.

6. One Baptism. We are baptized into Christ's death, and is not that to show
that we should be dead to all those things in the world that cause strife and
contention among men? Our Baptism is our badge, our livery, it furthers
somewhat the unity of servants that they wear all one livery.

7. One God. Though there be three persons in the Divine Nature, and every
person is God, yet there is but one God; here is an union infinitely beyond all
unions that any creature can be capable of; the mystery of this union is
revealed to us, to make us in love with union. Our interest in this one God is
such a conjuction, as nothing can be more.

Joseph's brethren, Genesis 50. 17. looked upon this, as having very great power in
it to make up all breaches, to heal all old grudges. After their Father was
dead, their consciences misgave them for what they had done to Joseph, they
were afraid old matters would break forth, and that Joseph would turn their
enemy; now how do they seek to unite Joseph's heart to them? We pray thee, say
they, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy Father, and the
Text says, Joseph wept when they spoke unto him. Oh this was a heartbreaking
speech to Joseph, The servants of the God of my Father; Shall my heart ever be
stranged from the servants of the God of my Father? The Lord forbid. This
offense indeed was great, but their God is my God, and he was my Fathers God;
this argument had more in it to draw Joseph's heart to them, then if they had
said, We are your brethren, we came from the same loins you did: True, that is
something, but the servants of the God of thy Father is much more. Let us look
upon all the godly, though they have many weaknesses, though they have not
carried themselves toward us as they ought, yet they are the servants, yea the
children of our God, and of our fathers God; let this draw our hearts to them.
If they be one with us, in their interest in one God, let them be one with us
in the affections of our heart, to love them, delight in them, and rejoice in
communion with them.

One God and Father. Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God
created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother? Job
31. 15. Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion
us in the womb? Is it seemly that one man's children should be always
contending, quarrelling and mischieving one another? do you think this is
pleasing to your Father? It follows in that 4. of Ephesians. who is above all, and
through all, and in all. You have enough in your Father to satisfy your souls
for ever, whatsoever you want other ways; he is above all; he that is so
glorious and blessed, infinitely above all things, has put honor enough upon
you, that he is your Father; why will you contend and quarrel about trifles?
He has absolute authority to dispose of all things as he pleases; let not the
different administrations of his, to some in one kind, to some in another, be
matter for you to contend about. And he works in all.

Those gifts and graces especially that are in his children, are his workings;
that some have more then others, it is from his working. You may see the
workings of your Father in the hearts of your Brethren. He is in all. Men may
have children in whom little or nothing of their Father appears, but God is in
all his children, notwithstanding all their weaknesses, therefore our hearts
should be in them and with them. This Scripture is one of the most famous
Scriptures for the union of the Saints in one, that we have in all the book of
God.

You will say, If indeed we could see God in such, if we could see grace and
holiness in them, our hearts would close with them, but we see not this.

1. Take heed thou do not reject any from being thy brother, Answ.
whom Jesus Christ at the great day will own for his, and God the Father will
call Child.

2. Suppose thou can not be satisfied in their godliness, yet the gifts of
the Spirit of God that are in them, should cause some kind of closing; common
gifts are of a middle nature, between nature and grace, as the spirits of a man
are neither of the same nature with the soul, nor of the body, but between
both, and serve to unite the soul and body together, which otherwise are of
natures very different. The common gifts that men who are not yet sanctified
have, may and should cause some union between the godly and them while they
live in this world, so far as to be useful one to another in what God has
given them.

The second joining Consideration: Let us consider how far we can agree.
WE differ thus and thus, but what do we agree in? do we not agree in things
enough, wherein we may all the days of our lives spend all the strength we
have in glorifying God together? Many men are of such spirits as they love to
be altogether busied about their brethrens differences; their discourse, their
pens, and all their ways are about these, and that not to heal them, but
rather to widen them. You shall not hear them speak of, or meddle with their
agreements; their strength is not bent to heighten and strengthen them: if at
any time they do take notice of their agreements, it is to make advantage of
them: to render their disagreements the more odious, or to strengthen
themselves in what they differ from them; they desire to get in men, and to get
from them, only to serve their own turns upon them, this is an evil spirit.
No marvel therefore though some be so loath to discover to them how near they
can come to him.

Pliny tells us of Apelles, Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10.
that drawing the face of Antiochus the King who had but one eye, that he might
hide this deformity, he devised to paint him turning his visage a little away,
so he showed but the one side of his face: and from him, says Pliny, came the
invention first of concealing the defects and blemishes of the visage. But the
Painters of (...) time are quite in another way, if there be any deformity or
defect on any side, they will be sure to paint that side in all the lin^^ments
of it, that must be set forth fully to the view of all men; yea if it may be
made to look more ugly and monstrous then it is, all the skill they have shall
be improved to do it. But my brethren, this ought not to be, God does not so
with us: he takes notice of the good of his children, but conceals their evil.
There was but one good word in Sarahs speech to Abraham, Genesis 18. 12. she
called him Lord, the speech otherwise was a speech of unbelief, yet the holy
Ghost speaking afterward of her, in reference to that speech, 1 Pet. 3. 6.
conceals all the evil in it, and mentions only that reverend title she gave to
her husband, commending her for it. Thus should we do; had we peceable hearts
thus we would do: all the good of our brethren we would improve to the
uttermost, and what is evil, so far as with a good conscience we might, we
could conceal. When I shall see this temper in men's spirits, I shall hope there
will be peace.

The third joining Consideration: Let us consider of men's tempers, spirits,
temptations, education, years, gifts.
THere must be a due consideration of all these, and we must indulge something
to them all. This would allay much strife: as we read Numb. 31. 23. Every thing
that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go thorough the fire, and all that
abides not the fire ye shall make go thorough the water. We must deal with
every man according to his temper. Some men are by their complexions of a more
harsh and rugged temper then others. Consider what is the best way of dealing
with such: in the main they are faithful and useful, they will join with you
there, and spend their lives for you: if the harshness of their natures cause
some excrescencies, unpleasing carriages, consider their tempers, though no
evil in them is to be justified, yet deal tenderly with them, indulge them
what lawfully you may. Some men's spirits, though upright to God and you, yet
they have a fervor in them that is not qualified with that wisdom, meekness,
humility, as they ought, do not presently take these advantages against them,
that they in their heat may perhaps give you; do not fly upon them as if those
unjustifiable expressions that com from them, came from a spirit of malignity:
You know the man and the manner of his communication, pass by weaknesses,
accept of uprightness. Some men's temptation are very strong; it may be their
hearts are pressed with disappointments, it may be they are pricked with the
want of many comforts you have; they have family-temptations, and personal
temptations that you are freed from: you do not know what you might do if you
were under the like temptations. Bless God that you are delivered from them;
but do not add to your brethrens affliction, by taking advantages against
them, but according to the rule of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1. If a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Consider their education.
Some men have been brought up altogether amongst Prelaticall men, perhaps among
Papists; some all their days have lived in wicked families, they never were
acquainted with the society of the Saints, with that way of godliness that
has the most strictness and power in it. You must not deal with them for all
things you see amiss in them, in the same way you would deal with such who
have had godly education, who have had acquaintance with the most strict and
powerful ways of godliness, but now manifest a spirit against them.

Consider men's years: old age looks for respect, and justly: especially such
as have gone through the brunt and suffered much for your good: though some
infirmities should break forth that are incident to old age, we must cover and
pass by what we can, not forgetting that reverent respect that is due to the
hoary head found in the way of godliness. Consider men's gifts: it may be they
are not able to rise to your height, to understand what you do; thank God for
your strength, but be not angry with your brother because he is weaker. This
was one of the arguments for peace that Constantine in that forementioned
Letter of his to Alexander and Arius, used, we are not in all things like
minded, neither have we all the same nature and gift engrafted in us.

The fourth joining Consideration.
What we get by contention will never quit cost.
A Merchant thinks it an ill venture, if when he casts up his accounts he finds
the charge of his voyage rises to more then his incomes. If thou have so much
command of thy spirit, if thou can so far overcome thy passions as to get a
time in cool blood to cast up thy accounts truly, what good thou have done, or
what thou have got by such and such contentions; and on the other side cast up
what the hurt thou have done, what sin has been committed, what evil has got
into thy spirit, I fear you will have little cause to boast of, Dispendio little
carcre non mediocre lucrum est. Ambros. offic. l. 2. c. ^1.
or rejoice in your gains. To be freed from that expense that comes in by
strife, is not a little gain, says Ambrose. In strife you will find there is a
very great expense of time, of gifts, and parts. Many men in regard of the good
gifts God has given them, might have proved shining Lights in the Church, but
by reason of their contentious spirits, they prove no other then smoking
firebrands. It may be by all the stir you keep you shall never get your
mind; if you do, it will not quit cost; the charge you have been at for it,
comes to much more then it is worth. God deliver me from having my mind at
such a dear rate.

The fifth joining Consideration.
The strongest has need of the weakest.
LEt not the hand say, it has no need of the foot; nor the eye, it has no
need of the hand; God has so tempred the body, that every member has need of
every member.

It was a sweet spirit in Peter, that great Apostle, writing to the scattered
Christians, he begins his Epistle thus: Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us. Little
nails may be useful, where great wedges can do no good. Little chips may help
to set great logs on fire.

The sixth.
Consider when any thing falls out that occasions strife, it may be this is but
for a trial, this is a temptation.
WHen men provoke us we are ready to fly upon them, looking no further then
the men with whom we are displeased. But if you look a little further, perhaps
you may see the Devil is on the other side of the hedge, and has been the
chief agent in this business. Augustine presses this by a most excellent
similitude. When a Fowler, says he, has set his net to catch Birds, he sets
it at a distance from the hedge, and when he has done he takes stones and
throws at the hedge, upon this the Birds fly out, and flutter about. The
Fowler does not intend any hurt to the hedge, neither does he think to hit any
Birds with his stones, but that which is in his eye is the net on the other
side of the hedge, he hopes to drive the Birds in there. So says he, the
Devil prepares his net to catch men in, he raises up contentions, and causes
much trouble to be in Churches, and among brethren, you think all the evil is
in the trouble of your present contentions. Oh no: the Devil is behind, he
intends to bring some of you into some great sin by these; he has set his net
for you, when you are troubled and vexed by such contentions, the Devil sees
you fit for a temptation, now I hope I shall get him to do such and such
things, which otherwise I could never have got him to. Oh that we had hearts
when we find contentions stirring to consider, But is there not a temptation in
them?

The seventh.
Consider how the heart of God is set upon making peace with us, and what it
cost him.
GOd was in Christ reconciling the world to himself: this work has taken up
the thoughts, councels, heart of God from all eternity above any thing that
ever he did: this is the chief masterpiece of all the works of God. There is
more of the glory of God in this, then in all that God has done. This is and
shall be the object of the admiration of Angels and Saints, the matter of their
praises to all eternity. The heart of God was so in this, that he was resolved
to have it whatsoever it cost him; it cost the dearest that ever any thing in
this world did; yea the price of it was more then ten thousand worlds are
worth: it was no less then the blood of the Son of God, of him who is the
second person in Trinity, God blessed for evermore. Col. 1. 14. In whom we have
redemption through his blood who is the image of the invisible God, the first
borne of every creature: by him were all things created, he is before all
things: by him all things consist, in him all fullness dwells: and having made
peace through the blood of his Cross, ver. 20. What God has done for peace
with us, calls aloud to us to prize peace one with another. It is the Apostles
argument, 1 John 3. 16. He laid down his life for us, we ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren. It cost his life to make our peace with God. We should
be willing to do any thing we are able, even to the hazard of our lives, to
make peace among the Saints. Christ laid down his life even for this peace
also. Ephesians. 2. 14. For he is our peace who has made both one, and has broke
down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in his flesh
the enmity, to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace, and
that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross. Christ
reconciles both unto God: but how? it is in one body. Lay this Consideration
warm at your hearts, and it will comfort your hearts, and so preserve and
increase peaceable dispositions in you toward one another.

The eighth.
Consider how unworthy we were when Jesus Christ received us into union with
himself.
WHat uncomely, what loathsome creatures we were! yet Christ took us into his
bosom, into his heart, and resolved that never any thing should separate us
from him again. But that those embracements of his should be everlasting, and
yet shall every trifle take us off from one another hearts? shall every
jealous spusitious conceit, every little difference, be enough to separate us
and that almost irreconcileably? Have we the spirit of Christ in us? is the
same mind in us that was in Christ Jesus?

The ninth.
Consider that we are called to Peace.
GOD has called us to peace, 1 Cor. 7. 15. That case upon which the Apostle
mentions our calling to peace is as difficult a case to preserve peace in, as
any can fall out in ones life. It was the case of man and wife unequally
yoaked, one is a Believer, the other an Infidel, yet being man and wife the
Apostle determines that the Believer must be content to live with the
unbeleever, as it becomes a wife or a husband; except he or she of themselves
will depart, but they should give them no occasion of departing, but rather by
their holy humble conversation seek to convert them: this no question was
accounted a hard task, but it must be, says the Apostle, and upon this he
grounds it, for God has called us to peace. There is another case almost as
difficult as this, where the patience and quietness of spirit is very much
tried, and that is when a servant meets with a harsh, rugged, cruel master,
that abuses him very injuriously; if any thing would put ones spirit into a
rage, one would think this would do it. No, says the Apostle, such must be
the command you must have over your spirits, as you must patiently bear this:
and he grounds it upon this, For hereunto were ye called, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22. But
though husbands and wives should live at peace, though they suffer one from
another: though servants should put up wrongs from their masters, yet it
follows not that the like patience should be required in us, when we are
wronged by our equals, by those to whom we have no such band of relation to tie
us. Yes, this argument of calling is strong in this case also: 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.
Love as brethren, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise, blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called.

The tenth.
Consider the presence of God and of Christ.
OUr God, our Father, our Master, our Savior, stands by looking on us. It is a
most excellent passage that I find in an Epistle of Luther to the Ministers of
Norimberg. There were great divisions amongst them: he writes to them that he
might pacify their spirits one toward another. Suppose ( says he) you saw
Jesus Christ standing before you, Fingite Christum in medio vest^i
corporaliter, and ab ipsius vultu discite ipse vel oculis sic alloquetur corda
vestra, Quid facitis charissimi filii, quos meo sanguine ^edemi meo verbo
regenui, ut diligeretis invicem hanc esse notam meorum discipulorum scitis.
Ponite hanc caus^m, vel in me rejicite ego videro, nihil periculi est; si
qu^escat vel etiam moria^ur nihil nocet Ecclesiae, sed hoc erit p^riculum si
dissideatis and mordeatis invicem. Nolite sic contristare speritum, nolite
Angelos sanctos in coelo gaudus spoliare; an ego non plus sum vobis quam omnes
causae, omnes affectus, omnes offensiones? Itane fortius penetrant, and haerent
verba aliqua fratris, vel iniquae molestiae quam mea vulnera, meus sanguis,
quam t^tus ipse salvator Jesus Christus? Luther Epist ad Norimbergensis.
and by his very eyes speaking thus unto your hearts, What do you, O my dear
children, whom I have redeemed with my blood, whom I have begotten again by my
Word, to that end that you might love one another? Know that this is the note
of my Disciples. Leave this business, ye wholly cast it upon me, I Will look to
it, there is no danger that the Church should suffer by this, though it should
be stilled, yea though it should dye, but there is a great deal of danger if
you dissent amongst your selves, if you bite one another: Do not thus sadden my
spirit, do not thus spoil the holy Angels of their joy in Heaven; am not I
more to you, then all matters that are between you? then all your affections?
then all your offenses? What? can any words of a brother, can any unjust
trouble penetrate your hearts, stick so fast in you as my wounds, as my blood,
as all that I am to you, your Savior Jesus Christ? Oh that we had such real
apprehensions of Christ looking upon us, speaking to us!

The eleventh.
Consider what account we can give to Jesus Christ of all our Divisions.
WHen Christ shall come, will you stand before him with scratched faces, with
black and blew eyes? 1 These. 3. 12, 13. The Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one toward another, and toward all men: To what end? To the
end, says the Apostle, he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness
before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all
his Saints. It will be a sad thing to be found in our divisions, at the coming
of Jesus Christ, Mat. 24. 50. the coming of Christ is mentioned as a terror to
those who shall but begin to smite their fellow servants. We may wrangle and
stand out one against another in our contentions now; but it will not be so
easy to answer Jesus Christ, as it is to answer one to another. In the Name of
Jesus Christ I now speak unto you, yea as from him charge you, let no reason
move you to contend with, dissent or separate from your brethren, but that
which you are persuaded in your conscience, and that after due and serious
examination will hold out before, will be approved of, Jesus Christ at his
coming.

The twelfth.
Let every man consider his own weaknesses.
YOu are ready to take offense from others, within a while you are as like to
be offensive to others. There will be as much need they should bear with you,
as now there is you should bear with them. The Common Law of those who intend
to live at peace one with another, is, Veniam, petimus, damusque, We desire
pardon, and we do pardon.

The thirteenth.
Let us consider our mortality.
IT is but a little time we have to live; shall the greater part of it, nay why
should any part of it be ravel'd out with contentions and quarrels? I have read
of Pompey, that upon a time passing over diverse hills, where there lived many
people in caves, but their order was that the man lived in one cave and the
wife in another; he asking the reason, they said, In those parts they live not
long, therefore they desired that the little time they did live, they might
have peace and quiet, which they had found by experience they could not have,
if man and wife lived constantly together. Hi motus animorum atque haec
certamina tanta, Pulveris exigui ^actu compressa quiescunt. Virgil. Georg. lib.
4.
Though the means they used for their quiet was sordid, yet the good use they
made of the shortness of their lives was commendable. Virgil says, if swarms
of Bees meet in the air, they will sometimes fight as it were in a set battle
with great violence; but if you cast but a little dust upon them, they will all
be presently quiet. Sprinkle upon your hearts the meditations of death, that
within a while this flesh of yours will be turned to dust, this will quiet you.

The fourteenth.
Consider the life of heaven.
THere is and will be perfect agreement there. We are here as Bees, flying up
and down from flower to flower all day, but at night they come all into the
same Hive; That is a place where Luther and Zuinglius will well agree. Shall
not we whom God from all eternity has ordained to live co-heires in heaven, to
join together in praises there, agree together here on earth?

CHAP. XXXIII.
Joining graces.
1. Wisdom.
THe deepest Seas are the most calm, so men of the deepest judgments are most
quiet. A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit, Prove. 17. 27. or thus,
is of a cool spirit, for so the word signifies; his spirit is not heat with
passion, there is a cool dew of examination and deliberation upon his spirit,
he weighs the circumstances, consequences, and issues of things; he orders and
disposes of things so, (...). Basil. Hom. de ira.
as jarres, contradictions and oppositions are prevented. The wisdom that is
from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. 17.
Reason and Wisdom have a majesty in them, and will force reverence. Let
Passion reverence the presence of Reason, says Basil, as children doing things
unseemly are afraid of the presence of men of worth.

2. Faith.
1. THis unites us to Christ and God, and in them to one another.

2. Faith commits all causes, all fears, injures to God.

3. Faith lays hold upon, and improves those gracious promises that God has
made to his Churches for union. Faith sues out the Bond.

4. Faith is able to descry the issue of troubles and afflictions; Though Sense
says, It will not be, Reason, It cannot be, yet Faith gets above, and says,
It shall be, I descry land: and thus quiets all in the soul; all being quiet
there, the turbulent motions that are in our spirits one toward another are
soon quieted.

3. Humility.
COloss. 3. 12. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind. Ephesians. 4. 2. With all lowlinosse and meekness, and
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace. Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through
strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better
then himself. We may say of Humility, as Tertullus, Acts 24* said of Felix, By
thee we enjoy great quietness. An humble heart looks upon every truth of God
as infinitely above it self, therefore it is willing to receive it from any; a
child may lead it, Esaias 11. 6. One Baldassar, a German Divine, writing to
Oecolampadius, has this notable expression: Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and
submittemur ei sexcenta si nobis essent coll^.
Let the Word of the Lord come, let it come, and we will put under six hundred
necks if we had them. Such a disposition as this would make much for peace.
Esaias 32. 18, 19. we have a promise, that the people of God should dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in quiet resting places, and the City shall be low,
in a low place. When the heart lies lowest, it is quietest.

4. Self-denial.
THe joints in the body cannot join, but one part must be hollow, and give way
to the other. Condescension of one to another is a principal thing in
friendship. Maximum est in amicitia superiorem parem esse inferiori. Cic. de
amicit.
Philip. 2. the example of Christ emptying himself, and making himself to be
of no reputation, is set before us as an argument for our union, that therefore
we should do nothing through strife, be like minded, having the same love, and
be of one accord, and one mind. It is indifferent to a heart emptyed of Self,
whether it conquers, or be conquered, so Truth may triumph. In other conflicts
the Conqueror has the honor, and the conquered is disgraced; but in the
conflicts for truth, both conquered and conqueror are honorable; the mercy is
the greater to him that is conquered; but he must have a self-denying heart to
make him think so.

5. Patience.
THe Olive, the Emblem of Peace, will continue green, though overflowne by
the waters for a long time together. After Noah had been so long in the Ark,
the Dove brought an Olive leaf in her mouth to him. It may be an Emblem of
Patience as well as Peace. Patience and Peaceableness are near akin. Ephesians. 4.
2, 3. Long-suffering is amongst the graces, where the unity of the spirit is to
be kept in the bond of peace.

There is a notable story I find in the lives of the German Divines: Per Deum
obtestatum ut taceret, and se ita gereret quasi non audiret.
One Vitus Theodorus a Divine, sends to advise with Melancthon what he should
do when Osiander preached against him; Melancthon writes to him, and beseeches
him for the love of God, yea charges him that he should not answer Osiander
again, but that he should hold his peace, and behave himself as if he heard
nothing. Vitus Theodorus writes back again, This was very hard, Qui nescit
far calumnias, convicia, injurias, nescit vivere. Melchior Adam. in vita
Chytraei.
yet he would obey. Let not men be too hasty to oppose oppositions, but let
them go on patiently in a constant way, resolving to bear what they meet with,
and God at length will make their righteousness break forth as the light.
Confute evil reports by thy life. He that knows not to bear calumnies,
reproaches, injuries, he knows not how to live, says Chytraeus, another
German Divine.

6. Joy in the holy Ghost.
Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of heaven is righteousness, peace, joy in the holy
Ghost. This grace in the heart puts a grace upon all a man's conversation; it
makes it lovely and amiable. The beams of the Sun shining upon the fire will
put it out; The beams of this spiritual joy will put out the fire of our
passions.

7. Meekness, Gentleness.
MIlk quenches wildfire, Su^vitas sermonum atque morum condimentum amicitiae;
tristitia and in omni reseveritas, absit; habet illa quidem gravitatem, sed
amicitia remissior esse debet, and liberior, and dulcior, and ad omnem
comitatem facilitatemque proclivi^r. Cicer. de Amicio.
Oil (says Luther) quenches Lime, which water sets on fire. Opposition will
heat, will fire men, when meekness and gentleness will still and quench all.
Cicero says, Sweetness of speech and rarriage is that which seasons
friendship; severity in every thing and sadness must not be among friends in
their converse; such a kind of carriage may have a seeming gravity, but
friendship must have a remisness, it must be more free and sweet, disposed to
all mildness and easiness. Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. Meekness comes in as a special
grace for peace and unity, so Col. 3. 12.

8. Love.
THat is the special uniting grace; Faith indeed has the pre-eminence in our
union with Christ our head, but Love is the grace that unites the members. 1
Cor. 13. the Apostle shows many of the fruits of this grace, all tending to
union and peace; It suffers long, it envies not, it is not puffed up, it
behaves not it self unseemly, it seeks not her own, it is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things. Bearing all things and enduring all things
seem to be the same. Therefore some would have it, (...).
it covers all things, for so the word also signifies; but there is a greater
elegancy in it, in the Translation, bears all things, it is like the cross
maine beam in a house, supporting the whole building: and were it not for some
who have the love of God and his truth, and the good of the publiqu^, enabling
them to undergo what they do, more then any encouragement from men, all things
in Church and State would be ready to fall into confusion, to be nothing but a
heap of rubbish; but this love enables to bear all things. But if they have no
encouragement, but see that though they hazard themselves never so much, be of
never so great use, do the greatest services that can be expected from men, yet
when men's turns are served, they are little regarded, but envyed and narrowly
watched, to spy out any thing that may have some show of excepting against
them, and left to shift for themselves as well as they can, when they might
justly expect a great reward of their services, yet are disappointed, their
hearts are grieved. But yet because they are acted by a principle of love to
God, his cause, the public, they therefore still hold out, go on in their
way, labor to be as isntrumental as they can for good, commit themselves and
all their endeavors to God, expecting encouragement from him, and so they
endure all things: such men are worth their weight in gold: here is a heart
that has much of the spirit of God in it, God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him. No marvel though these men act so
swiftly in their way; no marvel though their motion in public service be so
speedy, for their Charet is like that Charet of Salomons, Cant. 3. 10. The
middle thereof is paved with love, and this is for the daughters of Jerusalem.
Sive taceas, dilectione taceas; sive clames, dilectione clames; sive parcas,
dilectione parcas; sive corrigas, dilectone corrigas; ad disciplinam siant
omnia, de charitate procedant radice; dilige, and fa^ quod vi^. Aug Joan.
Tract. 7.
Now the love of God be for ever with these his servants, the blessing of the
Almighty and all his Saints, be with them, upon them, in them and theirs for
ever.

Where men are acted by love they may do any thing without offense. If you be
silent and be silent out of love; if you cry out, and you do it out of love; if
you spare, and it be out of love; if you correct, and you correct from love;
let all be for amendment for good, all from the root of love; love, and do what
you will. Thus Augustine in his 7. Tractate upon John.

These with other uniting graces that might be mentioned, are the graces that
God expects should be in a special manner acted in these times; and this is in
a holy manner (...), to serve the time, as some Copies have it, Romans 12. 11.
This is the most suitable work for the times wherein we live. What is more
seasonable for divided times then uniting graces? (...). Clem. Alex. Strom.
lib. 2.
And that union that comes from the acting of these graces, is a spiritual,
holy, truly Christian union, a raised union to a far higher pitch then any
natural excellencies can raise unto. It is an excellent saying of Clemens
Alexandrinus, If the spiritual man be in us, our humanity is fraternity. What
then is our fraternity? it is raised to that which has no name to express it:
the union of the Saints in heaven is beyond the unity of fraternity; this which
is of grace is of the same nature.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Joining Practices.
The first the practice of the tongue.
Gentle Language.
A Soft answer turns away wrath, Prove. 15. 1. In your disputes let your
arguments be as hard as you will, but let your words be soft. Soft words and
hard arguments make a good dispute. Gentle language gains much upon the hearts
of men, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2. Hear me my brethren, and my people, says David. This
was better and tended more to union between King and people, then the rugged
churlish answer of Rehoboam, My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to
your yoke. But what came on it? Ten tribes were rent from him. As good a man
as he could say, Hear me my brethren and my people. Good words are as cheap as
bad. Gentle courteous language is as easy as rough and bitter. Genesis 49. 21.
Napthali is said to give goodly words, sayings of goodlinesse or fairness;
so the Hebrew has it, that is, fair, pleasing words: this Tribe were fair
spoken men. Now compare this with Deuteronomy. 33. 23. there Naphtali is said to be
satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord. Fair, courteous
language has an acceptance among men, and the blessing of God is with it.

The second joining Practice.
Let us humble our selves for our divisions.
THat is a rule, Whatsoever sin you have been guilty of, though you have for
the time life it, yet if you have not been humbled for it, a hundred to one but
you fall into it again. Yes, say some, it is fit we should humble our selves
for our divisions, we will have days of fasts, that we may do it. But take
this note with you, In your days of fast, or at other times when you would
thus humble your selves, let it be principally for your own guiltiness
herein. Many in their humiliations make great complaints of others, as the
cause of divisions, whom it may be God will own, and acquit; take heed of being
too forward in meddling with others in your fasts, lest your fasts prove like
those, Isay 58. 4. Ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist.

The third joining Practice.
An Amnestia.
WHere we see there has been mistakes and differences thorough humane frailty,
and a willingness to be otherwise so far as God gives light, let all former
unkindnesses be forgotten, so as never to rip up old things to charge them one
upon another: let there he a line of forgetfulness drawn over them; let them
be buried in oblivion. This was the Athenians Amnestia; a Law that was made by
Thrasybulus, with the consent of the people; that former injuries should be
forgotten. It was made upon this occasion. After Lysander had conquered the
Athenians, he set thirty Governors over them which tyrannized exceedingly.
Thrasybulus, with many others, were banished; but after a while, Thrasybulus
gathering together his banished Countrymen, he got up an Army, and by it
delivered the Athenians from the yoke of these thirty Tyrants: now because when
the banished men came home ^o their former possessions, Thrasybulus feared
there would be exceeding heartburning amongst the Athenians, that those who had
been banished would be revenged upon those whom they judged the causes of it,
and the other would be enraged against them: therefore Thrasibulus got the
people to join with him in this Law, which they called Amnestia, that all
former wrongs should be forgotten, and that they should live lovingly and
peaceably henceforth one with another, as if such breaches had never been among
them. Whenever God shall deliver these Kingdoms from bondage, and settle
things amongst us, the addition of such a Law which we may call our English.
Amnestia will be very necessary. Otherwise oh the abundance of the fire of
malice that will remain raked up under the ashes, ready upon any occasion to
burst out! one will look upon the other with eyes full of revenge, with scorn,
hatred, and disdain; one will charge the other as the cause of all our
miseries, and curse him; the other will charge him, and curse him as deeply.
Every time men think what they have suffered, their hearts will be enraged.
Such now is that extreme bitter exasperation, and deadly rage of men's hearts
one against another, that whenever peace shall be concluded, if it be not
made exceeding sure, our pacification is like to be the foundation of far
greater evils to us then yet have befalne us. If this Amnestia be not
strengthened with what is in the wisdom, power of man to do, and the blessing
of the almighty also with it, we are an undone people.

The fourth joining Practice.
Never contend but be sure you understand one another what it is you contend
for.
I Have read of a quarrel there was between the Eastern and Western Churches;
the Eastern Churches said there were three subsistences in the Trinity, but not
three persons; the Western said there were three Persons, but not three
subsistences. Athanasius comes and reconciles them both. It is true, the
contentions among us are more then verbal, yet for any thing a great part of
the Kindome knows (even of those whose spirits are bitter enough) they may be
no other then merely verbal. How many ignorant people, women, young ones,
understand not where the difference lies between Presbyterians and those whom
they call Independents; and yet they can with much bitterness cry out against
the one or the other. Perhaps you have some Ministers, or others, come to your
Table, they tell you a tale of such and such, your heart is hot presently, but
do you understand the matter? You begin to make a stir, but can you give
account of it? Be silent, forbear, take heed what you do; meddle not in way of
strife, till you understand where the controversy lies, and that from both
parties.

The fifth joining Practice.
Be ingenious; 1. do not lie at the catch to take advantages, 2. make the best
interpretation of things you can.
IF God should catch advantages against us, what would become of us? This is
most unseemly, when men are seeking to find out truth, if then they shall
piddle about words, catch at phrases; get hold of expressions; and seek to make
their advantages out of them; and in this shall be the greatest strength of
their answer, though this may have a specious show before men, who are willing
to receive any thing which makes against what they would have crushed, yet this
will not abide before the throne of Christ. We read Matthew. 4. Christ had a
great dispute with the Devil, in which he had him at great advantage in his
quotation of a Scripture, ver. 6. He shall give his Angels charge concerning
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash
thy foot against a stoue. This was quoted out of the 91. Psalm. ver. 11. there
it is, He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways. Yet Christ did not catch this advantage, he did not so much as upbraid
him for leaving out that passage, which he might justly have done, but he
answers to the thing. Yea Christ might have taken a further advantage against
the Devil, for the words following in the Psalm are a prophecy of Christ
destroying the power of the Devil, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder,
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy feet. Christ did
not* take the advantage of this neither, and upbraid him with it, he had enough
against him in the thing it self he brought. It is a sign that men have less
advantage in the matter, when they seek so much to catch at all the advantages
they can in the manner of the expressions of those whom they oppose.

2. Make the best interpretation of things you can. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Love thinks
no evil. It may be if you meet with a man in the streets, if he stays not to
talk with you, if he takes not special notice of you, you presently think it
is his pride, his sleighting, disregarding you, this is the worst
interpretation that can be. Why? is it not possible that it may be thorough
multitude of business in his head that you know not of? May it not be that his
eyes and thoughts were another way? he did not take notice of your passing by
him; is it not thus often with your self in respect of others? Again, perhaps
such a man you find not in his behavior toward you when you are with him,
looking so smilingly upon you, carrying himself in that familiar affable way
as you expected; (...); etc. Naz. Orat. 20.
you presently think and say, Surely it is his pride and surlinesse, whereas it
may be it is because his head is fuller then yours, which may afterward be for
your good, if you would be but patient a while; it may be it is from some
trouble of his spirit at that time; it may be it is from the temper of his
body, his constitution, or some weakness in it at that time; if such a fair
interpretation may be made, why should not an ingenuous candid spirit make it?
This very exception I find was taken against Basilius Magnus, and Nazianzen in
one of his Orations, in which he highly commends Basil, answers it, and
justifies him; It is hard to keep unity, love and peace with men who are of
exceptious carping dispositions; if God were strict to mark what we do amiss,
what would become of us? God is strict to mark what good there is in his
Saints; if there be any little good in the midst of much imperfection, Gods way
is to pass by the imperfection, and take notice of the good; but our way is
often, if there be a little bad, though but through a very pardonable mistake,
in the midst of much good, to pass by all the good, and to seize upon the
mistake, to make it the seed of contention, to brood over it, and so beget the
brats of contention from it. Certainly this ought not thus to be.

The sixth joining Practice: So far as Reason and Conscience will give way,
yield to those whom you contend withal.
THat standing at a distance with those that dissent from us, even to the
utmost, is the way of many; but certainly it is a false way, God is not in it.
It may be some, yea many will judge this yielding to be a fair, handsome
turning about to the other side; take heed of such bold censures: Is every
difference from that rigid, stout spirit of thine, a warping from the truth, a
sinful temporizing for private ends? The Lord judge between you and his
servants. Some men who have been of yielding spirits in things that God would
have them, have stood out undauntedly when God has called them to witness to
his truth, when those who have been stout and harsh in their own ways have
basely betrayed it, when they have been tried with greater sufferings. Ambrose
was a man of a sweet and moderate spirit, witness amongst other things that
notable saying of his, Si virtutum fi^is ille sit maximus qui plurimorum
spectat profectum, moderatio omn^um plucherrima^ est. Ambr. de paenit. l. 1. c.
^.
If that end of virtues be the greatest that looks at public good, Moderation
is of all the most beautiful. Ay, but I warrant you, Ambrose was a man who saw
which way the times went, he was loath to hazard himself in standing out against
men who had power in their hands, this temper of his made him thus plead for
moderation. No, Ambrose was a man of an invincible spirit in the ways of God;
In all Ecclesiastical Story we read not of a braver spirit then his contesting
with men of power in the cause of Christ. For when Theodosius the Emperor had
been the cause of a great slaughter in Thessalonica, though provoked to it by a
sedition there, the Emperor a while after coming to Milan, where Ambroses
charge was, after the usual manner he came to the Church, Ambrose meets him,
and forbids him entrance, Ne intret, cum probibet gravissime coram f^aequenti
^aetu cum objargans, An nes^is, inquit, Imperator, quae sit atrocitas a te
commissi facinoris? aut non me^inisti alium nobis esse Imperatorem te
superiorem? quae con^idens impietas ut nihil v^rearis, etc. Vide Magdebu^g.
cent. 4. c. 10. page 165. quoting Theod. l. 6. c. 18. and Zozomen l. 7. c. 24.
reproving him before all the people, Do you not know, oh Emperor, (says he)
the barbarousnesse of that vile fact of yours? or do you not remember we have
another Emperor above you? what bold impiety is thi^? do you not fear to
bring those feet of yours, polluted with the blood of innocents, into this holy
place? or to stretch forth those hands of yours, wet, yea dropping with blood,
to take the most holy body of the Lord? or to put that mouth of yours, which
(forgetting not only the clemency which belongs to an Emperor, but the
justice) gave out the sentence for the killing so many innocent men,) to the
precious blood of the Lord? Away therefore, will you add impiety to your
sin? do not think much to come under that discipline which the Lord
commands. Upon this the Emperor goes back to his Palace with sighing and
tears, and spent eight months in mourning and lamentation, and yet after this
he was not received by Ambrose, till again being sharply reprehended, he cast
himself down in the porch, upon the pavement, bewailing his sin, and rising
up he was about to sit in the Chancel where the Emperors seat was, he was
required to go forth into the place of penitents. With the like, yea more
boldness he dealt with Ruffinus, a great Courtier, the Master of the Emperors
Horse. Here behold a man of a moderate, quiet spirit, yeeldable in what he
could, yet when he conceived himself interessed in the Cause of Christ, his
courage raises him above the fears or favors of men.

The seventh joining practice: If you will needs be striving, strive who shall
do one another most good, who shall engage one another in the most and
greatest offices of love.
THis is a good combat; such striving as this is, God and his blessed Angels
look upon, and take much delight in.

I find a notable story in the life of Alexander the Great, which may put on
and encourage Christians in such a combat as this: There was a great King in
India, his name was Taxiles, who on a time came to salute Alexander, Plutarch
in the life of Allexander.
and said unto him, What should we need to fight and make Wars one with
another, if thou come not to take away our water and our necessary commodity
to live by, for which things men of judgment must needs fight? as for other
goods, if I be richer then thee, I am ready to give thee of mine; and if I have
less, I will not think scorn to thank thee, if thou will give me some of
thine. Alexander being pleased to hear him speak thus wisely, embraced him, and
said unto him, Think thou that this meeting of ours can be without fight,
for all these goodly fair words? No, no, thou have won nothing by them, for I
will fight and contend with thee in honesty and courtesy, because thou shall
not exceed me in bounty and liberality. So Alexander took diverse gifts of him,
but gave more to him.

Oh that our contentions were turned into such contentions as these are! Let us
rejoice in any opportunity of doing any office of love to those we differ from,
yea to those who have wronged us. It was wont to be said of Archbishop
Cranmer, If you would be sure to have Cranmer do you a good turn, you must
do him some ill one; for though he loved to do good to all, yet especially he
would watch for opportunities to do good to such as had wronged him. Had we
but a few leading men of such spirits among us, how great a blessing of peace
might we enjoy!

The eighth joining Practice.
Let every man be diligent in that work that God calls him to.
STudy to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. It is not an arbitrary thing, the
command of God lies upon it.

I am verily persuaded that many of our divisions in opinion and otherwise, our
hard thoughts one of another, are raised and fomented by such as want
employment. Hence they go about from place to place, arguing, disputing,
jangling about things they understand not; and yet think themselves to have a
deeper insight then ordinary. I would be loath to add to the affliction of
those, who by the rage of the enemy have been put out of their employments, and
are come for shelter amongst us; God forbid that I should willingly grieve
them, their case is to be pitied, we are to succor, comfort, and help them
what we can; but yet I desire them withal to take heed of a temptation they
may be under, and think not of it, in this their want of employment, now they
are here they meet with variety of company, with all sorts of people, and
having too much time to spare, the Devil may soon and unawares to them
prevail to cause an itching desire in them; after this opinion and the other,
this and the other way, which having taken their hearts, they carry up and down
what they hear, and what apprehensions they have of things, and persons,
pleading and arguing for that they have but slight and sudden apprehensions
of, and by arguing, the thing gets down into their spirits, before it be
thoroughly examined and understood, and being got down there, then it must
needs be maintained, and so a spirit of contention rises in them, and seeds of
contention are sown among others. Unusquisque sciat opus suum in quocunque
vitae genere divinum esse opus qui^est opus divinae vocationis, habeus mandatnm
Dei. Luth.
It may be some of your callings are low and mean, and that may possibly be
your discouragement: but let it not be so, for there may be as much obedience
to God in thy faithfulness in that mean calling of thine as in the highest and
most honorable employment upon earth, yea thy reward may be as great, for God
looks at faithfulness in the work, not the greatness of the work. Let every
man know, says Luther, that his work in any godly kind of life is a divine
work, because it is the work of a divine call, having Gods command for it.

The ninth.
In all strivings with men have a care that due respect to their persons be
kept as much as may be.
IT is very observable, when God in the manifestation of his displeasure
against the Devil, in the Serpent, cursed him, Then he says cursed be thou;
but when he would manifest it against Simeon and Levi, it is not, Cursed be ye,
or Cursed be they; but Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
rage, for it was cruel. You may be bitter against men's sin, so be it you
show due respect to their persons; by denying that respect you might and ought
to give to men's persons, you deprive your self of that liberty which otherwise
you might take in opposing their sin, which is the thing you say you aim
only at.

The tenth.
Labor to get good by the wrongs that are done us.
IF we found God blessing them to us for good, our hearts will be very moderate
toward those that have done them. The overruling providence of God turning
the wrong that Joseph's brethren had done him to so much good, took off Joseph's
spirit from practicing any evil against them; but when this good shall come to
us by the exercise of our own graces, it will be more prevalent to quiet and
moderate our spirits. Philip of Macedon thanked some great men of Athens who
had brought up ill reports of him, because both in speech and life he was the
better laboring by words and deeds to prove them liars: the best answer to ill
reports, is to live contrary to them.

The eleventh.
Turn your zeal from working one against another to zeal for God.
YOu will say, Are works of zeal any helps to peace and union? who are they
that make the greatest disturbances in the world, but your fiery zelots? if men
were of a cooler temper, we should have more peace.

Ans. Distempered zeal may cause disturbance; but true zeal, the clear flame
of the Spirit of God, making men in their ways zealous not for themselves, but
for God, this has the blessing of Gods peace with it. Numb. 25. 12. 13.
Phinehas there has the promise of the Covenant of peace, because he was zealous
for his God.

The twelfth.
In seeking to reduce others to good, let it appear that you seek rather to be
helpful to them* then to get victory over them.
IT is grievous to a man's nature to be conquered, but not to be helped. Illud
sequendum putavi ut neminem vinci v^llem and omnes vincer^. Ambr. ep. 24.
Ambrose writing to his friend Marcellus about composing some breaches between
him and his brother and sister, has amongst other this excellent expression, I
thought that to be the best way, I would have none to be conquered, and all to
overcome. The like practice is reported of Scipio, when at the taking of New
Carthage two Soldiers contended about the Murall Crown, Plutarch in the life
of Scipio.
due to him who first climbed the walls, so that the whole Army was thereupon
in danger of division, when he came to Scipio, he decides the matter thus: He
told them they both got up the wall together, and so gave the scaling Crown to
both.

The thirteenth.
Make up breaches as soon as may be.
TAke them, if it may be; at the beginning. When good men fall out, only one
of them is usually faulty at the first, but if such strifes continue any time,
both of them become guilty. If you defer the setting of a bone broken, it
cannot be done without much difficulty, and great pain. Prove. 17. 14. The
beginning of strife is as when one lets out water, therefore leave off
contention before it be meddled with, antequam immisceat se, so you may read
it, before it be got into thee, and mingle it self in thy heart, or between
you and your brother. If your house be on fire, you do not stay quenching it
till it breaks out of the roof; divisions that are but sparks, very little at
the first, if let alone, grow very high and great in a little time. I have read
a story of two sons of the Duke of Florence, Who having been hunting, the one
said, My dog killed the Hare, and the other said, Nay but my dog killed it:
words multiplied, they grew into a heat, the one draws upon the other and
kills him; the servant seeing his master killed, draws upon him who had slain
him, and kills him. Neglect not beginnings of quarrels, you know not to what
they may grow.

The fourteenth.
Let us account those brethren, in whom we see godliness, and carry our selves
toward them accordingly, though they will not account us.
LEt us not be too ready to take the forfeiture of our brethern. Ipsum
f^at^rnitatis nomen, u^cunque Donatistis fastidiosum est tamen orthodoxis erga
ipsos Donatistas necessarium. Optat. l. 3. init.
The learned and godly men who lived in that Age wherein the Donatists
renounced all Christian communion with other Churches, yea disclaimed any
brotherhood with other Christians, yet seeing godliness in many of them, they
did account them part of the Church and their brethren; thus they sought to
pluck those to them, who thrust themselves from them.

Lastly, pray much.
PLiny says of the pearls they call Unions, Plin. not. hist. lib. 9. cap. 35.
though they be engendered in the sea, yet they participate more of the heavens
then of the sea. Certainly this precious union, though it be amongst men yet it
has its luster and beauty, yea its very being from the heavens. You must look
up to heaven therefore for peace, for the preservation, increase, luster,
beauty of it, if you would have it.

Job 25. 2. God makes peace in his high places, the Lord can make peace
between high and low. Let us carry men's rugged, crooked, perverse hearts to God
in Prayer, who is the great joyner of hearts; it is he that makes men to be of
one mind in a house, he makes the wars to cease. Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem. In your prayers for the Church this must be mentioned as a
special blessing. If praying prevail not, fighting will not. Those are the
most peaceable men in Church and Commonwealth, that pray most for the peace of
them; God has more prayers for the peace of this Church and State upon the
file, of theirs whom some of you account hinderers of it, then of yours. You
complain much for want of peace, you inveigh much against those whom you are
pleased to mark out as hinderers of the peace, but do you pray as much? You
have these means presented unto you for the furtherance of peace; what other
you may meet with any way, make use of. 2 These. 3. 16. The Lord of peace give
you peace always by all means.

And that all may be the better improved, let the exhortation of the Apostle,
(...).
1 These. 4. 11. sink into you, Study to be quiet, the words are, Love the
honor of being quiet: There is great excellency in it.

That is the last thing.

CAP. XXXV.
Exhortation to peaceable and brotherly union, showing the excellency of it.
ANd now, my brethren, as the Eunuch said to Philip concerning his Baptism,
Here is water, what lets but I may be baptized? I shall say concerning our
uniting in peace and love one with another. Here are Joining Principles,
Joining Considerations, Joining Graces, Joining Practices; what now lets, but
that we may join in love and peace one with another? Surely nothing can let
but extreme corrupt, perverse hearts of our own.

The Apostle Paul is mighty earnest in his desires, in his exhortations for
this: 1 Cor. 1. 12. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together, in the same mind, and in the
same judgment. The word translated perfectly joined, (...), Gale^o est cum
ossa reducuntur ad locum.
signifies such a joining, as when a bone is out of joint, is perfectly set
right again.

So Philip. 2. 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind, let nothing be done through strife, etc. The Apostle
poures forth his soul in this exhortation, it is a heartbreaking exhortation.

Luther, Vobis oro persaadeatis tam cupide me amplecti concordiam, quam cupide
velim mihi Dominum Jesum propitium semper fore. Luther Eccles. Agentinensis
pastoribus.
though a man of a stirring, hot spirit, yet writing to the Pastors of the
Church of Strasburg, has these words: I pray you be persuaded, that I shall
always be as desirous to embrace concord, as I am desirous to have the Lord
Jesus to be propitious to me.

I find also in a Letter that Martin Bucer writes to a godly Minister, a very
high expression, of that high esteem he had of, and earnest desires after the
curing of divisions: Who would not (says he) purchase with his life the
removing that infinite scandal that comes by dissension? Oh that there were
such hearts in us! Christ expects it from us all, but especially from his
Ministers, Quis non vita etiam sua redimat submotum istus infinitum dissi^ii
scandalum? Martin. Bucer. Ambr. Blaurero.
for they are his Ambassadors for peace, to beseech men in his stead to be
reconciled to God: reconciliation with God will reconcile us one to another. If
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4. 11. The faces of
the Cherubims in the Temple looked one toward another, which some think
signified the agreement that should be amongst Ministers of the Gospel. So the
six branches in the Candlestick joined all in one; those who hold the light of
truth before others, should be united in peace in one, amongst themselves. The
first thing Christ's Ministers were to do when they came to any place was to
say Peace be to that place; if any sons of peace were there, they were to
abide, Veteres s^ruta^s ^istorias invenire non possum, ita scidisse ecclesiam
and de domo Dei populus s^duxisse praetereo^ qui sacerdotes Dei posit^ sunt;
and Prophetae, id est speculatores isti vertuntur in laqueum tortuosum and in
omnibus scandala p^nunt. Jerome cited by John Hus, tractat. de pace.
otherwise not: Surely then it is expected that themselves should be sons of
peace. The contentions of private Christians are offensive, but the contentions
of Ministers is a scandal with a witness. Yet in all Ages of the Church, the
corrupt Clergy have been the greatest causes of divisions; they have been of
the most cruel spirits against any that differed from them. But let not such a
spirit be in us; we have enough to do to contend with the wicked of the world,
with the malice of Satan, let us not contend one with another.

Luther writing to the Ministers of Norimberg, brings in Christ saying to them,
Satis est vobis ob nomen meum malorum, You are like to suffer evil enough for
my name, you need not be afflictions one to another. It was barbarousnesse in
the Priests of Baal to cut and slash themselves, but it is worse for the
Ministers of Jesus Christ to cut and slash one another. 1 Kings 6. 23. The
Cherubims were made of the Olive tree; If you be typified by them, as we hinted
before, let it appear that you are olives, not brambles: yea and v. 31. For
the entering of the Oracle the doors were of Olive Tree: who will believe that
you bring the Oracles of God with you, when they see by your froward,
contentious carriage, that you never entered in at these doors? People cannot
but think it a miserable thing to have a scratching, tearing bramble to be over
them. Oh that God would set the beauty, glory of peace, friendship, love,
before us! That this precious pearl, Union, might be highly valued by us! All
men are taken in some degree or other with the excellency and sweetness of love
and friendship. Multi divitias despiciunt, quo^ parvo contentas, tenuis victus
cul^^sque delectat, honores vero quorum cupiditate quidam inflammantur, quam
multi ita contemnunt ut nihil inanius esse vellevias existiment, item caetera
quae quibusdam admirabilia videntur, permulti sunt qui ni^ilo putent; de
amicitia omnes ad unum idem se^^^unt, fine amio^^ia (...) esse nullam sentiunt.
Cicer. de Amicit.
Some men, says Cicero, despise riches, others honors; those things that by
some are delighted in by others are vilified; but all men of all sorts have a
high esteem of friendship, they think there can be no life without it.

Genesis 34. 21. The great commendation that Hamor and Shechem give of Jacob and
his Sons as an argument to persuade the men of Shechem to join with them in the
giving their daughters to them for wives, and in taking theirs, is, These men
are peaceable with us. A peaceable disposition is very convincing.

Cant. 6. 6. My dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her
mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. What then follows? The
daughters saw her and blessed her, yea the Queens, and the Concubines, and
they praised her, Who ise she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the
moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army of Banners? Let the Saints be
but one, and then they will appear beautiful and glorious indeed, yea they
will be terrible as an army of Baners.

Evagrius in his Ecclesiastical History records an Epistle of Cyrill of
Alexandria, Evargius l. 1. cap. 6.
written to John of Antioch, upon the occasion of a Pacificatory Epistle of
John unto him, his spirit was so taken with it that it breaks forth thus: Let
the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, the mid wall of rancour is
battered down, the boiling choler which bereaved the minds of quietness, is
purged from among us, and all the occasion of discord and dissension is
banished away, for our Savior Jesus Christ has granted peace unto the
Churches under heaven.

The Thebans made Harmonia a goddess, Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas.
they accounted her the defender and patroness of their City. Harmonious,
peaceable, uniting dispositions, have much of God in them; if not from
sanctifying grace, yet it is from a common work of the Spirit of God: there is
a nobleness in such a heart. By the Laws of England Noblemen have this
privilege, that none of them can be bound to the peace, because it is supposed
that a Noble disposition will never be engaged in brawles and contentions, it
is supposed that the peace is always bound to him, that of his own accord he
will be careful to preserve it. It is the base Bramble that rends and tears.
Nazianzen reports of Alexander, who having taken a City, and consulting what to
do, one Parmenius answered, If he were King he would raze the City to the
ground. (...). Nazian. carm. Iamb.
Alexander answers, So would I too, if I were what you are; rigor may become
you, but gentleness becomes me. Gentleness, mercy, goodness, love,
tenderness of others sufferings, are the greatest ornaments to a noble spirit.
If this be sanctified, the glory of God shines bright indeed in such a heart.
For God glories in this, to be the God of peace and love. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The
very God of peace. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. The Lord of peace himself. Jesus Christ in
being the Prince of peace; the holy Ghost in being like a Dove that has no
gall: the Gospel is the Gospel of peace; the Kingdom of God is peace as well
as righteousness; the legacy that Christ left is a legacy of peace; the
Apostolical benediction is grace, mercy, and peace: the glory of the Church is
in this, that it is a City compact at unity within it self. Yea this will be
the glory of that glorious Church, that God is raising a new Jerusalem, there
shall be no more crying there, Apoc. 21. 4. Ezech. 14. 9. The Lord shall be
King over all the earth, in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name
shall be one. There is but one Lord now, but he is called by different names,
but in that day his name shall be but one. Zeph. 3. 9. Then will I turn to a
people of pure language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, and
serve him with one consent. The Hebrew word is with one shoulder, now we
shoulder one another, but then all shall serve the Lord with one shoulder. This
love and peace is compared to the most delightful, and the most profitable
things; Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell at unity; it
is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard,
even Aarons beard; that went down to the skirts of his garment, as the dew of
Hermon, that descended upon the mountains of Sion. Psalm. 123.

There are many promises made to this. Mat. 5. Blessed are the peacemakers. 2
Cor. 13. 11. Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with
you. John 15. 12. Christ says, This is his commandment, that we love one
another. ver. 14. he says, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command
you. By loving others we do not only get them to be our friends, but Christ
too. Me thinks I see Christ here pleading for love, as one who had to deal
with two men who were at some variance, persuading them to peace and love;
Come, you shall pass by all former things, you shall be made friends, by this
you shall gain me also to be a friend to you as long as I live.

Genes. 13. ver. 8. to the end, is a remarkable Scripture to show how God is
with a loving, gentle, peaceable disposition. Ver. 8. 9. we have Abraham's kind
gentle yielding to Lot his inferior for peace sake; but mark what follows,
and you shall find he lost nothing by this his yielding: for as soon as Lot
was gone from him, the Lord came to him, ver. 14. and said to him, Lift up now
thine eyes and look from the place where thou art, Northward, Southward,
Eastward and Westward, for all the Land that thou see to thee will I give it,
and to thy seed for ever: arise, walk thorough, the Land in the length of it,
and in the breadth of it, for I will give it unto thee. The difference of what
Jacob says of Reuben when he was to dye, Genesis 49. 4. from that of Moses, Deuteronomy.
33. 6. is observable: Jacob says, He is the first borne, the beginning of his
strength; but he shall not excel, because he went to his fathers bed. But
Moses, Let Reuben live and not dye, and let not his men be few. The reason of
this difference is given by some, because it was fit that Jacob, to deter his
other children, should exercise the authority of a father, but Moses frees him
from the curse, because he was always loving to his brother Joseph. Brotherly
love has a blessing going along with it: God loves it exceedingly, for it
makes much for the glory of God. And to what purpose do we live, if God have
not glory by us? Romans 15. 5, 6, 7. the Apostle first prays that the God of
patience and consolution would grant them to be like minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus, that they may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God. Then he exhorts: Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also
received us to the glory of God. Much of Gods glory depends upon our union. Yea
God stands so much upon this, that he is willing to stay for his service till
we be at peace one with another. Mat. 5. 23, 24. Leave thy gift before the
Altar, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. My worship shall stay till you be reconciled. I love my worship, and
desire it much, but I must have peace and love amongst your selves first, I
will stay for that. But I beseech you let us not make God stay too long.
Remember while you are wrangling and quarrelling, God stays on you all this
while. If children should be quarrelling, and one comes to them, and says,
Your father stays for you, it is time for them to break off. But not
unmannerly with God, in making him stay so long upon you: some of you have made
him wait upon you for an acceptable duty of worship diverse weeks, yea it may be
many months, and yet your spirits are not in temper to offer any sacrifice to
God. What a fearful evil is it then to stand out in a stubborn, sullen,
dogged manner refusing to be reconciled! Learned Drusius cites Hebrew Writers,
saying, That he that offends his brother ought to seek to pacify him; if he
refuse to be pacified, then he must bring three of his friends with him to
intercede twice or thrice, and if he shall after this refuse, D^usius praet. l.
1. c. 13.
then he is to leave him, and such a man quia implacabilis est, vocatur
peccator, is called a sinner, with a special note upon him.

Lastly, the Saints enjoyment of the sweetness of love, peace and unity among
themselves, what is it but heaven upon earth? Heaven is above all storms,
tempests, troubles, the happiness of it is perfect rest. We pray that the will
of God might be done on earth as it is done in heaven; why, may not we have a
heaven upon earth? this would sweeten all our comforts, yea all our
afflictions. But the Devil envies us this happiness. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

If you would have the excellency of love set before you more fully, read over
and over again the Epistles of John. Ecclesiastical story reports of this
blessed Apostle, whose heart was so full of love, that when he grew very old,
not able to preach, yet he would be brought into the congregation in a chair,
and there say only these words, Little children flee idolatry, love one
another. But the more excellent union and peace is, the more is the pity that
it should be abused to be serviceable to men's lusts; the more would our misery
be if we should be abused in our treaties about it; if we should have a
mock-peace; if we should be gulled in either offers of or conclusions about
peace; if peace should be made our ruin, but a preparation of us for
slaughter. It has been by many observed, that what the English gained of the
French in battle by valor, Comineus lib. 4. c. 8.
the French regained of the English by cunning Treaties. The Lord deliver us
from such French tricks. Let us all be for peace, yet so as not to be befooled
into bondage by the name of peace. Now God has by his mighty arm helped us,
let us not be put off with a babble, and made to believe it is this Pearl. We
know with whom we have to deal.

And now as the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. The Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God: Let me add, And into the love of one another. Let us all study
peace, seek peace, follow peace, pursue peace, and the God of peace be with us.

FINIS.
The Contents.
Chap. 1. THe Text opened, and suitableness thereof showed, p. 1. Chap. 2. The
evil of dividing between God and any thing else, p. 6. Chap. 3.
Heart-divisions one from another: the difficulty of meddling with them, 11. the
Causes of them, and method in handling them, 12. Chap. 4. The first Dividing
Principle, There can be no agreement without uniformity, 14. wherein is shown
in what things it is necessary for peace we should be the same, and in what
not, 15. Chap. 5. The second Dividing Principle, All Religions are to be
tolerated, wherein is discussed the power of the Magistrate in matters of
Religion, 19. and 158. Chap. 6. That question discussed, What should be done to
a man who pleads his conscience, 30. Chap. 7. The congregationall way does not
held absolute liberty for all Religions, 41. Chap. 8. Not to tolerate any thing
which is conceived evil, is a Dividing Principle, as well as to tolerate all
things, 48. Chap. 9. Rules to know in what things we are to bear with our
brethren, 54. Chap. 10. The fourth Dividing Principle, Division is the best way
for rule. Wherein the cursed evil of this Principle is shown, and some
freedom from it that are thought to be guilty of it, 72. Chap. 11. The fifth
Dividing Principle, That every man is bound to profess and practice always,
what he apprehends to be truth, Here that case of conscience, When a man is
bound to profess, when not, is discussed, and what rules to be observed in it,
75 to 84. Chap. 12. The sixth Dividing Principle, is, What is in it self best,
must be chosen and done, not weighing circumstances or references, 84. Chap.
13. The seventh Dividing Principle, That it is obstinacy for a man to be
convinced by the judgment of many more learned and godly then himself. 87.
Wherein is shown 1. what respect is to be given to the judgments of learned and
godly men; 2. what men should do that cannot submit to their judgments; by
what rules we should judge men to be obstinate, 88. Chap. 14. If others be
against what we conceive to be truth, we may judge them to go against their
own light: the rashness and evil of this Principle, 95. The ninth Dividing
Principle, That rules of prudence are sufficient to guide us in natural and
civil things, therefore they may suffice us in spiritual and Church affairs,
97. to 100. The tenth Dividing Principle, Every difference in Religion is a
differing Religion, 100. Chap. 15. Dividing Distempers; what they are, how they
cause Divisions, 105. Chap. 21. Dividing Practices: what they are, 145. Chap.
23. Disorderly gathering of Churches: diverse things discussed about it, 162.
Chap. 25. Characterizing the names of division, amongst others the name of
Schismatic. The point of Schism, who is a Schismaticke, who not, is
discussed, 171. 9. Because men cannot join in all things, they will join in
nothing, 182. The point of hearing such as are supposed not to have a lawful
calling, discussed, 183. Chap. 27. The evil of divisions, how much good they
hinder, 189. Aggravations of the sinfulness of our divisions, 209. Chap. 29.
The woeful miseries of our Divisions, 217. Futher Aggravations of this misery
of our Divisions, 221. The ill uses that are made of our Divisions, 226.
Reasons why it is not to be wondered at, that godly men should be divid^d, 237.
That Christ and the Gospel occasion divisions, and how, 245. The good use to be
made of our Divisions, 247. The cure of them, 252. Fourteen joining Principles,
from 254. to 267. Fourteen joining Considerations, from 268. to 280. Eight
joining graces, 281. Sixteen joining Practices, 285. An Exhortation to
peaceable and brotherly union, showing the excellency of it. 296.
FINIS.

