A DISCOVERY Of some part of the War between the Kingdom of the LAMB, And the
Kingdom of ANTICHRIST: Held forth in this account, of several Disputes and
Queries, between a Minister of Christ (really so) and one that has the name of
a Minister, but is proved to be a Minister, and Member of Antichrist by
evident Testimonies. And is a short account of the Covetousness, Ignorance,
Envy, and the fruits of darkness brought forth by C. Fowler, a professed
Minister in Reading. And here all may see (in some measure) the differenc^
^^tween Christ, and Antichrist, and their Authority and Weapons; and also the
Fruits and (...) of each of them are made manifest. By one that makes war in
Righteousness, with the sword of the Spirit against Antichrist, and all the
parts of his Kingdom: Edw. Borough.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Winde-mill in
Martins, near Aldersgate, 1659.

To the Reader.
Friend,
THe chief occasion of this being sent abroad to public view, is to the
People of Reading most particularly; but yet more general unto all, and though
that it be chiefly unto a particular place, and against a particular person, to
wit Christopher Fowler, one that has the name of a Minister of Christ in
Reading, whose Folly, and Weakness, and Ignorance, is herein discovered; yet
it has partly relation to the whole Ministry of the Nation, and all men that
do not shutt their eyes may see, and behold something of that great opposition
that is at this day between the Kingdom of Christ, and the Kindgdome of
Antichrist, and I have no other end in publishing of this, but for the
satisfaction of them that desires it, and for the general good of all; and if
Christopher Fowler shall see himself justly reproved, and repent, it may prove
good to him also, and I am not a man of strife, for if he and his brethren had
not first challenged us to disputes, I had not had this occasion thus to
proceed now, and in what I have done I referr it to the just witness of God,
in the honest People of Redding, and to all else where.

E. B.

A discovery of some part of the War between the Kingdom of Antichrist and
the Kingdom of the Lamb, etc.
FOrasmuch as great has been the debate for these diverse years of late,
between the Lamb and his followers, and Antichrist and his followers, and the
one of them has been opposing the other in their own Power and Authority; and
great is the debate at this day between these two Kingdoms; which is
endeavoring the overthrow one of the other, and all the strength and power of
Antichrist is put forth in defense of his kingdom, by Persecution, Injustice,
false Imprisonments, Beatings and Whipings, and Spoiling of goods and Persons,
and Railings, Accusings, Slandrings Reproachings: by these ways and
proceedings does Antichrist stri^e at this day, for the upholding and
maintaining his own Cause and Kingdom, and by this means and these weapons
mentioned, does he seek to defend himself, his Church and Ministry, and
Ordinances; these are his Weapons and Armor, by which he Opposes and fights
against the Lamb and his followers, whom the Lord has raised up for this end,
and they have within these few years, more then ever for many Generations, made
an invasion and inroad, upon Antichrist his Kingdom, and Government, and the
great City Babylon, and the Seige is raised that has long been laid against
the Holy Seed; and the great City Babylon is taken, her Walls are scaled and
her Gates broken, and her strength defeated, and her Merchants spoiled of their
goodly Treasure; for the day of the Lord is come, and the Holy Seed is he
leading out of the spiritual Sodom and Egypt; and Mystery Babylon the Great,
has God remembered for her Iniquities, and Her crueltyes, and Mercilessnes, and
all Her Abominations will God avenge upon Her Head; and this does come to
pass, and not by the multitude of an host of men, nor yet by Human Policy
and Wisdom, nor yet by Carnal Weapons, not by Goales, nor Prisons, nor
Persecutions, these are not the Lambs Weapons, but these are Antichrists and
the Dragons Armor and Weapons, which he makes war by, against the Lamb and
his followers, even at this day in every Nation: But the Lambs Weapons are
Truth, Patience, long Suffering, meekness; and down right Sincerity of Heart
and Tongue; and by these things shall Antichrist be Slain, and these Weapons
shall Conquer his Kingdom, Love shall overcome Hatred, Meekness shall overcome
Wrath; Truth shall overcome Decit and Falsehood, and God shall overcome the
Devil.

But more perticularly: great has been the Opposition and Debate made one
against the other; and the Battle between Christ, and Antichrist, has
principally been held forth between the Ministers of the Church of England on
Antichrists part; and the People called Quakers on the other part: no man in
the Nation can be Ignorant how the controversy has depended betwixt these two,
and what weapons they have used the one against the other, and also it is in
part known the success of them both, and how the one of them (to wit) the
Ministers (so called) have had on their part the strength of Men, the
Magistrates power, the rude Multitude, and Humane Craft, and the Serpents
Policy, not any of these things have been wanting to them; but yet a little
seed has sprung up in the Nation on the other part unexspected by many, w^^ch
has had sincerity and truth in it, and the Lord has been with it, and he has
blessed it, though but little and very small in its beginning, yet it is
prospered into a kingdom, for Gods Might and his Authority dwells in it,
before whom all Nations of the Earth must Fear and Tremble.

But yet more particularly my present occasion of demonstrating these things
are as follows: and the engagement that lies upon me hereunto, is not out of
any personal enmity that I have against any, but my intent is for the discovery
of the Truth, that men may embrace it, and for the laying open the decits of
Antichrist and his Kingdom, that men may come out of Babylon, and may not
partake of Her Sins, nor of Her Plagues; and this matter now in hand chiefly
concerns the People of the Town of Reading for their Satisfaction, concerning
the Ways, Practices, Doctrines, and Proceedings, of Christopher Fowler one of
their Ministers: with whom I have been joined in opposition two several times
in dispute with him, and the third time was appointed for our meeting upon
discourse as hereafter is related, but he not appearing at the time and place
according to appointment; and he notwithstanding yet continues in opposition
too, and reproachings of the Truth of the Gospel, which I profess and contend
for; therefore upon this account do I thus engage with him, and not for
Contention sake, but for the open vindication of Truth and Righteousness, and
sound Faith and Doctrine, held forth by us, and opposed and gainsaid by him.

The first opposition that fell out between him and me, was at a meeting
challenged by himself, in that Town about the ninth Month in the year, 1657.
and I shall at present forbear his detestable and abominable practices and
speeches against me and the Truth, at that Meeting, for indeed the remembrance
of it is much passed from me, but many in that Town may well remember to this
day, how he howted and clapped his hands in the Pulpit, as if he had been
Hunting on a Mountain, and also his ungodly speeches, and revilings toward
me, as calling me dog and vilain, and such like names, and when some of his
own people reproved him for such words, he said the worst words he had in his
mouth was to good for me, and indeed such was his carriages, and words toward
me, at that time far off civility and not like a sober Heathen, much less
like a Christan or Minister of Christ, and here follows what was written to
him and to the Major, and whole Town, and sent the next morning after the
dispute: which is some account of that days proceeding, and finding a copy of
it by me; I thought meet here to insert it.

Friends, Rulers, Priests, and People of Reading.
A Few words to clear my Conscience to you all in the sight of God, I send
among you occasioned by this days meeting; ye people be ashamed of your
Priests, and ye Priests be ye ashamed of your People, and all of you together,
cover your lips and hide your faces, and be ashamed of your Profession in
Religion: or to make mention of the name of the Lord in that nature in which
you stand; whose lightness, and foolishness, and rudeness, and wickedness,
exceeds some others; yea, many with whom I have had to do in disputes, you
excel in unreasonablenesse in words and Behavior, manifesting your selves some
of you not to be civil men, much less Christians; and this very day much of
your vanity, bruitishnesse, and uncivility, appeared to your shame, in the
sight of all just and sober men and to your condemnation, in the sight of God;
who takes notice of your wickedness and unseemely behavior: which you may call
to mind and remember, that you may repent of your ungodly words and cruel
speeches, and rude brutish gestures, which appeared in you without any fear of
God, to your shame be it spoken; and like Priests like People, all out of the
way, in folly and vanity, erring through lightness and wantonnnesse, not
knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God, but perverters of the one, and
despisers of the other; the sin of the Priest will be charged upon the People,
because you love to have those things so, and uphold him in his wickedness,
and the sin of the people will be charged upon the Priests, who through lies
and lightness causes you to err, and profits them not at all; but is a blind
leader of ye blind people, till both fall into the ditch together, who closes
your eyes that you may not see, and shutts your ears least you should hear,
and hardens your hearts that you may not understand; and your destruction is of
your selves, and your blood is upon your own heads, who scorns to be reproved,
and despises the way of the Lord, and will not receive his Truth in the Love
of it, that you may be saved; but is a blind willful, and stifenecked people,
some of you who has hearts and cannot understand: Is these the fruits of your
long Profession, Railing, Mocking, Scorning, Laughing, Hooting, Foolish and
Vain Words, Nicknaming, and Reproaching? these things abounds openly among you
to your shame, especially at such a time, when Meekness, and Soberness, and
Moderation, had much better become you, to have been brought forth by you; Your
Priests, exceeding the rest in vileness, and some of your Rulers hardly being
clear: remember your work, and call to mind your words, and ways, and let
shame cover your heads, from the highest to the lowest of you; and thou proud
wild, reproachful professed Minister; cease thy vain presumptious boastings
against the Innocent, and now when thou puts off thy armor, if thou have gotten
a victory glory, or rather hide thy face for shame, and stop thy mouth in the
dust, whose lightness, and wildness, has super-abounded some of thy fellows,
who may be ashamed of thee in thy words and behavior, whereby thou art
sufficiently proved to be one that was never sent of God, if we had no other
testimony: Thy proud presumptious boast against the Quakers, was with
soberness and in the fear of the Lord answered, to thy shame in the sight of
all such, whose hearts are not altogether hardened and given up to believe Lies;
and to do Wickedness, that they may be damned that believe not the Truth: and
first, as to the manner of the dispute on his part, was his Railing, Envious,
Reproachful, unsavory filthy words, of God or of the Devil? with much impudency
many times uttered in the discourse; as Villain, Sirrah, Wretch, Blasphemer,
Rogue, and such like lying words of Bitterness, more like the words of a
brawling Drunkard then for a Minister of Christ, and was his hooting,
laughfing, and clapping his hands, and rude and unseemly gestures, and
behavior, of God, or of the Devil? more like in appearance to a Stage player,
then to a Minister of Christ; to his shame I mention it, consider and answer
these things, and let that of God in your Consciences Judge, to which I stand
to be approved in meekness, and he to be reproved and condemned in his
filthiness and bruitishnesse, in the sight of God; may not you who owned him
in that discourse, be ashamed of him in these his words and actions, which
appeared? who boastingly gave a Challenge to dispute of the things of God, and
then to manage it in rudeness and wildness, without any fear of God, in
lying and slandring; and at the end when things came to the head for trial, to
run away and not to stand to the end, though several times he was charged to
it; I appeal for Answer to the light of Christ in all your Consciences, not
like a Minister of Christ in any measure he appeared; But as one that knows not
the living God, nor his Law, and fear, nor Judgments; and an unfit fellow upon
trial I found him, to dispute the Precious things of God, and through some
Nations* I have hardly met with a worse, which caused me to be the more silent
then otherwise I would, for I chosed rather to be accounted a fool by silence,
then to offend the Just Law of God, by giving holy things to dogs, or casting
pearls before Swine, in which nature he and some of you appeared, who Falsely
Slandered the Innocent with the name of Jesuit and such like, crying away with
him, with bitter and cruel words and gestures, pushing with your hands and
crying a prison were the fitest, or such like, even like unto your Forefathers
the Pharisees, who persecuted Christ under the account of themselves being
righteous, and he a blasphemer, and they laid snares for him to entrap him in
his words as you did; who when I would not answer according to your provoking,
that you might ensnare me, would hardly suffer me to answer any thing, to
clear and defend to the Truth, against the boast of the Wicked; but by Hooting,
and Laughing, and Clapping of Hands, and Foolish Jeastings, and unreasonable
Rudeness, prevented me from speaking, and them that would have heard from
hearing, as much as you could, even as bruit beasts or Heathens, and not like
civil people* much less like godly Christians* nor like such as would or could
soberly debate the Truth of God to edification, and truly may I say I fought
with beasts at Reading, after the manner of men, but all was to make your
selves and your pretended Minister manifest, and all could not be so blind, but
might understand his ways and words, no to be guided by the Spirit of God, but
by the spirit of the Devil; who is the Father of such Works and Confusion, as
was brought forth by him in the meeting, in many uncivil actions, and
reproachful words of envy. And also as to the matter of dispute on his part
managed, was but a vain contention boastingly uttered without the fear of the
Lord, in a proud presumptious spirit, and a snare laid in the midst of his
questions, and arguments to entrap the Just, but in vain was the snare laid in
the sight of the Bird, and I chose rather to appear a fool to your wisdom, then
to be made a prey upon by you, and caught in your deeplaid snare, for we are
learned to be as wise as serpents* and deeply did he and some of you, fall into
the snare of Confusion, and Wickedness, and False Doctrine, as would have been
laid open if he had durst to have staid, or you to have heard. The Principal
Question was, whether the Scriptures are the Word of God? which he affirmed,
but could not prove by plain Scripture, unto which much might have been
answered, and said, if patience, or any moderation, had ruled over your
despiteful spirits; but because I could not, (to satisfy your wills, and to
fulfill your purpose) answer, yea or nay, and thereby make my self a
transgressor; Therefore, hardly would you suffer me to say any thing, in any
manner of arguing, but by wickedness endeavored to stopp my mouth; My answer
was, and is, the Scriptures, (the writings) which are one, are but a
declaration and witness of the word of God; which word was in the beginning,
and endures for ever; as John and Peter testifies; and the Scriptures (which
are writings) were not in the beginning, but began to be written by Moses many
hundred years after the beginning; Therefore, the Scriptures, which were not in
the beginning, are not the Word of God, which Word was in the beginning; further
the Scripture says, the Worlds were made and framed by the Word of God, but
the Scriptures made not the Worlds, therefore the Scriptures are not the Word
of God, which as the Scripture it self says, made the Worlds, many such like
witnesses might be alleged from the Scriptures, to prove the Scriptures are
not the the Word God, but a Declaration of the Word of God, which cannot endure
for ever; then he said he would prove the Scriptures should endure for ever,
but could not bring any plain Scriptures as I demanded of him to prove the
assertion; but went about in Logic to prove it, and could prove no more then
that the truth written of in the Scripture should endure for ever, which thing
I never did, or shall deny, and so needed not to be contended against by any
sober men, but unreasonable men, who have not faith will say any thing for
advantage to themselves, and disadvantage to the Truth, which they are set to
oppose: and he instanced, and said, it is written, Christ is God blessed for
ever, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and said this
should endure for ever: to which I answered, that which is written of only
shall endure for ever, but the Scripture and writings should not endure for
ever, and further instanced God was written and was Scripture, and should not
endure for ever, though God should endure for ever, and he could not be written
nor contained in a book; and through your vanity in scorning, and hooting, and
unreasonablenesse, according to your own purpose, least your deceiver should be
made manifest, you prevented me, and would not suffer me further to speak, in
what much more I had to say in this particular: and I observed that in all the
questions and arguments, against me was hatched secretly a snare to entrapp me
into suffering, and to this purpose some of you said wickedly; I would
presently dispute my self into prison: and further he instanced, Thou shall
honor thy Father and thy Mother, it is so written; and said he, this is a
command of God, and the Word of God, and shall endure for ever, with
presumptuous boasts, and scornful invented terms not beseeming any man, much
less a Minister; he could prove this to be the Word of God against all the
Quakers in the world, and and against all the Fiends in Hell, and against all
the Jesuits at Rome, or filthy words to this purpose, and much I desired
moderation from you, with diligence to hear my defense, and thereupon many
times desired the Mayor, who was present to command silence, but I could hardly
obtain any from you, you were so generally rude and rash, and unreasonable, and
to him I replied, that to honor father and Mother in the Lord, was a command of
God, and was the Word of God, and should endure for ever, but Lukes writings
(the Scripture) were but a Declaration of this Command, and not the Command it
self, nor the Word of God, and would perish, and not endure for ever, and bid
you read Luke 1.1. There Luke calls his writings, which are Scriptures, a
Declaration, and much more might I have spoken to this thing, if I had been
yoaked against a reasonable man, or if the Auditors had been but civil, but you
could not endure to hear, but said I subtly Insinuated into their people; and
thereupon several times some of you spoke to the Mayor to dismiss the people,
I think least your hirelings should be discovered, and your wickedness
reproved; and thus the thing came nere an end, he not being able to prove by
any Scripture, or right argument, the Scripture to be the Word of God, which
shall endure for ever, but must, if his and your eye ever be opened, confess
to what I held forth, that only that which is written of in the Scripture, or
which the Scripture declares of, shall endure for ever to be the Word of God,
and nor the Scripture or writings; then presumptuously he said, prove him if I
could, to be a False Prophet* to which I answered, (and desired much your
moderation, but could not obtain it, as though you had set your selves to be
rude and vain) to prove a False Prophet was either by conversation, or
doctrine, or both, and by his fruits he was known; to preach for hire, and to
didivine for money is fruits and signs of a False Prophet, as the Scripture
testified, which should be my rule to try him by, if he durst stand to it, and
they that preached for hire were False Prophets, and he preached for hire, and
therefore was a False Prophet according to the Scripture rule; then he said he
preached not for hire, yet he had hire for preaching, a poor shift to cover the
devils deceipts, but it will not hide his shame, and it was proved that he
preached for hire to all; but such who stopped their ears, and it was
manifested in his face that he sued some at the law which would not pay him
tithes, and then I asked him to give any examples from the Ministers of Christ
where ever they took tithes, or sued men at the the law who would not pay them
wages, but to this he gave no answer at all, and thereby he was proved to be a
False Prophet, and a deceiver, and much more might have been said as to this,
to prove him and his generation to be false Prophets, as may be done at any
time, but such was the unreasonablenesse at this passage, that you were nigh to
lay violent hands upon me some of you, and least your deceiver should be made
manifest, you would not suffer me to spoke what I had to say, but cried away
with me: and tell me any of you when he preached any year or time, at this town
when he had no hire, and therefore he is a hireling because he preaches not
without it, but for it, and so is a False Prophet, and he being, I judge,
sorely afraid least he should be discovered, went out of his pulpit door two or
three times, till I called him back again, and charged him to stay if he was a
man, and I would prove him to be a preacher of false doctrine, who in my
hearing said, the Scripture was the foundation of foundations, but when he
heard this he rann away and fled like a hireling, and would not stay and I was
and am ready in the presence of God and any sober men, to prove this to be
false doctrine, and of the devil, and him to be no Minister of Christ; who
holds it forth. And all you sober minded men may be ashamed of him, who managed
his work with so much wickedness and impudency while he staid, and when it
came to the very trial then he runn away, and would not stand though I desired
him, hereby did his guilt appear in flying the trial, and this is the substance
of the business, though not every particular word; and I have gathered it up to
send you and him, that when you see it, and consider, and read what you have
done, you may be ashamed of him, and of your own unreasonablenesse; and further
he is already proved, and may be more largely hereafter, to be one that God
never sent, both by conversation and doctrine, and no Minister of Jesus Christ;
and not only in the house, but when we were come forth, such was your violence
to the stopping of us, when we were passing, and had not the Mayor prevented
it, our suffering from some of you had been more than it was: let the fear of
the Lord strike you, and let his light search wicked and ungodly hearts, and
repent of your doings, and cease to do evil, and turn from your deceiver if you
love your own souls; and learn the way of righteousness and Peace, which you
have not yet known; for in the broad way you are, and the end of it will be
unto your everlasting destruction; and to you this is a warning, and a
visitation from the Lord, by a lover of your souls who is true, though by you
called and counted a deceiver, and this in love to your souls is sent unto you.

E. B.


Here also follows certain Queries to Christopher Fowler the same time, to
which he never yet could give any sober Answer, therefore I here Insert them
that he may yet give his Answer.
Christopher Fowler,
SEeing thou art a man so irrational, and so unsober to speak, and fairly to
debate things in discourse, and thy Auditory so rude, and inhumane in
behavior, and words: Therefore to thee these few Queries I propound, to try
thee whether thou will show the spirit of a man by writing more than by
speaking, seeing therein I have tried thee to be more like a wild inhumane
creature, than a sober and upright Christian.

Seeing the Scripture says the Word of God was in the beginning, and the world
was framed by it, and it shall endure for ever, hence I querie of thee.

I. Whether the Scriptures be the very Word of God yea, or nay?

Seeing the Scriptures were not in the beginning, neither was the World framed
by them, neither can they endure for ever, hence I querie of thee.

II. Whether the very Word of God be Scripture yea, or nay?

Seeing it is confessed, that which is written of, and declared of, in the
Scriptures, is the word of God, and the Truth which shall endure for ever,
hence I querie of thee.

III. Whether the Scriptures, (the writings) and the thing or subject declared
and written of, are not two distinct things, (so as one may have the one, and
not the other) yea, or nay?

Seeing God and his Word, will and mind is eternal, infinite and endless:
hence I querie of thee, if thou have an understanding, Answer.

IV: Whether God his Word, will and mind, is or can be contained, or holden in
Scriptures and writings, or but only part of the declaration of him, of his
word, will and mind, yea, or nay?

Seeing such were false prophets which preached for hire, and divined for
money, and sought for gain from their quarter, hence I querie of thee.

V. Whether by this rule art not thou proved a false prophet, who preaches for
hire, and takes hire for preaching, and has a quarter (reading of some part of
it) from which thou seeks gain, answer in plainness?

Seeing every tree is known by its fruit, as Christ says, hence I querie.

VI. Whether by this rule, thou that brings forth the same fruits as the false
prophets did, viz. lies, lightness, pride, covetuousnesse, and false accusing,
art not the same tree, viz. a false prophet?

Seeing they were false prophets, who rann and were not sent, and did not
profit them, the people at all; but clothed themselves with the wool, and
prepared war against them that put not into their mouths, etc. hence I querie
of thee.

VII. Whether by this rule thou art not proved a False Prophet, who can not
prove that thou art sent of God, neither are the people profited by thee; but
are rude, and wanton, and wicked; and thou prepared war against them, that put
not into thy mouth, by suing them at law for tithes, etc?

Seeing Scorning, Lying, Slandering, Envy, Hatred, Lightness, etc. with much
more of which thou art guilty, are the fruits of the flesh, and of the Devil;
hence I querie of thee.

VIII. Whether by this rule art thou not proved to be no Ministers of Christ,
but of the Devil, and a servant to him; and a liver to the flesh, and not in
the spirit, in whom these fruits of darkness, and of the flesh are abounding?

Seeing the Scripture says, the Word of God was in the beginning, and Christ
Jesus is the foundation, and no other can be laid, hence I querie of thee.

IX. Whether by this rule thou art not proved a deceiver, and thy doctrine
false* and error; and contrary to Scripture, who said the Scriptures are the
Word of God, (which were not in the beginning) and said that the Scriptures
(which are not Christ) are the foundation of foundations, and whether this
doctrine of thine does not deny Christ, and so art proved to be Antichrist,
answer according to truth?

Seeing thou confesses thou have hire for preaching, yet say thou preaches
not for hire, hence I querie of thee.

X. Whether any of the People of Reading, would give thee so much a year, if
thou did not preach to them, and if no, then whether they do not give thee so
much, and thou receive it, because thou preaches unto them? or did they give
thee so much before thou preachedst? or will they give thee any when thou does
cease to preach to them? try them when thou will, and prove thy self a true
Prophet by preaching some years, and receiving nothing; and till then I charge
thee to be a false prophet?

Seeing the Ministry which Christ Jesus sent by the the Apostles, did bring
people that they needed no man to teach them, but as the anointing within them,
hence I querie of thee.

XI. Whether by this rule thy Ministry is proved not to be of Christ Jesus, nor
thou sent of him, by which none can come to this condition, that they need no
man to teach them, (produce any one if thou can) and so a Ministry of
Antichrist, and thou of the Devil?

Seeing they that abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, have not God; hence I
querie of thee.

XII. Whether by this rule thou art not proved to be without Christ, and
without God, who abides not in Christ's doctrine; but are called of men master,
and stand Praying in the Synagogue, and have the chief seat in the Assembly,
and contrary to Christ's Command?

Answer these Queries, with the Spirit of Soberness, if thou have it; and show
thy self a man, if thou have the heart of a man; and repent of thy wickedness,
and own thy condemnation upon thy former words and works.

I am a Friend unto thy Soul, but a witness against thy deceits. E. B


And after which time, for the space of two years, I had no Communication with
Christopher Fowler, till this last nineth month, at a place called East-
Hamsted, where a meeting of dispute was appointed, and challenged by some of
his Brethren, at which place again I met with this my adversary, where we had
some hours discourse, and many particulars of False Doctrine fell from
Christopher Fowlers mouth, some few of which hereafter follows.

First, one of his brethren in his prayer before the dispute, prayed to God to
forgive them the Athesm that were in their hearts of him and his Brethren.

Answer, now an Athest is one that denies God, and Athesm is denying of God,
according to common reputation, Athesm is so taken; so that how shall such a
generation of men bring people to the knowledge of God by your Ministry? or how
should they ever convert people, or profit them, who yet in their own hearts
denied God, as the man acknowledged in his prayer before the Lord and many
witnesses? the poor people of England had thought that the spirit of God had
been in your hearts, but now we know that you deny God in your hearts, and you
have confessed it to you ownr shame: are you Ministers of Christ, and yet
denies God in your hearts; and in whose hearts lodges Athesm? Oh! let not
people be deceived by you, but repent, ye that know not God, but with your
mouths confess him, and with your hearts do deny him.

Christopher Fowler also affirmed that day, That the Scriptures are the
Glorious everlasting Foundation of Foundations.

Answ. And hereby it is made manifest that he has totolly denied Christ, and
so proved with his brother, confessed in his prayer, that indeed Athesm is in
their hearts; and so he has denied Christ, whom the Scriptures say is the
foundation, and no other foundation can any man lay, and upon him were the
Saints builded in their faith, and all their practices of Religion; for he is
the corner stone, as it is written: and thus he has dishonored Christ, in
setting the Scriptures above him, and taking the Honor from him, and giving it
to the Scriptures; and I shall leave this his doctrine to be considered, with a
querie, to these people of his Church in Reading, whether he is worth hearing,
or giving money to for preaching, that holds forth such doctrine? and whether
it is possible he should bring them to Christ, who has in effect denied him to
be the foundation, and held forth, that the Scriptures are the Glorious
everlasting Foundation of Foundations; much I need not say to uncover the error
of such a doctrine.

Again he affirmed, That a man at one and the self same time might be a
Minister of Christ, and a deceiver.

Answ. And here all may see the weakness and Ignorance of this strange
paradox, and indeed which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, No man
can serve two maststers; and its very certain that he that serves the Devil,
does not serve Christ at the same time; and he that serves Christ does not
serve the Devil: and so his doctrine is Anti-christan, which would make people
believe, that though they serve the Devil, yet they are the servants of God;
and this is as much as he has said, that one may be a Minister of Christ, and
yet a deceiver; now a deceiver is one that follows the spirit of the Devil,
and a Minister of Christ is one that follows the Spirit of Christ, and these
two spirits are contrary, and not both ruling in one man at one time: but then
to help the matter, he said, a man might serve Christ in office, but not in
love: to which my answer was, let him say whether he, and the Priests of
England, did serve Christ by way of office, or love, both, or either, and I
should prove the contrary; but that we prosecuted no further: some other
things were affirmed by him, that day not now remembered. He said, That Christ
was a sinner, from this argument laid down by him; all that dies are sinners,
Christ died, therefore, etc. These, and such things he held forth all that day,
besides the unsobernesse of his words, and carriages toward me, who called me
a dog diverse times, and did use very ridiculous jestures and words toward
me, even to his own shame in the sight of many people, and the people of that
Country do it well remember, his unchristian like proceedings, and were
ashamed of him; but at last went his way, and all his brethren, and I was left
among the people; and I need not now mention, for many, even themselves know
it, what loss and disadvantage they sustained that day; and Gods loving truth
was advanced, and the advantage of it that was obtained on the Lords behalf;
but I being not yet as it were wholly satisfied, but would endeavor further to
the laying open deceit, and to invade Antichrists kingdom; the next morning
after the dispute it was upon me to write forth, and to send him this paper of
propositions following: whereunto is annexed his Answer.

C. Fowler:
FRiend, seeing thou art so high in thy spirit against us, and against the
truth which we profess, and from time to time do open thy mouth so wide in
Justification of thy self, and thy practices, and in false charges against us;
and though we have had diverse meetings, and and the differences between us
always appeared greater and greater, therefore this I propound unto thee,
Whether thou will give another meeting of open dispute for the trial of thee,
and thy ways, and of us, and the truths which we hold forth, for the
satisfaction of the people? and these things following I propound, as the
subject matter worthy to be handled, which may discover thee, and us, to the
satisfaction of all that desires in that case.

First, What be the evident signs and tokens of a wolf in sheeps clothing? and
whether thou or we in the sight of the people, and of the Lord God can clear
our selves, to be clear and free, from the marks and signs of such aforesaid?

Secondly, whether will thou stand to be tried in thy Ministry, in thy Call to
it, practice in it, and maintenance of it, by and according to the Scriptures
of the old and new tement? and will thou admit of trial of thy Church, and
worship, and Ministry thereby? and this being done, we do engage to suffer the
like trial in any part, and every part of our Religion.

Thirdly, whether there be any other Foundation of Faith, etc. for the people
of God at this day, then Jesus Christ only, and alone? and whether he was not
the foundation to the Fathers before the Scriptures were written? and whether
he that lays or preaches any other foundation, does not dishonor Christ, and
spoke contrary to the Scriptures?

These things with some others, which we may have occasion to spoke of, are we
willing to discourse with thee, for the further clearing of the truth, and
laying open deceit; for yesterday I had much more to have spoken to thee, had
thou not gone so hastily away: so if thou art willing to join in discourse
with me again, appoint place and hour, either this day or to morrow, for my
occasions will admit of either of these two days, always provided that we
may have all moderation, and may proceed in meekness like men, and not like
raylers as thou appeared yesterday to thy own shame. An answer hereof we do
expect with speed; and we are Friends to all that love righteousness.

E. B. Thomas Curtis


THe original of this was delivered to the hands of C* Fowler in Reading, the
next morning after the dispute at east Hamsteed, and being given to him at his
Steeple-house-doo^, when he was coming out from his worship, he would have
given them again to the messenger, after he had it in his hand, and opened it,
but not being taken, he said he would burn it: and thus people may see, that
though he cried against us as deceivers behind our backs, yet he is one of them
dumb dogs that cannot bark, nor fright us away, if we were such as he says
of us.

And here all sober people may understand the temper of this my adversary, and
I shall leave them to judge of the proceedings between him and me; but yet
though he denies to meet me, yet when I was passed out of the country, he
caused the following paper to be fixed upon the steeple-house-door at East
Hamsteed, where the dispute was drawn up by him, and set their as a hidious
vapor, to enchant the minds of People; it may be not supposing that ever it
should have come to public view, as now it is like to do to his shame.

A true Charge in ten particulars against the people called QUAKERS.
1 THey that pernitiously deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
Heretics and Blasphemers:

But ^^ose called Quakers do thus deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God;
therefore they are Heretics and Blasphemers.

2 They that deny the Scriptures to be the Foundation of Faith, and Rule of
Life, they are Heretics and Blasphemers: But the Quakers do this; therefore
they are Heretics and Blasphemers.

3 They that do not own the Lord Jesus Christ to be God by Nature, are horrible
Blasphemers: But those called Quakers, do not own the Lord Jesus Christ to be
God by Nature; therefore they are Blasphemers.

4 They that say the good works of the Saints are meritorious of Eternal Life,
are Heretics and Papists of the worst sort: But the Quakers say so; therefore
they are Heretics and Papists.

5 They deny the Ordinance of Water Baptism, and the Administration of the
Lords Supper, they are Antichristian Heretics: But the Quakers do this;
therefore the Quakers are Antichristian Heretics.

6 They that deny the sin of Infants are Pelagian Heretics: But the Quakers
deny the sin of Infants; therefore they are Pelagian Heretics.

7 They that deny the Resurrection of this Body, are Heretics: But the Quakers
deny this; therefore they are Heretics.

8 They that deny the Christian Sabbath, are very erroneous: But the Quakers do
this; therefore they are very erroneous.

9 They that quarrel at, and deride the singing of David's Psalms, calling them
the Ballads of Hopkins and Sternhold, the Kings Fiddlers, they are foolish,
ignorant, and profane in that: But the Quakers do this; therefore they are
foolish, ignorant, and profane in this.

10 They that publicly charge the Office and Call of Ministers with lies and
calumnies, they are railers and slanderers: But the people called Quakers do
this; therefore the people called Quakers, are railers and slanderers.

These things through the Lord I am able to justify, and if I do not, I shall
be contented to be called a Deceiver: Let them choose their own time as soon as
they please; in witness whereof I have set to my hand, this twenty sixth of
November, 1659. Christopher Fowler.

And according to providence, this paper coming to my hands, though its
believed without any purpose in him; to which I did return my Answer, as to
answer his Challenge; and neither time nor place being mentioned by him, but
both left to us to appoint, I did appoint Reading for the place, and nominated
a certain day for the time, and he had nigh a weeks notice from me; and the
time appointed I went to Reading to attend the Service, but when I came there,
I understood that he would not meet me according to his own proposals and
agreement, but nominated another place, and another time, which was supposed by
me and others to be but a present evading of the matter: whereupon his denial
to meet me at the time and place appointed by me, this following Letter I sent
unto him.

C. Fowler,
WHereas a Challenge of thine (to us called Quakers, for a Dispute upon ten
Particulars) was set up on the Steeple-house-door, at Easthamstead, and leaving
it to us to appoint time and place, I did appoint Reading for the place, and
the fourth day this week, called Wednesday, the 21. of this month, for the
time; and in order to proceed (upon the particulars in dispute with thee, the
place and time abovesaid) I ordered my occasions so as to attend upon the
Service the said time; but I being come into the Town this night, do perceive,
that thou art not content with the place and time, though they were left to our
appointing in thy Challenge, but have appointed another place and time, upon
some feeble Reasons which thou gives, which I might show the weakness of, and
might upon many better reasons say, that Reading is the only place seasonable
to dispute at; for if thou be indeed a true Minister of Christ, the people of
this Town best deserves to know it, by hearing it to be so; and if thou art a
Deceiver, the people of this Town had the most need of any others to know it,
by hearing thee disproved: So upon this place I have pitched, and cannot now
change my resolution, nor alter, neither time nor place, by me
beforementioned, my occasion will not admit me to it: Therefore I thought good
to write to thee, to know for certain under thy hand, whether you will give a
meeting or not in this Town, the fourth day next, as aforesaid; if not, this
matter must yet remain as it stands between us, till a more clear opportunity;
for I cannot be at Okingham the day mentioned by thee, because my service is
already determined for that day, and for some other reasons also in my own
breast: Let me have a plain answer from thee, that I may dispose of my self as
the Lord guides me for his service. This is all for present I do desire, who am
a friend to all that love the Lord.

Reading the 19th of the 10th Month, 1659. E. Borough.


But to this Letter his Answer was, he would not meet me at Reading, for there
was no need of Dispute there; and therefore it is my present work at this time,
for to answer his ten Particulars in writing, and to make them public to all,
that all may judge of this matter: And indeed, but that for these ten
particular Charges, and that truth may be clear from those Charges in his ten
Particulars, I believe I had not thus proceeded in this public manner; but
because he cease not to speak evil of the Truth, and yet will not come forth
fairly to Trial, neither will answer me any Queries in public, but keeps a
secret reviling and reproaching; therefore do I thus proceed.

Answer to the first Position. Thy Major and thy Minor are both lame, and both
false, and thy so conclusion falls to the ground; for the Quakers do not
perniciously deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but they in sincerity
say that Christ is the Word of God, Io. 1.1. Rev. 19.13. and the Scriptures are
the Words of God, and a Declaration, and a Treatise, and this testimony is
according to the Scriptures, Luke 1.1. Acts 1. And it is not Heresy nor
Blasphemy to deny the Scriptures (to wit, the writings) to be the Word of God,
but the truth written of, and those things declared of in the Scriptures, are
the Word of God, and not the writings, which are Scriptures. But this is
further spoken to before, and so I pass it.

Answer to the second Position: Thy Major Position is utterly false, and not
grounded upon any part of the Scriptures, so that the Minor and the Conclusion
are both denied, and cast out: For a man may say, that Christ is the Foundation
of Faith, and the Spirit of God is the Rule of Life; for thus the Scriptures
say: And a man may lawfully deny the Scriptures to be the Foundation of Faith,
and Rule of Life, and neither be Heretic nor Blasphemer: Was the Apostle a
Blasphemer and a Heretic, who said, No other Foundation could be laid, but
that which was laid already, which was Christ? And was he a Heretic and a
Blasphemer, that said the Sons of God were led by the Spirit of God, and
exhorted to walk by the Rule of the Spirit* And are the Quakers Blasphemers and
Heretics, who holds forth that truth the Apostles hold forth; and who walks by
the Spirit, walks according, and not contrary to the Scriptures? O thou
Perverter of the right way of God, who have falsely accused the Innocent in thy
illiterate Logic!

Answer to the third Position: In this thou have falsely accused; but yet let us
consider thy words; There was a Nature in that Man Jesus Christ, that was born
of the Virgin, that was subject to cold, heat, thirst, and hunger, and subject
to be tempted of the Devil; and this Nature was not God, whose Nature is
Infinite, Eternal, Unmeasurable, not subject to hunger nor thirst, nor to heat
and cold* nor subject to temptations; so that a man may say lawfully, and be no
Blasphemer, That there was a Nature in him which was not God, and yet the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him to; and he is the Everlasting Father, and
the Father is in him, and he in the Father: And thus by a sound interpretation
of the Word, (God by Nature) thy Major, and Minor, and Conclusion, are all made
void.

Answer to the fourth: The good works of the Saints are wrought in God, and by
his Spirit, and its God that works in them to will and to do, and all such
works are worthy works, glorious works, and blessed works, even unto eternal
life; as the Scripture says, Glory, Honor, and Peace, be to every man that
works good, Rom, 2.7.10. And no man by Faith without works is justified, for
Faith without works is dead, and a dead Faith does not justify: This is our
Faith, and the Faith which the Apostles were of; and we are neither Heretics
nor Papists, no more than were the Apostles: and thus thy argument is vain, and
falls to the ground, and has no weight in it unto sober minds, though
self-righteousness is altogether abomination to the Lord, and justifies not any
man.

Answer to the fifth: A man may deny the sprinkling of Infants, and the
Administration of Bread and Wine, as is held forth in your Assemblies, and be
neither Antichristian, nor a Heretic; for the Institution of sprinkling
Infants, and administering of Bread and Wine among unconverted people, was never
ordained of God, nor practiced amongst the Apostles; if thou say it was,
prove it out of the Scriptures, or else stop thy mouth; and to deny such
Ordinances and Practices which God never commanded, nor the Saints of former
ages ever practiced, is not Antichristian, nor Heresy: but thus do the
Quakers, and therefore they are not Antichristian, nor Heretics, upon this
account: And thus thy Proposition is not worth any thing, for the end proposed
by thee, but thy weakness and folly is made manifest, and thy Idolatrous
practices, so much pleaded for by thee, are denied, and opposed by the Spirit
of the Lord.

Answer to the sixth: As for the sin of Infants we do say that Infants in
general, that is to say, every particular Infant that is, or has been born
into the world has sin, for some were filled with the Holy Ghost, and some
were sanctified from their Mothers womb; and what sin had such? And the
Scripture speaks, that the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband, else were your children unclean, but now are they holy: And what sin
had these? So that thy major is proved defective, and so thy minor and thy
conclusion is worth nothing, though as to the general part, we do believe,
there is a nature whereby all are children of wrath, in degeneration.

Answer to the seventh: This is a false accusation, thy minor Proposition, and
is a lie; and so thy conclusion is utterly false.

Answer to the eighth: As for the Christian Sabbath, we do not deny that* for
Christ is the Saints Rest; and the seventh day of the week is the Jews
Sabbath, and not the Christian Sabbath; and so this is but a false accusation,
as the rest; And as for the first day of the week, which you observe for
Sabbath, you have neither binding example, nor express command in Scripture for
that practice.

Answer to the ninth: As for the singing of David's Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter,
and in the custom as practiced amongst you, we do utterly deny to be any
Ordinance of God, or any part of his Worship, though you say it is; yet we
never had other proof of you than tradition of time, and long custom, and by
this you would seem to plead the practice to be a duty: But this satisfies not
us, though we do not quarrel nor deride at your practice in this particular;
(as thou grounds thy argument*) but this we do, we freely give our testimony
against your practice, from time to time, in the fear and Power of the Lord,
yet not as quarrelling and deriding, after the (...). Though we do say they
were composed in Rhyme and Metter, by Sternhold, and Hopkins, and others, which
(...) Musitioners to the Queen; and in this we say true, and are neither
ignorant, foolish, nor profane, as thou say ^ and we give witness against
such your practice to be Antichristian, and you Deceivers of the people
thereby* so hereby is thy conclusion made void, and a place is brought in for
another; they that act such things, and observe such practices, in pretense of
Honor and Worship to God, which is not commanded nor instituted of God, nor
which his Spirit leads unto, They are idolaters, and their worship, and their
practice is abomination unto the Lord. But thus do the Ministers and people of
the Church of England; and therefore the Ministers and people of the Church of
England are Idolaters, and their practices abomination unto the Lord.

Answer to the tenth: Thy minor Proposition I do deny; for we do not charge the
Office and Call of the Ministers of the Church of England with lies and
calumnies; but this we say, their Office and their Call is not from the Lord,
nor by the authority of his Spirit, neither is their Office and Call according
to the Scriptures, but it is different and contrary, both to the Spirit of God,
and the Scriptures, and is not from heaven, but rather from the Whore of Rome.
And though we do affirm these things concerning the Ministry of England, yet we
do not charge it with lies and calumnies, but we speak the truth in
righteousness: And what would C. Fowler, and his Brethren, have said of the
true Prophets, that called the Priests and Watchmen of Israel, (that were made
by Divine Institution, which the Office and Call of Englands Ministry never
was) that called them blind Watchmen, and greedy dumb dogs, and devourers of
Souls? Might not they have said to the true Prophets, you charge the Office and
Call of the Priests of the Lord, with lies and slanders? And this is like the
case between us and the Priests of England: And did not Christ call the
Chief-Priests Serpents, Vipers, and hipocrites, and those Priests were in their
office, and call of Gods institution; but might not they have said that he
charged the office, and call of the Priesthood with calumines, etc. and the
case is the same with us, and it is accounted no sin by the Lord, for us to
give our witness against the ways and practices of the Priests of England,
and utterly to deny both its office and call; for they that do profess their
office and call, to be of God, and from him, and yet can give no true testimony
thereof, by the Spirit of God, and according to the Scriptures, such are
deceived and deceivers of others, but such are the Priests of England, and
therefore, etc.

And thus I have returned Answer to his tenn propositions, and laid down some
others in their place His being confounded, and I must leave it to be judged of
by the witness in every man's Conscience, whether he has not showed his
madness and folly in his matter, and in the way of his proceedings; as for the
matter he charges us withal, its wholely invalid as for the end proposed by
him, and we account of his work as but the malice of an Anti-christan spirit:
and as for his proceedings they are inconsistant with a Minister of Christ, for
him and his brethren to fly from me at his dispute at East Ham^teed, before
mentioned, as being not able to defend their cause, this he and they did as
many in that country knows; and then for him the next morning, when I did
invite him to meet again upon sober reasons, which he also denied, and refused
to meet me any more, and yet afterward when I was gone out of the country, to
go and hatch such mischief in his mind, as to invent tenn such vain arguments,
and cause them to set up on the Steeple-house-door, on purpose to villify, and
reproach the Innocent people of God, this was his wickedness as all upright
men may see; and further for him to challenge to dispute these particulars, and
leave time and place to our appointing, which when time and place was
appointed, suitable and equitable on all parts, and yet for him to refuse to
meet at that time and place, this was his folly and madness, as understanding
men may discern; and further for him yet to rail behind our backs, against us
in his pulpit, and to charge us, as if we refused to meet him, this is his
hypocrisy, and the deceitfulness of his heart, whereby he thinks to keep the
people in blindness, but the light is now arising in the hearts of people,
whereby such deceits and deceivers are fully discovered, and they cannot now be
hid.

And though for many ages deceivers, and false prophets* have hid themselves
under the profession of Ministers, and fine names; yet the day of the Lord is
dawned, which has made them fully manifest, and now their sheeps clothing will
not hide them, though they cover themselves therewith, and have deceived the
world thereby, and these Babylons Merchants, they have made great gain upon
people, and traded with the souls of men, and souls have been murdered, even
for dishonest gain; but the plagues of God is coming upon the earth; which the
Whore, the false Church has corrupted, through her sorceries, and
witch-crafts, and as she has done unto others, in causing them to drink her
cup of abominations, and false principles, doctrines, and practices, which the
beast and his power has imposed upon the Nations, and Nations have been made
drunk thereby, and in particular this C. Fowler, with whom I am now dealing is
made manifest, to be one of these Merchants of Babylon, who has made
merchandise of people for gain to himself, and such are his covetous, cursed
practices, having a heart excercised with covetousness, and oppression, as is
well known in the Town of Reading, as for instance.

First, It was charged upon him, and confessed by him, that he sued at Law
twelve poor men of Reading, for the tithe of their Turneeps, and with much
malice and greediness did prosecute the twelve poor men, and put himself and
them to great charges and trouble, only he confessed he took but twenty Nobles
of them, and thought he did favorably with them. Now this was acknowledged by
his own mouth, which is a clear demonstration of the covetousness and
oppression of this man, and that he is a grinder of the faces of the poor, and
exceeds in unmercifulness and cruelty, the very worst of the false Prophets
that ever we read of in Scripture. Oh! abominable practice, which shames
Christianity, and the profession of Christ, that ever such a fellow should have
the name of a Gospel-Minister, and that ever people should be so blind, as to
receive this man for a Messenger of God, who has a heart filled with such
cursed g^inding practices, who is in the way of Bala^^^, and exceeding him in
covetousness.

Secondly, He said, he did not Preach for hire; but confessed that he had hire
for Preaching.

Answ. With this kind of foolish Paradox he would deceive and blind the people,
for if he have hire for Preaching (for) shows a reason, and it is the same,
he has hire, because he preaches; that is the reason wherefore he has hire,
and so he is a hireling* And it may easily be proved, that he will not preach,
if he have not so much money, tithes, or such things, and his own example
beforementioned, in suing at Law twelve poor men, for the very tithe of
Turneeps in the garden, does demonstrate him sufficiently to be a hireling; as
also a third particular; which is,

He demanded money of a certain man in Reading, for marrying the said man,
whe^^as the man was married by another* yet notwithstanding the said Fowler
forced the said man to give him seven shillings and six pence, because he
pretended he was a man of his Parish (to wit) within his quarter, where he
seeks his gain.

Answ. And thus it is fully manifest more and more, that he is one that seeks
for his gain from his quarter, and is a complete man in the very nature and
steps of the false Prophets of Israel, whose example he does follow, and not
the example of any of the Ministers of Jesus Christ. Was not this a piece of
griping covetousness, to demand money of the man which he married not? Oh
abominable* What, would thou have wages without any work? this is a degree
beyond preaching for hire, to claim and receive money of a man, having no
manner of due, nor title thereunto: Well, people cannot be so blind, but they
must needs see thy folly, wickedness and covetousness.

Fourthly, Christopher Fowler at a certain time did give a poor Minister, so
called, five shillings, and afterward there happened to be a Collection for
the poor Irish, and he snatched five shillings of that money away which was
gathered, and said, he gave five shillings awhile ago to a poor Minister, This
was his pretense, and thus he defrauded the poor Irish people.

Answ. Was not this also a foul covetous practice and hypocrisy too, in
pretending to give a poor man some money, and afterward, as it were, to rob
others to pay himself? Here is a double iniquity, and unmeasurable
covetousness, which the Lord will judge: And the like of this manner of
greediness is seldom to be found so foul, and so extreme deceitful and
covetous: But all these things are but a further testimony of his naughtiness,
and this I do in order, that all men may beware and take heed of the mouths of
Wolves in sheeps clothing, which tears the flocks, and devoures both souls and
bodies of men, such a one as this man, with which I am now dealing; let all men
beware of him, least they become his prey.

Fifthly, Another covetous practice of Christopher Fowlers was, he sold one
Load of Straw twice, and the man that bought it first, did sue him at Law, and
it was prosecuted, and Fowler was Cast, to his great shame; and this the people
of Reading very well knows.

Answ. Nothing need be said, as to discover the wickedness and covetousness of
this practice, the worst of men seldom ever is found in such a practice: Is
not this an unfit person to mention the Name of Christ, or to take it into his
month* Oh deceitful man! who art unfit to be called a Christian, much less a
Minister of Christ* These, and diverse others such like covetous practices is
C.F. highly guilty of, as many good people very well knows. Diverse other things
I could mention, but these for present are sufficient, for the end that they
are produced, which is to lay Christopher ^^^lers wic^edness upon him, that he
may feel the weigh^ of it upon his conscience, and that all sober people may be
warned of such men, that they have not to do with them. ^^t however, if
Christopher Fowler shall answer my Queries propounded to him, and shall seek to
clear himself from what I have said, he shall hear further from me, however in
the mean time, let him stop his boasting and vaunting, and vapouring
Challenges, till he has answered what is charged against him in this book.

But and if Christopher Fowler does go on with his railing accusations, and
presumptuous boasts against us, then let him appoint any time that he shall
please, and in the Lords Power I shall engage, that he shall be met at what
time he will appoint, in any place in Reading. Reading* I do appoint for the
place, let him appoint what time he please for to dispute of any such thing or
things as we may agree upon at our meeting; and though he is unwilling to
dispute in Reading, yet there is no other place so suitable as that Town is,
for many reasons as may be showed; and I suppose justly, that his unwillingness
to dispute at Reading, arises, least he should be discovered among his own
Hearers, and therefore would evade the matter, by seeming to be willing to
dispute at other places, which is not so suitable, nor yet so reasonable; but
if he will at Reading, let him appoint time at his pleasure, and he shall be
answered, if God permit.

Now C. Fowler, hold up thy hand, Guilty, or not Guilty; whether a Minister of
Christ, or a Deceiver; come to the Bar, and receive the sentence, thou that
have long been accounted by some as an Oracle, thy glory is fallen, and thou
art brought into contempt: How have they been deceived, that have looked upon
thee as an Oracle? thy Language is sentenced to be of Babylon; and the Beast,
and False Prophet, must be taken alive, and cast into the Lake of burning. The
Day of the Lord is come.

The End.

