The glorious Name of God, The Lord of Hosts.

Opened in two SERMONS, At MICHAELS Cornhill, LONDON.

Vindicating the Commission from this Lord of Hosts, to Subjects, in some case,
to take up Arms.

WITH A POSTSCRIPT, Briefly Answering A LATE TREATISE BY HENRY FERN, D. D.

BY JER. BURROUGHES.

PSALM. 48. 8. As we have heard, so have we seen, in the City of the Lord of
Hosts. LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman. 1643.

To his Excellency, ROBERT, Earl of Essex, Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars
of Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Lovaine, one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel, and General of the Army raised by the Parliament in defense of
the true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, the Laws and Liberties of
the Kingdom, and the privileges of Parliament.
THere is no man this day upon the face of the earth whom it more concerns to
have this name of God The Lord of Hosts presented to him in the due luster and
glory of it, then your Excellency, whom the Lord has not only honored to
stand up even in the fore front to maintain his cause, and the cause of his
people, but he has even put upon you this his own name, he has made you the
Lord of his Hosts. It is that which every Soldier may justly glory in, that
God himself seems to affect the glory of Arms, when he causes himself to be
as it were sir-named THE LORD OF HOSTS. The beams of this glorious name puts
some luster upon the meanest in an Army; What a luster then does it put upon
your Excellency, who stand so near it? Happy the time that ever you were
borne to be made use of by God and his people in so noble and honorable a
service as this. We read ZECH. 3. 3. of Joshua, that great instrument of
Reformation, in the return of JUDAH from her Captivity, that he stood in
filthy garments, but the Angel spoke to those who stood before him, saying,
Take away the filthy garments from him: and unto him he said, Behold, I have
caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloathe thee with change of
raiment. Those who stand up most eminent and forward in the cause of God and
his people, shall ever have some who will seek to stain their glory by slanders
and reproachful names, to put them into vile garments: what viler garment can
there be then the garment of Treason and Rebellion? But the Angel stands by to
take off these vile garments, and to cleanse his servants even from this
nominall iniquity: he will put change of raiment upon them, he will one day
make it appear that there were none so faithful to God, their King and
Country, as they: The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, says the Text, ver. 2.
will rebuke them who thus stand up against his servants. The Lord who has set
his heart to bring mercy to Jerusalem, to his Church, will certainly rebuke
such as stand to resist the great instruments thereof. Wherefore that which the
Angel of the Lord protested to JOSHUA, v. 6. I may in the name of the Lord with
a little change protest unto your Excellency, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, if
you will walk in my ways, and if you will keep my charge, then you shall
have an eminency in my house, and I will give you places among these that
stand by. That is, among the blessed Angels in the heavens. If a cup of cold
water shall not go without a reward, surely then the venturing estate, liberty,
limbs, honor, blood, life for the cause of Christ, shall not go without its
reward.

Wherefore most noble Lord of our Hosts, yea of the Hosts of God, Go on with
true Heroicke magnanimity, and prosper, in the name of this glorious Lord of
hosts. The prayers of the Churches are for you, the blessings of the Saints are
upon you. I believe never any General upon the earth has been mentioned more
in heaven then your Excellency has been, and yet is in this cause.

That which is storyed of the Cross appearing to CONSTANTINE, with these
words, HOC VINCES, I may with far more confidence apply to this name of God,
The Lord of hosts. This I present unto your Excellence, with this Motto, Hoc
vinces: The name is in it self a box of sweet ointment, give me leave to open
it before your Excellency, that it may be fragrant indeed, and add quickening
and strength. To that true noble heroic spirit fit for great actions, that God
has honored you withal, I here humbly present it opened and poured forth.
The blessing of it be upon you, and those great things undertaken by you, which
is and shall be the prayer of

Your Excellencies in all humble service and duty, Jer. Burroughes.

To the Reader.
THe necessity of the time put me to preach upon this subject, the City being
in great fear of a great Army coming against it in the name of the King, and
the necessity of the subject for this time made me not unwilling to yield to
the making my meditations upon this subject, yet more public. Something I have
enlarged, especially in the argument of justifying the present taking up arms
so much cried down, as if it were against the King, to be by commission from
the Lord of Hosts, which is discussed page 27. and so on: the satisfation of
the consciences of men in this thing is of so great consequence in this time,
that every man is bound to afford what help hereunto he is able. I should have
had guilt lie grating upon mine own conscience if I had stifled what I might
afford to the helping toward the satisfaction of others; although therefore I
am not ignorant, but sensible enough that it is an argument wherein a man runs
hazard enough; yet whatsoever I suffer in it, may I be useful, I have enough.
This I can say, if I ever did, or am like to publish any thing in the
uprightnes of my heart, aiming at the glory of God, and thy good, I bless God
I have comfort in this; and in this (whatsoever the issue be) I shall rejoice.
Certainly things had never come to that pass they are at, if men's consciences
had bin rightly informed in the liberties God has given them. The infusing
contrary principles, and making men believe that the subject must and would
suffer any thing rather then rise up to maintain his own right has been the
cause of the bold adventures of many amongst us.

What I have said is breife, coming to you as a Sermon, it could not admit of
larger discourse, but if there be need it would not be very difficult to
enlarge these things in another way. Read for thy profit, and I have my end.

Yours to serve for Christ, Jer: Burroughes.

IT is ordered this first day of December, 1642. by the Committee of the House
of Commons in Parliament, concerning Printing, That this Book entitled [The
glorious Name of God, The Lord of Hosts] be printed by Robert Dawlman,
appointed thereunto by M. Jeremy Burroughes, the Author thereof.

John White.

The glorious Name of God, The Lord of Hosts.
ESAIAS 47. 4. The Lord of Hosts is his Name.
IN this Chapter we have Gods mercy to his Church, threatening the destruction
of Babylon. When Babylon is used as Gods rod, it is then cast into the fire.

If Israel when God was about to deliver from Babylonish Captivity should ask
the Question that Moses thought would be asked upon his sending to be their
Deliverer from the Egyptian bondage, What is his Name? Exodus 13. 3. The Prophet
answers here, The Lord of Hosts is his Name. There, his Name was I am; Here it
is, The Lord of Hosts. And if they should say, But how can this deliverance be
here? Can Babylon be destroyed? Babylon is strong, who shall bring down her
power? Yes, there is one can do it, The Lord our Redeemer, The Lord of Hosts
is his Name.

Here then we have this glorious title of the Lord, for the comfort of his
people in their distress, and the terror of their enemies in their pride, The
Lord of Hosts, The Lord of Armies. The English word Hosts is from the Latin
Hostis, because an Army is either for defense, or offense against enemies.

Doct.
The Redeemer of Gods people is the Lord of Hosts.

The work then I have to do in this Sermon, is to teach you how to sanctify
the Name of the Lord in this his glorious title, The Lord of Hosts. It is the
duty of the Saints to observe what the way of God is in the times of their
generation; To see what name of God is most conspicuous in his administration,
and accordingly to sanctify that Name of his.

We may say of this Name of God, The Lord of Hosts, as God himself says of
his Name Jehovah, Exodus 6. 3. By my Name Jehovah was I not known to them: So by
this name, The Lord of Hosts, God has scarce been known to us here in England;
but now he appears to us by this name in a glorious way: And we shall not know
how to sanctify it, except we search into it, to see how much of Gods glory
there is in it, which we shall find much more then at first view seems to be,
then most of us have ever thought; All Gods titles are full of excellency. The
excellency of this I shall open unto you, that this Name of God may not be
taken in vain by you, but be sanctified as it is worthy.

It is a title that God has heretofore delighted much, yea gloryed much in; we
find it not less then two hundred times in the Old Testament, and most
frequently in the Prophecy of Zechariah, Chap. 1. ver. 3. we have it three
times in one verse, and in one short Chapter, Zech. 8. we have it there
eighteen times.

But why is it used so frequently in that Prophecy more then others? Quest.


Because the scope of that Prophecy was to encourage Answ.
the people of God in building up Jerusalem and the Temple, in which work they
had many enemies, and therefore they had need of a spirit of magnanimity and
fortitude in it. Hence it was the Lord revealed himself to them so much by the
name of The Lord of Hosts.

Times of Reformation, Temple-work, usually meets with much, with strong
opposition. We had need therefore to have this name of God in our eye, and
sanctify it in our hearts, in such times, while such work is on foot.

It is true, God did this work without bloodshed, it was done not by power or
by might, but by the Spirit of the Lord, as we have it Zech. 4. 6. but because
the work was such, as in regard of second causes, needed an Army to effect it;
although God did it himself, yet his Name was to be sanctified in it, as the
Lord of Hosts. In the New Testament we seldom find this title; it is but twice
that I remember in all the New Testament, and in one of those two places it is
quoted out of the Old Testament, Romans 9. 29. There the Hebrew word is retained,
The Lord of Sabbath, not of (...) Quievit. (...) Exe^citus, Militia.
Sabbath, as many take it. There is a great difference between these two, The
Lord of Sabbath, and The Lord of Sabbath: The one is the Lord of rest, the
other is the Lord of Hosts: those words come from a different root in the
Hebrew. The second place is James 5. 4. and there you have not the English word
Hosts, but the Hebrew word Sabbath likewise. In the New Testament we have Gods
Titles fuller of sweetness and grace, as The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
The God of all consolation, The Father of mercies, The God of peace, etc. The
more cause have we to be humbled, who live in the times of the Gospel, and yet
are come to such times wherein God has changed as it were his name, and even
in the times of the Gospel appears to us in this dreadful name of his, The
Lord of Hosts.

This Title is in it self a very fearful one, and yet before we have done
with it we shall find it like that name of Christ, Cant. 1. 3. Thy name is as
an ointment poured forth, a sweet refreshing pleasant ointment. In the 2. of
Sam. Chap. 6. ver. 2. the Lord speaks of this name of his set between the
Cherubims, Whose name is called by the name of the Lord of Hosts that dwells
between the Cherubims. Now you know the Mercy-seat was between the Cherubims,
and that which I shall endeavor this day is, To show you this name of the Lord
of Hosts written upon the mercy-seat between the Cherubims. Although it be
dreadful in it self, yet all Gods Saints shall have it this day presented to
them from the mercie-seat: A name as full of goodness and mercy, as our hearts
can desire. We have already seen in this Kingdom the Lord of Hosts upon his
Mercy-seat, making this his dreadful title to be amiable and lovely to us,
from thence dispensing grace and abundance of mercy in the manifestation of
this his glorious title. It is comfortable to behold the Lord of Hosts sitting
upon his Mercy-seat: and thus am I to present him this day unto you.

Now God is called The Lord of Hosts in two respects Why God is called The Lord
of Hosts.
:

First, because all creatures in heaven and in earth are his armies. He is the
absolute great Lord over Psalm. 148. ver. 2. etc.

Secondly, in regard of that special providence of God in the great affairs
of wars and battles in the The Lord of Hosts.

If I should speak of the first, the time would soon be gone, for there is much
in it, it is more general: therefore I will confine my self to the second,
the more special, and now most seasonable.

God is the God of Armies. That he might express himself the more clearly,
and fully interested in Warlike affairs, Exodus 15. 3. he styles himself A
man of War. God seems to glory much in his workings about Warlike affairs.
Hence Psalm. 24. 8. Who is the King of glory? The Lord strong, mighty, the Lord
mighty in battle. The Providence of God is great in all wars, but especially
in those wars that concern his people, whether in a way of chastising them, or
defensive to save them, or offensive in avenging himself upon their enemies.

I do not know any one thing wherein the Providence Gods Providence in the
workings of War.
of God is more fully set out in Scripture, then in the workings of it about
Wars, as in these many particulars will be fully presented to you:

First, God works in the raising of Wars, when and how he pleases. He is the
great General, and Jer. 25. 29. Behold I begin to bring evil upon the City
which is called by my name, etc. for I will call for a sword. God does not
only call for a sword upon the heathen, but upon the Cities called by his
name. Certainly there is as much of God in this City, as in any City this day
in the World; yet God may call for a sword upon you, be not you secure; Yea do
you not hear God now calling for it upon you? Esaias 5. 26. God will hiss for
the Nations from the ends of the earth, and behold they shall come with speed
swiftly. And Esaias 7. 18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord
shall hiss for the Fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt,
and for the Be that is in the Land of Assyria, and they shall come. Let God
but give a hiss, the least intimation of his mind, and they shall come. It was
a proud speech of Pompey, when Plutarch. vita ejus.
one of his Officers told him they wanted men, Let me (says he) but stamp
with my foot upon the ground of Italy, and I shall have men enough, Footmen
and Horsemen come from every corner. Although it was a proud speech in him, and
when it came to he was disappointed, yet it is always true of this Lord of
Hosts, let him but speak the least word, do the least thing to gather Armies,
they presently come together, to fight his battles: when he pleases he can
stir up the hearts of the Kings of the earth to hate the whore, to make war
with her, Rev. 17. 16. The ten Kings shall hate the whore, and make her
desolate and naked; they shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. It is a
wonder that they stay all this while, that they rise not with a spirit of
indignation against her, considering what base bondage they are in under her.
It is such a bondage, wherein both soul, and body, and estate is in such a
servile subjection to her, as one would think the spirit of a man could not
bear it, much less the spirit of a King. But when Gods time is come, the
spirits of the Kings of the earth shall be suddenly raised to war against her.

It is an observation of Abulensis upon 1 Chro. 14. 8. that Gods providence was
very observable toward David, that he should have no wars raised against him
by the Philistims those seven years he was in Hebron, which time he was but
weak, being King only over the house of Judah; but when all Israel came to
him, and he was established King over them all, then came the Philistims
against him: So do we not see the mighty providence of God toward us, that
he did not call for the sword against us all this time till now, until we had
a Parliament, and that made indissoluble but by their own consent, until our
Militia in the Kingdom was well-nigh settled, until we had an Army to resist?
If God had called for the sword before these things, what had become of us? Oh
the merciful providence of God toward England in this thing! God is much seen
in the provocations to wars, consultations about them, enclining men's hearts to
them, taking them off from peace, etc. It was from the Lord that Pharaohs heart
was so hardened against the people of Israel, to go forth to battle against
them, because God had a purpose to destroy him. It was of God that Rehoboam was
so set to hearken to the counsel of young Cavalliers, and to harden his heart
against his wise Counselors, that God might rend ten Tribes from him. It was
of God that Ahab should be so set to go to war against Ramoth Gilead, that he
might be destroyed.

Secondly, the Lord sets up his Standard in War: Thus he expresses himself,
Esaias 5. 26. He will lift up an Ensign to the Nations. Whosoever is the
Standard Bearer, it is God himself that sets up the Standard.

Thirdly, it is God that musters up the Army, Esaias 13. 4. The Lord of Hosts
mustereth the Host of the battle The Lord of Hosts is himself the
Muster-master in Armies. He thus condescends in his expressions, that he might
the more particularly, and so the more fully show the workings of his
Providence in Military affairs.

Fourthly, the Lord brings forth weapons out of his Armory, Jer. 50. 25. The
Lord has opened his Armory, and brought forth the weapons of his indignation,
for this is the work of the Lord of Hosts. God has his Magazine, his Armory
that he opens in times of War: From whencesoever Arms come, from beyond Sea
or else where, not one Piece can come but out of Gods Magazine. If God did not
open his Armory, neither we nor our enemies could have Arms.

There was a time when God shut up his Armory from Israel, and then there was
neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
Saul and Jonathan, only with Saul and Jonathan there was found. 1 Samuel 13. 22.

Fifthly, It is the Lord that gives his people their Banners to display, Psalm.
60. 4. Thou have given a Banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
displayed because of the truth. There are a generation of men that fight
against the truth, they would take away the Gospel from them, and because of
this thou have given them Banners that they may be dispayed, because of this
truth; God would have us contend for the truth, Jude 1. 3. Yea earnestly
contend, fight for it, if that comes in question, (...).
if we be in danger to lose that, God gives us our Banners, not to be folden
up, but to be displayed because of the truth.

Sixthly, God himself comes into the field with his people, he tells them often
that he is with them there. Deuteronomy. 20. 4. The Lord your God is he that goes
with you to fight. When God says, I am with you, you may write down what you
will to make up this promise a complete one for your safety and comfort; As
thus, I am with you to assist you, I am with you to direct you, I am with you
to encourage you, to bless, to save you, to comfort you, to reward you, etc. I
am with you, says God. This is as it were a piece of a line that our faith
must make up; If we once have this promise got into our hearts, whatsoever we
want, we may add to it, and then our peace and joy may be full.

We read, Judges 4. 8. Barak would not go into the field, except Deborah
would go with him. It is ill going into the field, except God go with you;
but if you have this promise in your hearts, you cannot but have strength in
your hands. Zac. 10. 5. They shall be as mighty men which tread down their
enemies as mire in the streets, in the battle, and they shall fight, because
the Lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

7. God is not only with his people in their Josh. 5. 13. Joshua saw a man
with his sword drawn in his hand, and Joshua went to him, and said, Art thou
for us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay, but a Captain of the host of
the Lord am I now come. It is apparent this was Christ, for Joshua fell on his
face, and worshipped, and said, What says my Lord unto his servant? And the
Captain of the Lords Host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoes from off thy feet,
for the place where thou stand is holy.

8. God condescends lower, even to be the Trumpeter in the wars of his people.
It is accounted too mean a work for a General to blow the Trumpet to his
Army; but this great General, The Lord of Hosts, that he might encourage his
people the more in his battles, he blows the Trumpet himself to them, Zach. 9.
14. And the Lord shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with the whirle-winds of
the South. Why of the South? Those winds are hottest, and therefore swiftest.
If ye see the South Wind, ye say it will be hot, (says Christ) and so it
comes to pass, Luke 12. 54, 55. If we think our General follows too slowly,
this great General, The Lord of Hosts, follows swiftly enough. In the words
before, The arrows of the Lord are said to go forth like lightning.
Swiftness in an Army is of great consequence, it has been a special advantage
to our adversaries. We do little, except in this we equal them.

9. God is the Rereward of his people in times of Battle. Isa. 52. 12. Ye
shall not go out with haste, nor by slight: for the Lord will go before you:
and the God of Israel will be your Rereward. Not the Reward, but Rereward, the
guard and defense behind. When an Army is strong in the Rereward as well as in
the Front, it is safe, God is both before and behind in the Armies of his
people.

10. Gods providence in Wars works in the continuance of them. How long they
shall abide in a How long shall the sword devour? but when God gives Commission
to the sword, it must stay; it must go on devouring till the Commission be
out. Jer. 47. 6, 7. Oh thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? put up thy self into the scabbard, rest and be still. The answer is
there, How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against
Askelon, and against the sea shore? there has he appointed it. Hos. 11. 6. The
sword shall abide on his cities, and consume his branches, and shall devour
them, because of their own counsels. We are troubled at the sword coming near
our Cities; but how sore would the misery be, if it should come into our
Cities? but if abide in our Cities, what miserable spoil and ruin would there
be? If we would be delivered from so great an evil, let us take heed of our
own counsels: If God leaves Parliament or City to their own counsels, the sword
will abide amongst us longer time then we for the present imagine, even until
it has devoured. God usually is a long time before he draws his sword; he is
whetting, preparing, delaying it; but when it is once drawn, he many times will
not put it up again, until it be bathed, filled, fatted, satiated, drunk
with blood. All these expressions we find in Scripture. Esaias 34. 5, 6. My
sword shall be bathed in heaven, it shall come down upon Idumea, upon the
people of my curse. When Gods sword has to deal with the people of his curse,
then it shall be bathed indeed; And surely God has a people of his curse
amongst us this day; who they are, is easy to know: You may know them to be
cursed of God by the horrid blasphemies, and hideous, unheard of curses that
come out of their mouths. The earth was never stained with such dreadful
execrations and blasphemies since man lived upon the face of it, as now it is
by these men. Surely the brand of Gods curse is upon them, fear them not. Ver.
6. it is said, The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with
fatness: and Jer. 46. 10. The sword shall devour, it shall be satiate and
drunk with their blood.

And when God is pleased to give the word, he God stilleth wars.
makes wars to cease. Psalm. 49. 9. He makes wars to cease unto the end of the
earth, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the
chariot in fire.

Of Gods work in stilling wars, we have a most admirable example, 1 Kings 12.
21. we have not the like in all the Book of God, neither was there ever the
like before or since in the world. King Rehoboam was incensed against the ten
Tribes falling off from him, he was in as great a heat and rage against them as
we can imagine a man could be put into. This fire of his rage was blown up to
the height by those young daring Cavaliers that were about him, he had got an
Army together, strong enough, an hundred and fourscore thousand men, a mighty
force, and it was but to bring the Kingdom to the house of David: Well, their
power was great, their rage was fierce, their cause they questioned not, they
were going forth with a high hand, with cruel and bloody intentions. How was
all stilled now? You shall find, that The word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the
Prophet, saying, Speak to Rehoboam, -- Thus says the Lord, Ye shall not go up
to fight against your brethren, return every man to his house. The Text says,
They hearkened to the word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according to the
word of the Lord. What a mighty work of God was this? what power has God over
the spirits of men, yea of the greatest, who think it an unsufferable dishonor
to be controlled in any thing they have set their hearts upon?

Rehoboam, a wicked man, in the height of his pride and wrath, thus strong,
apprehending himself exceedingly wronged, so much of his Kingdom rent from
him, and there comes only a poor Prophet and speaks to him in the name of
This Lord of Hosts, that he should not fight against his brethren, and all is
stayed, he returns back again, and sits down quiet.

Oh that now some Prophet of the Lord might have access to His Majesty, and
tell him that he must not go this way he does, that he is drawn aside by
evil men about him, that there is a misunderstanding between him and his
people, that nothing is done by us but according to the mind of God, that we
do not endeavor to deprive him of any lawful power he has given him by God
or man, but only to preserve our lawful liberties as truly ours as he is born
unto the Crown, and that we might with peace enjoy the Gospel, and serve the
Lord and His Majesty in our own Land.

11. The providence of God in war is great, in Ezech. 14. 17. Or if I bring a
sword upon that Land, and say, Sword go through the Land, so that I cut off
man and beast in it: The sword has been in many parts of our Land already,
even in the utmost parts, Northumberland and Cornwall, the two extremities of
the Land, as Dan and Bersheba in the Land of Canaan. Just were it with God to
give it commission to go up and down in the midst of it, yea, in great part
he has done it already, and how is it devouring, even almost round about us?
the guilt of the misery our brethren have suffered, the guilt of their blood is
upon the whole Kingdom, in as much as the whole Kingdom has not risen even
as one man to prevent it, but we suffer our brethren in several places to be
devoured one after another: one country hopes it will not come there, and
another country hopes it shall escape, and in the mean time we suffer our
brethren to be spoiled.

Jer. 12. 12. The spoilers are come upon all high places through the
wilderness. (They are come from the Country to the City, the Country is to
them but as a wilderness in comparison of the City) For the Sword shall
devour from the one end of the Land to the other, no flesh shall have peace,
Jer. 25. 15. The Lord bade the Prophet take the cup of the wine of his fury,
and cause all the Nations to whom I send thee to drink it: God has given other
Nations this cup of his fury, France, Holland, Germany, have been drinking
these 24. years, Spain, Italy have had it, a little of the top of it Scotland
had; we were afraid of it then here, and they and we cried to God, If it be
possible let this cup of blood pass from us, and God in his great mercy
caused it to pass from us, but it went to our brethren in Ireland, they have
drunk deep of it, and still are drinking, and whether God intends that we
shall drink the dregs of it we know not, we had need do as Christ did in
his Agony, Luke 22. 44. yet (...).
pray more earnestly, the second and third time, If it be possible, let this
cup of blood pass from us. If an Agony cause Christ's spirit to rise in Prayer,
it should then do ours; it is a sad thing to have our spirits heavy, dull and
strait in such a time as this.

12. The work of this Lord of Hosts in War is to give wisdom and counsel
for the managing of Sam. 22. 35. Thou teach my hands to war, and my fingers
to fight. The same we have, Psalm. 144. 1. Other Generals have their Council
of War to help them, that they may not miscarry in it; but this Lord of Hosts
gives all the counsel and wisdom from himself to all under him: And in this
there is much of Gods glory. Esaias 28. 24, 25, 26, 27. The Lord accounts it his
glory that he teaches the Plowman to plow his ground, to sow his seed, to
thresh his corn, his God does instruct him to discretion, the Text says; much
more then is the glory of God in giving wisdom to order and to lead Armies.
And when the Lord pleases, he takes away counsel, he besots men in their
counsails, and mingles a perverse spirit amongst them, and befools them; he
turns their counsails upside downward, and insnares them in the work of their
own hands: This made David pray against the counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15.
31. O Lord turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness; what counsel
that was you may find 2 Samuel 17. 2. Fall upon him while he is weary and weak.
This war was raised up against David for his sin, and yet God hears David's
prayer against Achitophel: The same counsel was given against our Army of late
by a great Achitophel, when the question was, whether they should come to the
City or fall upon the Army, the counsel cast it upon the Army, because they
were weary and weak, not being together, and how has God turned that counsel
into folly? it has bin our safety and preservation, but their shame. There God
wrought for David in that Achitophels counsel was not followed, although it
was a more politic counsel, it had more warlike wisdom in it then Hushaies
had, but for us God wrought, in that Achitophels counsel was followed. Thus
Isai. 19. 11. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools, the counsails of the wise
counselors of Pharaoh are become brutish, where are they? where are the wise
men? and again, The Princes of Zoan are become fools.

Why are the Princes of Zoan so much mentioned there? Quest.


Because Zoan was the Metropolis of Egypt, where Ans.
the great counsel of Egypt was, and verse 14. The Lord has mingled a
perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in
every work thereof, as a drunkenman staggereth in his vomit. Jerome upon the
Hieron. in Isa. 19. 14.
place adds this to express the meaning, Non solum ebrii, sed and vomentes
furore^ draconu^ and furore^ aspidum insanabilem: not only drunken, but
vomiting the fury of Dragons, the incurable fury of Aspes. And is not this the
vomit of our adversaries at this day, who are drunk with malice and rage
against us, yea, against Christ himself and his Saints?

13. The spirit of valor and courage is also from this Lord of Hosts. When the
Spirit of the Lord Sampson, Gideon, and others of the Worthies of the Lord,
what great things did they? Heb. 11. 33, 34. Who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in sight, turned to slight the Armies of the Aliens. It was
through faith they were enabled to do all this, faith fetched valor and
courage from this Lord of Hosts. Hag. 1. 14. The Lord stirred up the spirit of
Zerubbabel and the spirit of Joshua, and the spirit of all the Remnant of the
people, and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of Hosts their
God. It was a warlike spirit to resist their enemies, to encounter with dangers.

God has stirred up a spirit in many of our Nobles, in our Worthies of
Parliament, in some of our people; if a spirit were now stirred up in the
remnant of our people, our work would soon be at an end. It were the
unworthiest, yea, the most horrible thing that ever was in this world, that now
people should forsake Nobility, those they have chosen in Parliament, and
Ministers who have had a spirit to stand up for God and their liberties. Oh
that a spirit of indignation would arise in the whole Kingdom, that they may
not suffer themselves to be baffled out of their Religion, their Liberties,
their estates, by a generation of vile men that are risen up amongst us.

Zac. 10. 3, 5. The Lord of Hosts has visited his flock the house of Judah,
and has made them as his goodly horse in the battle. They shall be as mighty
men which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle. It
seems they presumed to come into their towns and Cities, therefore says the
Text, They shall tread them down us mire in the streets. They are vile, and
therefore to be trodden down as mire in the streets. The spirits of those that
seem to be the greatest terror amongst us, are mean and base: What worthy thing
have they ever done? have they ever stood before those that opposed them? All
their valor is in going up and down to Country houses in a poor unworthy
manner, pillaging and pilfring: A spirit in people raised by God, would scorn
to be brought under by men of such spirits as these. Further, as God gives a
spirit of courage, so he takes it away when he pleases, Is. 19. 16. And in that
day shall Egypt be like unto women, and fear because of the shaking of the hand
of the Lord of Hosts, which he shakes over it; and the land of Judah shall be a
terror unto Egypt, every one that makes mention thereof shall be afraid in
himself, because of the counsel of the Lord of Hosts. It may be they will not
confess that they are afraid, but may make their boast as if they had got the
better: but mark the words, every one shall be afraid in himself: If we could
look into their bosoms, we should see blacknes, tremblings, the terror of the
Lord upon them. Ps. 76. 5 The stout hearted are spoiled, they have slept their
sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands, at thy rebuke, O
Lord, the horse and chariot are cast into a dead sleep: and v. 12. He shall
Vindimiabit.
cut off the spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, he
shall wipe them off as a man will do a flower between his fingers, or as
easily as a bunch of grapes is cut off from the vine.

14. The Lord of Hosts has the absolute power Isay 54. 17. No weapons formed
against thee shall prosper. If any shall say, This is a special promise to them
at that time; mark what follows, This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord: This (that is, this promise of the Lord) is the inheritance of his
servants. Now we of late have had the benefit of this our inheritance, the last
Lords day fortnight we did inherit this promise, when there were 17. Canons
discharged from the Adversary, and not one man slain by them. How was this made
good, that no weapon formed against thee shall prosper? The adversary was
enraged at this, they said, they thought the devil was in the powder: No, it
was God that was there, fulfilling this promise of his to his servants.

15. All the success in battles is from the Lord of Eccles. 9. 11. The battle
is not to the strong. A horse is but a vain thing for safety, Psalm. 33. 17.
Behold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the people shall labor in the very
fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity? Hab. 2. 13.

Yea lastly, the whole battle is the Lords, when it Sam. 17. 47. The battle is
the Lords.

Now you see what the Scripture says about Gods providence in battle. You have
the sum presented here together, in which is a full and strong encouragement
to those who fight the battles of the Lord.

Now if the Question be asked, Why does the Quest.
Lord thus work in Armies?

The Answer is, 1. Because the lives of men are Answ.
precious to him. In them multitudes of creatures Why the Lord does work in
Armies.
are cast for their eternal estates. If not a sparrow, not a hair from the
head falls to the ground without providence, much less the life of a creature

2. Because of the great things of consequence that depend upon War: the mighty
turns of Nations,

But how comes it to pass, seeing God is thus The Lord of Hosts, that yet the
adversaries of Gods Ob.
people do often prevail in battle?

1. It is for the chastisement of his people. Ashur Answ.
is made sometimes the rod of Gods anger. Jer. 12. 7. Why the adversary often
prevails.
I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies. She
is the dearly beloved of Gods soul, yet she is given into the hands of her
enemies. We must not judge by the present prevailing, that God loves those who
have the day, and has rejected those who seem to have the worst. God
sometimes for chastisement, brings the worst of men upon them. Ezekiel. 7. 24. I
will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses. The
Lord has raised up against us many that are the worst, the vilest upon the
face of the earth, and they have possessed the houses of many of his Saints,
the dearly beloved of Gods soul. We use to take the vilest, the worst of men
to be Hangmen; the worst rags and clouts to scour withal. It is an argument
that we are very foul, that God has chosen such wisps and clots to scour us
with.

Secondly, God suffers this, because his people are not humbled thoroughly. The
want of through Judges 20. although in that battle they had a good cause. A
good cause is not enough for safety in time of battle; there must be
humiliation before this great God.

Thirdly, the adversary may prevail, because the Saints do not awaken the
Lord of Hosts by Psalm. 59. 9. Thou therefore O Lord God of Hosts the God of
Israel, awake to visit all the heathen, be not merciful to wicked
transgressors. Esaias 51. 9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord,
awake as in the ancient days, as in the generations of old. Art not thou he
that have cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? We have here in one verse three
times crying to God to awake. God has strength enough to help his people.
There is an Arm of the Lord, but yet this Arm of the Lord may be for a time
as it were asleep, therefore the Church cries, Awake O Arm of the Lord: And
that she may be sure the Lord should hear, she cries again and again, Awake,
awake, O arm of the Lord, put on strength. We are now to look back to former
times, to see how God has manifested himself The Lord of Hosts, and to cry to
him, that now in our days he would show forth the glory of this glorious
title of his, as he has done in the generations of old.

Lastly, God has many secret passages of his providence to be brought about,
which in after times we come to see clearly, but for a time are hidden, and
therefore the adversary is suffered to prevail. The 46. Psalm speaks much
about the fury of the adversary, and of this Title of the Lord; and the Title
of that Psalm is, A song upon Alamoth, which word signifies secrets, because
of the hidden counsels of (...) Abscondit
God in wars.

Thus you have had the doctrinall part of one branch of this glorious title of
the Lord presented to you: The application nearly concerns us in these times.

First, it beseemes then those who are in Armies, to be godly, because their
great General is The Lord of Hosts; and this Lord of Hosts is likewise The
holy one of Israel. Even in this verse, holiness is joined to his warlike
greatness. And Exodus 15. he is magnified as a man of war overthrowing the
enemy: and ver. 11. he is said to be glorious in holiness: and Esaias 6. 3.
where the Cherubims and Seraphims are magnifying his glory, they cry out, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord of Hosts. It is very observable, that Gods holiness is joined
with this title of his The Lord of Hosts; surely then holiness and valor in
us are not only consistent one with another, but subservient one to another.
It it is an abominable maxim of Machiavil, that Religion makes men cowards;
the most valorous soldiers in the world have been the most eminent in
Religion. Soldiers use to endeavor to be like their General in any thing,
yea, in their naevis: Alexanders Soldiers accounted it a graceful posture to
hold their heads aside, because Alexander their General did so; surely then to
be like the Lord of Hosts in that which is his excellency and glory, must
needs put a luster upon those who are his soldiers. Plutarch reports of a
Theban Band of soldiers which they called the Holy band, in which there was
more considence put then in any, because they prospered above others.

The Lord of Hosts, who is holy, will delight to be amongst them that are
godly, to bless them in their way. Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth
against the enemy, then keep thee from every wicked thing, yea they must keep
from outward bodily uncleanness, they must carry a paddle with them to cover
it, ver. 14. the reason is there given, For the Lord thy God walks in the
midst of thy Camp, therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. It is true, God looks more
at the cause then at the instrument; yet he rejoices most to use instruments
that are fitted to give him the praise of his work.

One day the Lord will convince the world, that the strength of Nations and
Kingdoms consist in the interest that the godly have in this Lord of Hosts.
Zach. 12. 5. And the Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, Our
strength is in the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in the Lord of Hosts their God: Oh
that this prophecy were fulfilled! it begins to be more now then ever in our
days or our forefathers; Even those who have been accounted hypocrites,
factious heretofore, yet now even the Governors of Judah begin to see their
strength is in them. Who has the burden of the great work in this State layne
upon but the Religious party? has it not been published in your City by
chief men in the Army, that the great things in the Army were done by those
that are called Roundheads? We hope our Governors will every day be more and
more convinced that their strength is in these. Revel. 17. 14. He is the Lord
of Hosts, the King of Kings, and they that are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful, and therefore it is said the Lamb shall overcome: They are not
such as are called faithful, but such as are called and faithful: There was
one in our Army whose name was Faithful that turned head against us, but these
that are with the Lamb are called and faithful. It is a blessed thing for a
Kingdom when their Army may be said to be as it was said of that Army, Luke 2.
13. a heavenly Host. This great Lord of Hosts, who is the God of Heaven will
certainly do great things by such an Host.

Secondly, If God be the Lord of Hosts, if this be An honorable employment to
be a Soldier.
soldier is an honorable employment. As the estate of marriage is much
honored in that Christ is pleased to express (the great mystery of the
Gospel) the blessed union between him and his Church by it; which is a great
engagement to those in such a condition, that they walk so as their lives may
put in mind of the excellency of Christ's Communion with his Church: So the
calling of a Soldier is much honored in this, that God himself will set
forth his glory by this title, The Lord of Hosts; or, The Lord of Armies. Psalm
24. 10. The Lord of Hosts is the King of glory; surely some beam of this glory
must needs shine upon soldiers that serve under him. The Romans honored a
Soldier much: The Latin expresses a soldier and a Knight by the same word,
Miles. The serving under this or that Captain, they expressed by this phrase,
Mereri sub hoc vel illo duce. Hence, miles emeritus, for an old soldier that
was to take his ease. In any lawful service, you serve under The Lord of
Hosts; but the more the service concerns his glory and the good of his Saints,
the more will God own it. The very Chronicles or Records of the wars of the
Church, the Lord is pleased to have styled, The Book of the wars of the Lord,
Numbers 21. 14. The Name of the Lord is exceedingly much interessed in these
wars. You young ones, who are willing to offer and venture your selves in this
service, you honor your selves betimes; yea, God and his people do and will
honor you; God will remember the kindness of your youth. You tenderhearted
mothers, be not unwilling to give up your children, the fruit of your wombes
to this service, but bless God that ever ye bare any in your wombes to be of
that use, to stand up for God and his people, as your children have an
opportunity now to do: If (as you heard) when God hissed for the fly and for
the be they came, much more do you come when God calls, and that aloud, to
come and help him against the mighty.

And when you are in the service, seeing it is so Cowardice branded with
infamy.
honorable, take heed you stain it not as others have done, of whom it may be
said as it was of the children of Ephraim, Psalm. 78. 9. The children of Ephraim
being armed turned back in the day of battle, They kept not the covenant of
God. The covenant of a soldier is the Covenant of God. Hence the oath that a
soldier took when he came to his Captain, the Romans called Sacramentum. A
brand of dishonor was upon Ephraim, Judges 12. 4. Ye fugitives of Ephraim.
Let not such a Brand be upon any of you, ye Fugitives of such a county, of such
a town; your General the Lord of Hosts is worthy of all you can possibly do for
him. Plutarch tells of Scipio Africanus, showing a friend of his three hundred
of his soldiers exercising their Arms near the Sea where there was a high
tower, There is never a one of all these, said he, but if I bid him climb up
that steep tower, and from the top of it cast himself down into the sea, but
he will readily do it. What, will not you be ready to show more respect to your
General this Lord of Hosts, then any heathen shall do to a Heathen General? be
willing to venture your lives for him; this is your glory, for he accounts it
his.

If in this cause you should turn your backs upon your enemies, with what face
could you ever after look upon your friends? Psalm. 69. 6. Let not them that
wait for thee O Lord of Hosts, be ashamed for my sake. Take this Text with you
into the Army, and pray to God, O Lord grant that I may so behave my self in
this great business I have undertaken, that none of those that wait on the
Lord, that have prayed for, and now wait for the salvation of God, may be
ashamed for my sake.

I have read of one Abaga a Tartarian, that had this device to make cowards
valiant, he caused them that ran away from the battle ever after to wear
women's clothes; I do not say that there should be this brand of dishonor, but
one brand or other it is fit should be upon such as basely forsake such an
honorable work, such an honorable cause as this is.

Thirdly, If God be the Lord of Hosts, hence there is no war to be undertaken
but for God and according Use 3.
to Gods will, it must be by commission from this great General. To go into
the field without him is dangerous, but to go against him is desperate. Ps. 20.
5. In the Name of the Lord will we set up our banners.

But if any shall say, We are afraid we go not by Ob.
the Commission of The Lord of Hosts, because we go against the King: Does God
give Commission for Subjects to fight against the King?

For answer, The sound of these words in the ears Answ.
of men, oh what an efficacy have they! But when they are examined and applied
to this business, the truth is, there is nothing at all in them to any man
that will be rational.

For first, It is not against the King, it is defensive only, to defend our
lawful liberties, our estates, which we inherit as truly as the King inherits
any thing he has. It is to defend our Religion, which is our chief
inheritance. The law of Nature and Scripture teaches us to defend our selves
from violence and wrong.

God has not put man, and whole Kingdoms into a worse condition then brute
creatures, and yet they by an instinct of nature defend themselves against man
that would hurt them: and yet they were made for man; but Kingdoms were not
made for Kings, but Kings rather for Kingdoms.

And the Scripture warrants this, you know David 1 Samuel 23. 13.
gathered 600. soldiers together to defend himself against any injury Saul
intended and endeavored against him. And when the children of Benjamin and
Judah came to him to the hold, 1 Chronicles. 12. 16, 17, 18. The spirit came upon
Amasai, and he said, Peace be to thee, and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy
God helps thee. What David did in this kind was no other but what God helped
him in.

2. It is not against the King, but for the King; it is for the preservation of
true Regal power in the King and his posterity; it is to rescue him out of
the hands of evil men, who are his greatest enemies. The Scripture bids, that
the wicked should be taken from the throne of the King; Who should take them
away? if he had a mind to do it himself, he need not suffer them to come to
his throne; but when he does suffer them to come there and abide there, yet
they must be taken away; if a Representative kingdom has not power to take
them away, who has?

3. That which is done is not done against the power of the King; His power is
that which the laws of the land invests him withal. The Scripture bids us be
subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. It does not bid us to be subject to
the wills of those who are in highest place. If we be either actively or
passively subject to the Laws of that country wherein we live, we fulfill the
very letter of that Scripture that commands us to be subject to the highest
powers. Wherefore that which is now done, is not against the King; though it be
against the personal command of the King, yet it is not against the Legal
power of the King; when we speak of a King, we mean such a man invested with a
Regal power by the laws and constitutions of that country he is the King of.
Now if nothing be done against this power that the laws and constitutions of
our country invests him with, then nothing can be said to be done against the
King. People are much mistaken who do not distinguish between a man in
authority and the authority of that man. A man in authority may command what
authority does not command.

But may we go against the command of the King? Ob.


It is not against his authorative command. Many, Ans.
if not most men mistake in this, they think the authorative commands of the
King chiefly consist in his personal verbal commands, but the truth is, his
authority is in his commands by his officers Seals, and Courts of Justice; we
may appeal from his personal verbal command, to his command in his Courts of
Justice, and whatsoever is his command in one Court of Justice, may be appealed
from to a superior Court, and so to the highest, and there we must rest.

But the King says, That this which is done, is Ob.
done against Law.

If when the most inferior Court of Justice determines Ans.
any thing to be Law, it is not the Kings personal dissent, and saying it is
not Law that disanuls it, but the judgment of some superior Court; then if the
highest Court in the Land, which is the Parliament, shall judge a thing to be
Law, surely the personal dissent of the King, and saying it is not Law, cannot
disanul it.

But although the Parliament tells us that what Ob.
they do is Law, yet they do not show where that Law is; where shall we find
it extant?

We are to know that our Commonwealth is governed Answ.
not only by Statute Law, but by the Common Law; now this Common Law is
nothing else but recta ratio, right reason, so adjudged by Judges appointed
thereunto by Law, and this is various according as cases do occur; so that
although some presidents, some general maxims of this Law be extant, yet if
new cases arise, then there must be determination according to the nature of
such a new case, which determination by such as are appointed Judges is now
Law, although it were no where written before. And certainly we have now such
things fallen out, as no former time can show presidents of: As, That a King
should go from his Parliament, so as ours does: That a King should take up
Arms, as now he does; with many other things of consequence, of a high nature,
which our Houses of Parl. in their Declarations publish, which our ears tingle
to hear of, and our hearts tremble at the mention of. These things were never
heard of since England was a Kingdom, therefore we can expect no presidents of
what determinations there can be in these cases; and some determinations of
necessity we must have, or else we shall run to confusion.

The determination then of the highest Court of Justice in the Kingdom, we
must account Law in this case. This is the way of determining Cases that fall
out in the Common Law.

First, the determination must not be against any Statute Law, and so is the
determination of Parliament now, there is no Statute Law against it.

Secondly, it must be according to some general Maxims of that Law. Now this
is one great maxim of it, Salus populi suprema Lex, The safety of the people
is the supreme Law: and according to this their determination is.

Thirdly, when any inferior Judge makes this determination against any party
that thinks himself wronged, he makes his Appeal to the Kings Bench: If at
the Kings Bench that be judged Law against a man, which he thinks is not right,
then he has a Writ of Appeal ad proximum Parliamentum, to the next
Parliament; so that it is apparent by the frame of Government in our Kingdom,
that the Parliament is supreme Judge of what is Recta ratio, Right reason in
cases of difficulty and controversy; and this not being against any former
Statute Law, and agreeable to the received Maxims of Common Law, it is to be
accounted Law, although we find not that Case, or that Determination written
in any Book before.

This is needful for the satisfying men's consciences, that things are carried
according to the constitution of the Government of our Kingdom, and therefore
in this we do not sin against Authority. If men's consciences be not satisfied
in these things, what shall they do? Now therefore because that which is urged
upon men's consciences is the authority of man, that we must obey, we can never
satisfy our consciences until we know what this authority of man is; and that
we cannot know but by the Law of the Kingdom. It is necessary therefore that
men understand what kind of government they live under, that they may know when
they offend against Authority, and when not; that they may not be deluded, and
brought into snares, and things of dangerous consequence, merely by the name of
Authority.

But yet it may further be said, Grant the Parliament to be the Judge, how can
it judge without the Ob.
King? For the Parliament consists of three Estates, the House of Commons, the
House of Lords, and the King: How can that then be said to be the determination
of the Parliament, which is not the determination of the King?

It is true, for the making any Statute, the passing Ans.
any thing by way of Bill, all the three Estates of the Kingdom are required
to join: but for the determination of what is Law, that may be done by both
the Houses, in the absence of, or without the knowledge of the King, as usually
it is: In cases that are brought before them in the punishment of Delinquents,
they do not send to the King for his assent to join with them in their
determinations, but in those proceed as a Court of Justice themselves.

But what if authority be abused, may we resist? Is Ob.
not passive obedience required, if active cannot be given?

There is a great deal of difference between the Ans.
commands that are from abused authority, and the commands that are from the
wills of men in authority, but not from the authority of those men. That is
abused authority, when those to whom power of making Laws belongs, shall make
evil Laws; in this case there is no help, but passive obedience, or flying,
until some way may be taken for rectifying that Authority that is abused. But
when men that are in authority command any thing out of their own wills, which
is no Law, it is not Authority that does command it; in this case there is no
resisting of Authority at all, although the thing be denied that is commanded;
in such a case if we neither yield active nor passive obedience, we cannot be
said therefore to resist authority: For as Samson said in another case, If you
do thus and thus unto me, I shall be but as another man: so if these men who
are in place of authority, do such things as the Laws and Government of the
Country will not bear them out in, they are but as other men; yet some
reverence ought to be showed to their persons, both in words and actions, in
regard of their place.

What say you to the Kings of Judah? Many of Ob.
them did otherwise then they ought, and yet we do not read they were
resisted, but obeyed.

1. In a defensive way they were resisted, as appears by what was said before
in the case of David, gathering Ans.
up 600. men to defend himself against Saul.

2. Yea when Saul would have killed Jonathan, the people resisted him, and
would not suffer him.

3. We read, 2 King. 6. 32. when the King of Israel sent a messenger to kill
the Prophet, the Prophet being amongst the Elders of the people, calls the King
the son of a murderer, and bade that they should shut the door against the
messenger, and hold him fast at the door. The former Translation has it,
Handle him roughly, though sent by the King: Yea the King himself was
following, yet his messenger coming with his command must be handled roughly.
The Hebrew word is (...) You shall oppress him, so Arias Montanus translates
it, opprimet is, you shall use great rigor to him. It is a vain conceit in
people to think that the command of the King is enough to bear out an Officer
in illegal and unjust acts, as if every one were bound to obey, if he comes by
the command of the King: there is no such thing: if any man does any thing
illegal, although the King bids him, he must answer for it as if it were his
own act: therefore it is that the Acts of Authority that come from the King,
they come by Officers, because the Subject may have some to call to account in
case of injury, not being fit to molest the Kings own Person for every damage
the Subject suffers.

These three examples are out of question justifiable: And if we would go to
bare example, we shall find that ten Tribes brake off from Rehoboam, because
he would follow the counsel of his young Cavaliers, to make their yoaks heavy,
to make his little finger heavier then his fathers loins: yea and God says it
was of him what was done.

But further, this is no certain rule, that just what power the Kings of Judah
had, that and no more should all Kings have; If in some things they may have
more, then it cannot follow, because they had this or that power, therefore all
Kings must have the same. If their examples be the rule for all Kings power,
then their examples must as well be to limit the power of Kings, as enlarge it:
but Kings would think it much to be limited by their power, therefore they must
not urge the enlargement from their power too hard.

I will instance in one thing, wherein the Kings of England would not
willingly be limited by their example, namely, The confining of their
succession to the heir male. The daughters of the Kings of Judah did not
inherit, only the males; but the daughters of our Kings do. If this Question
be asked, Why in some countries only the Male inherits, as in France; in
others, the females likewise, as in England; why in some Countries the King is
elective, as in Denmark and others; in others it is hereditary, as with us: The
Answer will be given, This is from the diversity of the Laws of Kingdoms. So
then it follows not, because some Kings in Scripture were thus and thus,
therefore all Kings must needs be so; but according to the diversity of the
Laws of Kingdoms, so is the diversity of the power of Kings. Every Country in
the first constitution of the Government, has power to divide the Government,
so much to the King, so much to the Nobles, so much to the Commons, as they
shall see best suitable to the condition of their Country: so that we are not
to go by such a rule, what power such and such Kings have had, but what power
every King has in the Country where he is King. Civil Government 1 Pet 2. 13
All civil Government, even that of Kings, is called a humane creation, for so
the words are in the Original, (...).
is left to the wisdom and justice of every Country, in the constitution of
it: They may confer power upon several Magistrates by several portions, as
shall be most for the good of that Country. That there should be Civil
Government, God has appointed; but that it should be thus or thus, all in one,
or divided into many, that is left to humane prudence, going according to rules
of Justice, for the public good. If the kinds of Civil government were of
Divine institution, it must be all the same in every complete Commonwealth,
which no man that I know will affirm. Ecclesiastical Government, because it is
spiritual, and has a spiritual efficacy in it, must therefore of necessity
be of Divine institution, and so the same in all places in the world where
Churches are co^pleat. Ob.


But what shall we say to the example of the Christians in the Primitive times,
who suffered so much wrong under Tyrants, and would never resist?

The Civil Government under which they lived was such, as it gave power to
those Emperors to do Answ.
such things as they did; the laws of those Countries being against them, they
could not help themselves, but it is not so with us: The Laws of our Country
are for us, and we seek nothing but to maintain those liberties we have by Law;
We have legal ways to help our selves, which they had not.

But above all Objections this sticks most with us, Does not the Scripture
straightly charge us not to Ob.
touch Gods Anointed?

First, This does nothing concern this raising of Arms, for it is for defense
of our selves, not offense Ans.
against Gods Anointed.

But further, that I may satisfy fully, I will say three things to this
Objection: First, we will examine the Scripture out of which this Objection is
raised, and see whether there be any such sense in it as is ordinarily taken
for granted: Secondly, I shall show that Anointing is not proper to Kings, but
belongs to others as well as Kings: Thirdly, I will show the difference
between that anointing that Kings had in time of the Law, from that they have
now.

For the first, This Scripture is 1 Chronicles. 26. 22. and Psalm. 105. 15. it is the
same in both places. 1. They both speak of times before ever there had been any
Kings of Israel. 2. The Anointing here is apparently meant of the people of
God, of the Church, of the Saints; God gives here a charge, that none, no not
Kings should touch them to do them any hurt. It is not here meant that people
should not touch Kings that are anointed, but that Kings should not touch
people that are Gods Anointed. The Church of God being separated from the world
to God, being consecrated to God, Gods sanctified ones are here called Gods
anointed: and that it is meant of people, it is plain if you consider this
Scripture, from the 12. ver. to this 15. ver. When they were but few in number,
and strangers in the Land, when they went from one Nation to another, from one
Kingdom to another people, he suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed: To whom did he
say it? he said it even to Kings: Whom should they not touch? Not them that
were few in number, that went from one country to another; them for whose
sakes Kings were reproved, he said that these anointed ones must not be
touched: though the Kings and people of the world thought them to be but
ordinary ones, yet God accounts them his anointed ones, and will not have them
touched; but if Kings shall meddle with them to do them any hurt, he will
reprove the^ for their sakes. You may see how God reproved that King
Nebuchadnezar, for their sakes, Jer. 50. 17. This Nebuchadnezar has broken
their bones; observe the expression, This Nebuchadnezar: he makes but a [This]
of Nebuchadnezar a great King, when he comes to reprove him for the sake of his
anointed ones: and mark further how the reproof is, when their inheritance is
but touched, Jer. 12. 17. Thus says the Lord against all the evil neighbors
that touch the inheritance, etc. Behold I will pluck them out of the Land; If
they do but touch my peoples inheritance, I will pluck them out of the Land.
And Isa. 10. 27. all this care of God over his people is laid upon their
anointment, The burden shall be taken off their shoulder, and the yoke from
their neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing. I
suppose now every one that looks into this Scripture, Touch not mine anointed,
will see that it has been grossly abused, and made to speak rather the conceits
of men then the meaning of the Holy Ghost.

But for futher satisfaction, consider, it is not peculiar to Kings to be
anointed; It is true, they were anointed in the time of the Law; but as they
were anointed, so Priests were anointed, Prophets were anointed, yea other
Magistrates and Captains of Gods people are called the anointed ones.

First, for Priests, Numb. 3. 3. These are the names of the sons of Aaron the
Priest that were anointed. And you know the Prophet Elijah anointed Elisha. And
Zac. 4. 14. speaking of Zerubbabel and Joshua, the text says, these are the
anointed of the Lord: now then if this meaning could be put upon the words,
that those which are Gods anointed must not be touched, whatsoever they do,
then Priests and Prophets whatsoever they do, must not be touched, for they are
as truly Gods anointed, as Kings are: yea Captains and inferior Magistrates
must not be touched, because they are Gods anointed also.

The third thing is the difference between Kings anointing then, as David, and
Solomon, and others were, and Kings anointing now. Then God chose such himself
by revealing from Heaven that they should be Kings; it was the immediate choice
of God; and then they were upon this, submitted to by the people: but now the
people first agree that such a one shall be King, the Kingly power shall be in
such a family successively, and then God establishes this choice or agreement.
There is a great difference between these two; First, Gods choosing, and then
the peoples establishing; and this, the peoples choosing, and then Gods
establishing. There the Kingly power was not conferred by way of compact or
covenant, but with us it was, and so is with others.

But what if the Kingdom be got by Conquest, and the Ob.
right come in that way?

Those who plead thus for Kings, know not what they do in making this plea: For
if there were no Ans.
other right, neither precedent nor consequent, but merely because such a one
was the stronger and got it, and so holds it now, then whosoever is the
strongest at any time he has right, if a stronger then he comes he shall have
the right. This is no good Divinity nor Polity to plead thus; that which
subjects my conscience to such a one, is the submission upon some compact,
covenant or agreement.

This may be when Kings are elective, but what Ob.
will you say concerning Kings that are hereditary?

Kings that inherit, inherit no more then their fathers Ans.
had, and their fathers no more then those before them, so that you must come
at length to the root, to the first who had this Kingly power invested upon
him; and by whom was he invested with this, but by the people? and what
subjected the consciences of people to acknowledge this man or this family,
more then another man, or another family, but only the agreement that passed
between this people, and such a man or family?

But there is yet one Objection more out of Scripture; Ob.
We read that David's heart smote him, but for cutting off the lap of Saul's
garment, because Saul was Gods Anointed.

The consequence that follows from hence is clearly this, That no private man
in his own cause, (for so was David then) by his own power may seize upon the
person of a King in an offensive way, especially such a King which had his call
immediately from heaven: what further consequence that concerns our business in
hand, let any show from this place that can.

But is not this a Popish tenet, that in case of Religion Ob.
Subjects may rise up against their King?

Papists hold and practice against this, and for this, Ans.
and beyond this; as they see they may serve their own turns: in their
practices especially of late they have labored to infuse into people, yea, and
into Princes an opinion of their absolute power, as conceiving it for the
present most conducing to their ends, who have preached up that all is the
Kings, that his will is our Law, that whatsoever he commands must be obeyed,
either by doing or suffering. Prelates and prelatical men have infused this
doctrine, so that to question this was dangerous enough, yea not to be zealous
in it was enough to have the brand of an Antimonarchical Puritan. And the
reason why the Popish party labors so much to cry up absolute and arbitrary
Government in Kings, is, because their being but few, they hope to gain some of
them at least to them, and then this absolute power shall be made use of for
the extirpation of the truth, and upholding Popery: In gaining one King they
gain almost the whole Kingdom, if this King may rule by his absolute power;
if once he be a Papist, then this absolute power is the Popes absolute power,
it is the Prelates absolute power, for if he uses it not as they please, they
can excommunicate him, they can free their Subjects from their allegiance: yea,
being by them excommunicated. Mark what follows, it is one of the Canons of
Pope Urbans, We take them not Can. Excom. cause. 23. qu. 6. cited by K. James,
in his Answer to Perror.
in any wise to be man slayers, who in a certain heat of Zeal toward the
Catholic Church their mother, shall happen to kill an excommunicated person.
This they teach and practice, if they do not gain them to be full Papists,
yet if they can by popish matches, or by any popish party in the Kingdom gain
them to be inclinable any way to them, or remiss in the profession of the
truth, they get a great advantage by this absolute power of the King; the
Prelates have upheld their tyrannical power by infusing this principle of the
absolute power of Kings into their ears and the cares of the people; but if
the Papist sees he has no hope to gain the King, or advantage by him, then he
turns his tenets another way, and says that for the promoting of the
Catholic cause, yea, although Kings do govern by the Laws of their Kingdom,
yet because they are against the Catholic Religion, Subjects may rise up
against their King and kill him. This doctrine of theirs we abhor, we say,
that if power be given to Kings by Law, yea, or to other Magistrates, though it
be against Religion, we have no help but suffering or flying until we can be
helped by a legal way; but if when we have Laws for our Religion and liberty,
the King out of his own will, or seduced by others, shall in an illegal way
seek to deprive us of them, now we may defend our selves, and in this we
resist not the Kingly authority, but the will of such a man.

And yet further, if it be possible that we may give satisfaction in this
thing, the mistake whereof is so exceeding dangerous: consider, if the taking
up Arms to defend Religion and liberties that we have by Law be treason or
rebellion, then all the reformed Churches are traitors and Rebels: Have not the
reformed Churches in Holland, in France, in Germany done this? Did not Queen
Elizabeth take the Holanders taking up Arms to defend their Religion and
liberty against their King into her protection, and assist them with money,
men, Ammunition? King James in his answer to Perron defends the Protestants in
France for what they did: He says, Their civil wars was not taking up Arms
against their King, it was but standing upon their guard. And did not our King
Charles send aid to the Protestants in France, defending their Religion and
liberty against their King at the Isle of Ree? and is not the Prince of
Aurania, whom we usually call the Prince of Orange, the General to the Army of
the States, defending themselves against the K. of Spain, whose Countries those
once were? Yea, and has not our King acknowledged our brethren the Scots his
loyal Subjects, and yet they did as much as we, yea, a great deal more? they
were indeed at first called Traitors and Rebels, in the prayers the Prelates
sent about and commanded to be read in Churches, but upon due consideration
they were found and so styled loving and loyal Subjects, and so in time we hope
we shall.

But if we shall thus plead and stand for our liberties, how can we expect the
King should ever look Ob.
upon us with any respect, or confide in us? will it not set the Kings heart
against us?

God forbid we should do any thing justly meriting the loss of His Majesty's
favor, and his heart confiding Answ.
in us: The happiness of a Kingdom is in Princes ruling as fathers, and Subjects
obeying out of love rather then mere necessity. K. James so renowned for
learning and deep understanding was fully of that mind, that his brother the
K. of France had no better Subjects in his Kingdom then the Protestants, which
yet stood up to defend their liberties by force of Arms. His words in answer
to Perron are these: I dare promise to my self that my most honored brother
the King of France will bear in mind the great and faithful service of those
who in matter of Religion dissent from His Majesty, as of the only men that
have preserved and saved the Crown for the King his Father, of most glorious
memory. I am persuaded my brother of France will believe, that his liege people
pretended by the Lord Cardinal to be heretics, are nor half so bad as my
Roman Catholic subjects, who by secret practices undermine my life, serve a
foreign Sovereign, are bound (by the Maxims and rules published and
maintained in favor of the Pope, before this full and famous assembly of the
Estates of Paris) to hold me for no lawful King, are by his Lordship there
taught and instructed, that Paul's commandment concerning subjection to the
higher powers, adverse to their professed Religion, is only a provisionall
precept, framed to the times, and watching for opportunity to shake off the
yoke. Surely then it is impossible but that His Majesty's heart must needs
confide in us, (although seeking to maintain our lawful liberties) rather then
in any Papists whatsoever. Yea yet further, hear what K. James his thoughts
were of the Protestants in France, toward the latter end of his former Answer
to Cardinal Perron he has these words, During the minority of K. Francis the
second, the Protestants of France were only a refuge and succor to the Princes
of blood, when they were kept from the Kings presence; and by the over-powring
power of their enemies, were no better then plain driven and chased from the
Court. I mean the Grandfather of the King now reigning, and the Grandfather of
the Prince of Conde, when they had no place of safe retreat besides in the
whole Kingdom. In regard of which worthy and honorable service, it may seem
the French King has reason to hold the Protestants in the princely Ark of his
gracious remembrance. (Shall Protestants be kept in the Princely Ark of the
gracious remembrance of a Popish King, and shall Protestants be cast out of the
heart of a Protestant King, and that only for defending their lawful
liberties in a just way? God forbid.) Yet further, hear the fidelity of
Protestants to their Prince. In all the heat of revolts and rebellions raised
in the greatest part of the Kingdom by the Pope, and the more part of the
Clergy, they stood to their King to bear up the Crown when tottering and
ready to fall.

And at this day the King of France has in pay between three and forescore
thousand Protestant Soldiers for the defense of himself and his Dominions, he
maintains so many yearly, his chief Commanders being Protestants, as confiding
especially in Protestants for their fidelity; and certainly so may our King
do, he should find none more faithful to him, and ready to venture their
estates and lives in defense of him and his Legal power, then the Parliament,
and those who adhere to them, and this no question even those about His Majesty
do believe in their hearts, whatsoever they say; they otherwise would never
venture to put His Majesty upon such ways as might exasperate them so as they
do. Was it ever known when Parliaments have been Papists, and the Kingdom
Papists, that ever any dared venture to put Kings upon such things as might
provoke such a Parliament, and the people that then would adhere to them?
Certainly other manner of effects would have followed the provocation of them
at such times. Why was it that the Laws against Papists have been so remissely
followed, and not only Law, but Will against the Puritans have been so hotly
pursued, but this, they were afraid of papists that they would do some
mischief, but for Puritans, they were confident they would not stir, they
would do no hurt but bear, and therefore they might do what they list with
them, they needed not fear exasperating them, they were taught obedience to
Governors out of conscience, and so they had them sure enough; but the
principles of the others would not bear too hard usage, therefore they must be
more fairly dealt withal. I am confident, if we could have seen into many
of their bosoms, we should have found these reasonings in them, It is true,
Puritans have been taught obedience to Authority out of conscience, and
howsoever Princes may be exasperated against Puritanicall Preachers, as they
call them, yet they are as much beholding to them as to any people in their
Kingdoms for bringing people out of conscience to obey Authority; whereas
others obey only upon necessities, and so serve Princes as they may serve
themselves by them, but in their teaching obedience to Authority they never
taught obedience out of conscience to any men's bare wills. How far obedience is
due I have shown before.

Wherefore although honest men are still bitterly inveighed against by the name
of Brownists and Sectaries, and Papists seldom or never mentioned, yet we
cannot think but they in their consciences are persuaded that they are not the
dangerous men for resisting authority. How is it possible for any man to think
that a Brownist, who only differs from us in manner of Church discipline, but
agrees with us in Doctrine and Civil-Government, yet that he may not be
suffered to live in a Kingdom, when a Papist may be embraced in a Bosom?
Surely the consciences of the meanest are as dear to them as the consciences of
the greatest.

But it is said that a great part of the Army of the Ob.
Parliaments are Anabaptists.

There is no great fear they can do much hurt, if Ans.
there be 40. Papists to oppose one Anabaptist; But surely it is an unhappy
mistake to say that there is any one Anabaptist in the Army, but a mistake,
like many others. For it is one of the tenets that Anabaptists stiffly maintain,
that it is unlawful to take up Arms upon any occasion: and therefore they are
never found to wear sword, nor in their Ships to carry Canons for their own
defense.

But does not the King profess that he will maintain the Protestant Religion,
and govern only Ob.
by the Laws? What need we trouble our selves then any farther?

The Answer to the Kings Professions and Protestations Ans.
the Parliament has already given; it is far more fit for them to answer, then
that any particular should: Only this thing let me say, I put it to every man's
conscience to judge, whether he can think that it is more likely for the King
with those Cavaliers that are now about him, and the aid of Papists coming in,
and called in unto him, to maintain the Protestant Religion, and Government by
the Laws, then the King, together with his Parl. to maintain the Protestant
Religion, and govern by the Laws. Surely we must unreason our selves before we
can think so.

But yet further, perhaps some may say, We do Ob.
not take that which is done to be done by both Houses of Parliament, many of
them are gone, but few remaining.

1. Some are gone, but compare those who are Ans.
gone with those that abide, and you may easily see which way the stream of
things would go, if those that stay, and the Kingdom with them, had not
hearts to appear for the maintaining what God and Nature, and the Laws of the
Kingdom have made their own.

2. There are not so many gone as are pretended;

3. When I hear of such and such men going Aeneas Sylvius, before he was Pope
himself, he was of that judgment that a general Counsel was above the Pope,
and some yet wondering why so many forsook the Counsel, and would cleave to the
Pope, he gave this reason, The Pope had Bishoprics, and Deanaries, and
Prebendaries, and fat Benefices to bestow, but the Counsel had no such things;
They saw which way preferment went, and which way it was like to go; They have
not seen Offices and great places of preferment bestowed by the Parliament.

4. Suppose more were gone then yet are, yet the Kingdom has a Parliament in
being, until both what was done in Parliament, because they were absent. Those
that stay then are the Houses of Parl. and if their determinations must not be
valid, because some of their Members be gone, then we may call into question all
determinations of Parl. that ever have been before us; for who knows how many
were present or absent when it was resolved upon the Question?

5. If a Country should choose a Representative

But even in the Houses, are not things carried on Ob.
in a Faction? are they not led by a fevv?

1. If there be this liberty to object against the Ans.
highest Court of Judicature in a Kingdom, when can we rest in any
determinations that can be in any Civil Polity?

2. What is this but to charge the whole Kingdom

3. If any thing for the Kings prerogative were

4. There was more danger of faction in the Prelates Convocations, where the
most of the Members were Bishops and their creatures, in servile subjection to
them. There is no such danger in either Houses, there is no such distance
between the Members amongst themselves; there is no such dependence of one upon
the other.

5. Faction cannot be the act of a body that depends not upon another; but in
particular members

If any shall say, howsoever those who yield not to ordinances of Parl. cannot
be accounted Schismatiques, because that is a rending from the Church.

The House of Parl. may as truly have the denomination of the Church as the
Prelates, their Chancellors, Ans.
Commissaries and Officials; will they not acknowledge the House of parl. to
have as much power to govern the Church as they have? surely they dare not
speak out. Yea, the Houses of Parl. are as truly Gods Clergy, although there
be never a Prelat there, as the Bishops or Ministers are; it is a proud
arrogation of theirs to make themselves Gods Clergy, that is, Gods lot or
Heritage, thereby distinguishing themselves from the people, when as the
Scripture makes the people Gods Clergy by way of distinction from the
Ministers; but never the Ministers Gods Clergy by way of distinction from the
people, as 1. Pet. 5. 3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage; he speaks
to Ministers, that they may not Lord over the Clergy; (...), so the words are:
let any show me now where Ministers in distinction from people are called
(...), from whence their word Clergy comes, but thus in matters of Church
government, as well as in Civil, have people been deluded.

But are not many, if not most of the House of Commons men of mean quality in
comparison, and Ob.
what must the great affairs of King and Kingdom be ordered by them?

1. Would you know why so many of the Gentry Answ.
in most Counties throughout the Kingdom are so malignant? surely it lies in
great part in this objection; they look with an envious eye at the Parliament,
because they think themselves as good men, yea, and far better then many of
them there, and why should not they have been chosen in as well as those that
are? this pride and envy of theirs makes them swel at every thing the House of
Commons does; it makes them forget that the liberties of themselves and
posterities, together with the whole Commons of the Kingdom are maintained in
such a way of choice of the Members of that House, howsoever for the present it
has not fallen upon themselves; besides many of the^ had rather inslave
themselves and their posterities to those above them, then not to have their
wills upon those that are under them: they would feign bring it to be with us as
it is in France, that the Gentry should be under the Nobility and Courtiers,
and all the country people, the pesants, be under them as slaves, they live in
miserable bondage under the Gentrey there, who generally are Cavalliers.

There is no Country in the world, where country men, such as we call the
yeomandry, yea, and their Farmers and workmen under them, do live in that
fashion and freedom as they do in England, in all other places they are
slaves in comparison, their lives are so miserable as they are not worth the
enjoying, they have no influence at all into the government they are under,
nothing to do in the making of Laws, or any way consenting to them, but must
receive them from others, according to their pleasure; but in England every
Freeholder has an influence into the making and consenting every Law he is
under, and enjoyes his own with as true a title as the Nobleman enjoyes
whatsoever is his. This freedom many of the proud Gentry are vexed at, and
hence it is their hearts rise so against those that are chosen by them, and
against their Ordinances. But the Commons begin to discern this more then they
have done, and to be so wise as to hold their own faster then formerly they
have.

2. Whatsoever quality any man is of before he be invested with power, should
be no prejudice to his Saul, Agathocles, and others? would it not be accounted
an high offense, yea Treason for any to refuse obedience to a Prince upon this
ground, that when he and that Family was chosen, perhaps neither he nor his
family was the fittest and ablest that might have been had? No, we are to rest
in the choice being made. Is not the reason the same in this, although the
degree inferior? The one is the supreme man in authority, the other a Member
of the supreme Court of Judicature, and regulating all authority.

3. Yet further, the honor of the Members of the

4. Such is the constitution of the Government of

But what would the Lords or Commons have? Ob.
has not the King graciously yielded to them, almost in all things they can
desire? why do they now stand out so as they do?

True, we acknowledge with all humble thankfulness to God and his Majesty for
what he has done Ans.
; and what is for the good of the Kingdom, surely is for the good of his
Majesty too; and if it be so worthy an Act of the King to yield his royal
assent to those things that are so beneficial for his Majesty and the
kingdom, then surely the Act of Commons and Lords must have their due praise
in preparing such good things first, in voting them and presenting them to his
Majesty, for his Royal assent to them.

But then you say, What would they have more? Ob.
what do they stand for more?

They desire that, and stand for that now, without Answ.
which all is done is nothing, all that they shall do will be nothing, yea,
they themselves will be nothing: No marvail therefore, although they and the
Kingdom with them stand for that.

But what is that? Ob.


It is that the defense of the King, Kingdom, and Ans.
Parliament, from the danger of the plots and attempts of Papists, and all
Malignants, may be put into the hands of those that they may confide in. To
what purpose are good Laws made? To what purpose is a Parl fitting, if Papists,
Prelates, Popish and Prelatical men, Atheists, Delinquents so infinitely
discontent, whom we had cause enough to fear that they would endeavor to get
power that they might disanul all, and according to those fears we see what is
come to pass; if we may not have the Militia of the Kingdom, that is the
only positive Legal way next to that we have from the Law of Nature, to
resist such power as would endeavor to undo all. If a man should be bound to
pay me such a debt, and withal to join with me to provide safe means of
conveying both my self and money to such a place, if this man at the day
appointed should pay the debt duly to a farthing, but when I tell him of great
danger by the way, many lie in wait to surprise me and my money, and I require
of him to join with me to afford me such aid as I may go safely, for go I
must, if he refuses, and will only consent to such aid as I not without good
grounds have cause to suspect to be as dangerous even as those that lie in wait
for me, yea, it may be I can prove that even some principal ones of those he
would have for my aid and safety, are confederate and of the same company with
those that lie in wait for me. Now I demand what advantage is it to me that the
debt is paid me, supposing I must go and have no other way to help my self but
that which he denies to me? is it not all one to me as if he had refused to pay
the debt? Do you think that good words would be enough to you in such a case,
if he should say, I Will warrant you, you may be safe, when I know certainly
these men are of the company with those who lie in wait for me, and I have
other men by, whom I know will be faithful, and can be no prejudice to the
other party, and I desire him that he would suffer those to go along with me
for my safety, and he refuses it?

But howsoever were it not better to harken to peace, Ob.
if possibly there may be ways of Accommodation?

Peace is indeed a most lovely and desirable thing Answ.
; we desire with our souls to live in peace. God himself knows, there is
nothing that would be more acceptable to us, then to serve God and the King in
ways of peace; God forbid but that we should in all our ways show our selves
the children of peace. We could make large orations in commendation of peace,
as well as others; yea in the midst of all the clatterings of our Arms, and
sounds of warlike instruments, yet peace is in our eyes and hearts: As
faithful Ministers in all the terrible threats they denounce in the name of
God against impenitent sinners, seek the true peace of their souls: so the
true soldier who is faithful to God and his Country, although he has the
sword in one hand, and fire in the other, yet it is with this Motto, Sic
quaerimus pacem.

For a full Answer to this Objection, I shall first answer merely as a Divine
out of the Scripture, and then we may consider what may be said in true wisdom
of Politic.

For the first. The Scripture tells us, James 3. 17. The wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable. Such an expression, did it not come from
an Apostle, would be scorned by many profane Atheistical spirits amongst us;
yea they would accuse James himself, if they dared, for a Puritan, for
speaking thus. The Scripture frequently joins Peace Isay 38. 9. Heb. 12. 14.
Romans 14. 17. Romans 1. 7.
and truth, peace and holiness, peace and righteousness, grace and peace
together: We must be sure so to seek peace, as we must seek the God of peace,
the Gospel of peace: That were a fearful peace that should make war between
the God of peace and us, or deprive us of the Gospel of peace. Let us not
dis-joyn or disorder the Angels Doxologie, Glory be to God on high, peace on
earth, good will toward men: So peace on earth, as glory may be to God on
high, and the good will, the (...) of this our God toward us. Placet ista
distributio, says Bernard, this distribution pleases me well, that God should
have glory, and we have peace. Oh that this Angelical distribution of glory and
peace might please us all! The truth is, peace is sweet, and those which are
thought enemies to it, pray a hundred times more to the God of peace, for
peace, then those who plead so much for it. Peace is to be purchased at any
rate, but with the loss of Truth; if this be the price of it, we buy it too
dear. We use to say, We may buy gold too dear; It would be a hard bargain if
the glory of God, if the liberty of his Ordinances, that now we have an
opportunity to enjoy, if the most religious party in the Kingdom should be now
sacrificed for a supposed peace, which upon such terms certainly will not hold
long: This would make God our enemy, not only because his glory, truth, and
Saints are dear unto him, but because those who are most religious, have stuck
most to the Parliament; they have ventured their estates, their lives, their
children, their servants for the safety of King, Kingdom and Parl. Never was
Parl. so engaged to any party in England, as they are engaged to these now:
Therefore it were the most horrible injustice that ever was in the world, if
the Parl. should leave them, yea sacrifice them to their adversaries, only to
provide for a false uncertain, dishonorable peace for themselves and others.
It cannot be imagined that such a thought could enter into them; God would
never suffer such injustice as this to pass this world, without the
expressions of his high indignation against it.

And in way of true wisdom of civil polity these four things must be
considered of.

1. How far treaties may be advantageous to the adversaries. We read Dan. 8.
25. that through peace many should be destroyed. Under the name of peace, there
may be fomented the most bloody, cruel war that ever England has known: Many
people when they hear of the word Peace, they are so pleased that they run away
with that, not knowing what bloody cruel designs may lie under it, and be
promoted by it, and they think that if some follow not the treaty presently,
though upon never so great disadvantage, it is because they are bloody and love
war; whereas in truth it is that they might prevent cruel bloodshed, and the
outragiousnesse of war as much as in them lies, which they see in all
probability may follow upon giving the aversary that advantage he desires,
though the standers by see not the cunning of it.

2. Great care must be had in the propositions of, and conditions about peace.
We read 1 Samuel 11. 2. when the men of Jabesh Gilead would make a covenant with
Nahash, he told the^ that upon this condition he would make a covenant with
them, that he might thrust out all their right eyes, and lay it for a reproach
upon all Israel.

3. You must be sure you make such a peace as you may confide in it, so as you
may not be afterward at the mercy of your adversaries, whether they will keep
the conditions yea or no: you must take heed of disinabling your selves, to
maintain what your conditions of agreement bind to, especially if you have to
deal with Papists, whose principle is, that no faith is to be kept with
Heretics, and for the Catholic cause leagues may be broke; if your peace
hinder your strength to maintain your right, what security can you have in your
peace one month?

4. As things now stand great care had need be taken that the hearts of
people who have shown themselves forward, venturing their lives, exhausting
their estates, may not be discouraged, lest if Parliamennts ever need the
people again, they never find them appear for them, stick to them; and cases
may fall out that there may be need of the peoples standing by them hereafter
as well as now, or else their privileges may soon vanish, and their power be
over-powred, and so come to nothing. We know how soon authority is contemned,
where power is not joined with authority.

But do not our adversaries grow stronger then we? Ob.
if so, it is in vain for us to oppose.

It is impossible to conceive they should, except Ans.
the Kingdom be so besotted, as never yet any Kingdom was upon the face of
the earth. For

1. How can men of understanding, who have estates in the Kingdom, and have
posterity to live here, imagine that the Kingdom should be better governed by
the King, with those Cavalliers about him, then by the King with his Parliament?

2. If the Parliament should now be over-powred and spoiled because they have
gone according to their consciences for the good of the Kingdom, must not all
Parliaments hereafter lie at mercy?

3. If these men prevail, is there not danger lest things should be carried as
they please? if they get power into their hands, who knows but that they will
presume to give Laws to us, that things shall be done according to their minds
rather then the Kings? does not the King forbid plunderings now, and yet do
they not plunder as they please? if then they get power into their hands fully,
what will not they do then?

These things being so obvious to every man's thoughts, that one can hardly be
a man to understand any thing, but he must needs think of those things; how
then is it possible that the Kingdom should not generally rise with a spirit
of indignation against these men, who are thus risen up to make such spoil and
waste in the Kingdom? Although they do not yet stir in many places, hoping
there may be some help of these things some other way; but if they see there be
no other help, it cannot be conceived but this spirit of indignation must rise
through out the Kingdom; men will never suffer themselves to be baffled out of
their Religion, their liberties, their estates on this fashion; They will never
so unworthily desert those whom they have chosen, and betrusted with their
estates, liberties and lives, those who have been so faithful to them,
spending their strength in their indefatigable labors night and day, wasting
their estates, and hazarding their lives for them; wherefore it cannot be
imagined that the adversaries should ever gather more strength then we.

2. Suppose they could be more in number; yet considering how vile and wicked,
what notorious blasphemers and cursers they are, they are not much to be
feared. Plutarch reports of one Cyneas, Plutarch in the life of Pyrrus.
discoursing of the opinions of the Epicurians, that they thought the gods
took no care of, had no regard of men's doings, and that the only happiness
was to live in pleasure, for so the gods themselves did: Fabritius hearing
this, cried aloud, and said, The gods grant that Pyrrus and the Samnites were
of such opinions, as long as they have wars against us: Supposing that if they
were thus, and had such vile opinions of the gods, they could never prosper to
do any great matter. We dare not say thus of our adversaries, God grant that
they continue thus vile and blasphemous as they are: No, we pray if it be
possible that they may see how they fight against God, that their hearts may be
changed; but yet we are of this belief, that Fabritius was of, that whilst
they are so wicked, and speak so vilely of God, and blaspheme his name so as
they do, that they are not much to be feared, they will never be able to do
any great matters, the wrath of the Almighty will pursue them.

3. And lastly, if they should get more in number, yet if our cause be Christ's,
(which is clear to us, for our consciences tell us we desire not, we endeavor
not the wrong of any man living, much less of our King) we then have Christ
with us; And as Antigonus once said to his soldiers, when they said that their
enemies were more in number, Why how many do you reckon me for? So I may say
in this case, How many do you reckon Jesus Christ for? If he be not with us,
let us lay down all presently.

Well, but we are sure for the present there is a woeful disturbance in the
Kingdom, and men's estates are consumed in the extreme charge of these Wars, and
Ob.
what shall we think will become of things at last?

It is true, when a bone is out of joint, there is much pain; but if the care
be not of setting it right, the very Ans.
setting will breed much more pain: There is much disturbance, but it is only
the breaking out of what has layn in the plots and secret workings of our
adversaries a long time. It was once the speech of Lysonder, that if the Lions
skin will not serve, we must Plutarch. vita Lysandri.
help it with the Foxes; Contrary now it is with our adversaries; The Foxes
would not do the deed, and therefore now they put on the Lions. It is well for
us that things break out, when there may be help to resist; our condition was
as dangerous, though not so troublesome before; now our disturbance is but the
noise of resisting, a deluge of evil that was flowing in upon us: That man
certainly is not a wise man that is not willing the floods coming in upon him
should not be stopped, because the stopping of them will make a noise.

2. But consider wisely who have bin the cause of this disturbance;
Puritanicall Preachers are cried out of: So Elijah was said to be the troubler
of Israel: Amos was said 1 Reg. 18. 17. Amos 7. 10 Act. 24. 5. Act. 17. 6.
to speak such words, as the Land could not bear: Paul was accounted a
pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition: They cried out of the Apostles, that
they turned the world upside down. Luther in his time was called Tuba
Rebellionis, the very trumpet of rebellion. But if men will not shut their eyes,
and stop their ears, they cannot but know the cause of our disturbance has
been the pride and cruelty of Prelates, forcing illegal things both upon our
brethren in Scotland, and upon us; Is it not as clear as the Sun, that the
disturbance began with their imposition of their own Service Book upon them?
Have not they and their Preachers sought to infuse such principles into Kings,
that all is theirs, to dispose on as they please, That they are bound to no
Laws? A doctrine condemned by the Heathens. We read of Trajan the Emperor,
when he ordained any Praetor, giving him the sword, he would bid him use the
sword against his enemies, in just causes; and if he himself did otherwise
then Justice, to use then his power against him also.

And as Ministers, so people that have been most conscientious, they have been
cried out of as disturbers: Thus it was in the Primitive times, if there were
any evils upon the Countries where the Christians dwelt, they cried out of them
as the cause of all, the voice presently was, Christianos ad Leones, bring
forth the Christians to the Lions: so now, the Roundheads the cause of all. Men
that will examine things, and are not mad with malice, wonder how such an
apprehension can arise; They suffer the wrong, and yet they are accused for the
trouble of the Kingdom; by reason of their sufferings they are more in the view
of people then other men; and therefore when men are in a rage, they fall upon
them that are next hand. They indeed will not yield to such illegal things as
others will; they think themselves bound what lies in them to keep the Kingdom
and their posterities from slavery; and for this good service, although it cost
them dear, they must be accounted the cause of all the evil in the Kingdom.
Did they ever plot any Treason, as Papists have done from time to time? Did
they even in times of Popery ever seek to blow up Parliament houses, as Papists
have done? There is a great deal of stir about these men, but what have they
done? the very foundations of this our Land are out of course; but what have
the righteous done? So far as they can they yield active obedience to what Law
requires of them, and in what they cannot yield active, they yield passive, and
what can man require more of them? Only they will not yield to men's wills and
lusts beyond that authority they have over them, and who will that has the
spirit of a man in him?

But these are not friends to the King.

Surely those who obey so far, cannot without extreme malice be accounted
enemies to the King; They pray more for the King, then any people do: yea they
do more for him and his, in a right way then any people do. Who have ventured
so much of their estates to reduce Ireland to the obedience of the King, as
those that are thus called Roundheads? Will it not be found that some few of
these in the City of London have disbursed more of their estates for the Kings
service in this thing, to keep this his lawful inheritance in his possession,
and for his posterity, then all those thousands that are now with the King in
his Army? And heretofore, who were the men that were most free with their
estates to assist the Parl and to have recovered the Palatinate, but these
kind of men? Howsoever now God sees, and the world sees they are ill requited
at this day.

No, no, God, and we hope in time, Man also will find our other troublers of
the Kingdom rather then these. The Lord judge between us and our adversaries in
this thing.

As for the great cost and charge the Kingdom is at,

1. We must know those who have done least in this kind, complain most; those
upon whom the weight and burden of the work has layn, you hear not to make
such complaints of the charge.

2. Better venture half then lose all. In this thing that saying is true,
Dimidium plus toto: If we be too sparing now, it is the only way to lose all:
it is better to have but a piece sure, then by venturing to keep all, to lose
all. If we will keep all, we may soon lose all, as many have done; they have
kept their estates for the spoilers. Yea we were better to have less, as our
own with freedom, then more with bondage at the wills of others.

Times of extreme danger are no times of complaining of charges; If a man's
house be on fire, were it not absurd for him to cry out against breaking of the
tiles, because it will put him to charges? There is a story of a man who in
discontent hanged himself, and his servant coming into the room at that
instant, seeing his master hanging, he presently cuts down the rope, and so
saves his life: afterward this man being extremely covetous, wrangles with his
servant because he would rather cut the rope then untye it, and so put him to
more charges: Does not all lie at the stake? is not the very life of the
Kingdom in danger? is it not time for us now to have our hearts raised above
these things? Let us take heed our covetousness be not our undoing; and if our
enemies find treasure with us, then how justly may they mock and jeere us?

When Constantinople was taken, in the year 1453. it appears by the Turkish
History that it was lost through the Citizens covetousness; The Citizens were
full of gold and silver when it was taken, but would not pay the soldiers that
should have defended them, and so their enemies made merry with their riches.
The like is reported of Heydelburgh, taken by their enemies not many years
since, upon the like ground.

God has been beforehand with us in many mercies, and he has yet more rich
and glorious mercies for us, that surely will pay for all at last over and over
again. We are unworthy of our liberties, unworthy of the Gospel, if we prize
them at so low a rate, as if they were not transcendently above all the costs
we have been at, or are like to be at.

We think these charges much, but there is not one year wherein our neighbors
in the Low Countries are not at far more charge then we have been at this
chargeable year; all our extraordinary charges are below their ordinary.

But although there is nothing can be said, but God Object.
allows of these wars, yet were it not better in prudence that I be not seen in
them? for if I be, if the other party prevails I am undone; if I be not, yea,
although I should do something for that party, yet the Parliament will never do
me any great hurt.

It is true, the lenity of the Parliament on the one side, and the cruelty of
the other party on the other Answ.
side, has been a great prejudice to the one, and advantage to the other: How
many delinquents that have been complained of, and brought up with great charge
to the country, yet have gone away insulting? but whosoever comes under the
power of the other, either must yield, or is undone; yea, it may be undone,
though then he yeeldes. What blood has been of late shed by them, even in
cool blood? But how unreasonable is this so to reason, The Parliament is more
just and gentle, the other more cruel and mischievous, therefore I will leave
the Parliament to sink for any help it shall have from me, and join my self
with the other party. God will judge these evil thoughts of yours, and yet you
may be mistaken, in this your device to save your estate, you may prove false
to the Parliament, and yet your estates not so safe as you think; it may
befall you as it has done others, that when these plunderers come to you, if
you tell them you are for the King, you are no Roundhead, then they reason
thus with you, If you be indeed for the King, you will be willing to have your
estates go to be helpefull to him, and so they may reason you out of all you
have, and so you may be deceived of what you aimed at, by discovering your
selves not to be Roundheads. Whatsoever you be, yet if they prevail your
goods will be found to be Roundheads. They are a little fair mannered now and
then as yet, because they have not the day; but if once the day be theirs, and
they have power in their hands; then they will call your goods by what name
they please. Platina tells us, that when the citizens of Papia in Italy were at
dissension by reason of the faction between the Guelphes and the Gibellines:
The Gibellines procured a favourer of theirs called Facinus Cajus to assist
them, covenanting that he should have the goods of the Guelphes for his
labor; but he being once come into the City and prevailing, he spared the
goods of neither of them: whereupon the Gibellines complained, saying, that
their goods also were spoiled; he answered them that they themselves were
Gibellines, but their goods were Guelphes. You may perhaps be Royalists, but
your goods will be Roundheads.

Job 27. 8. What hope has an hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes
away his soul? If men by hypocritical devises should gain as they desire,
yet when God takes away their souls, what good have they then? But how
miserable then will it be for them, when God curses them for the present, and
when their souls are taken away at last? what hope can they have then? It is
just that the curse of God should pursue them, who will be of any side for
their own advantage.

To. Hoved. fo. 438. reports of Brabantes called Rutters, that they would serve
on any side for wages; therefore they are called by Hoveden, Nefando gens, and
he says they were accursed in the Lateran Council.

Whereupon the conclusion from all is, There is nothing required of you in this
service by both Houses of Parliament, but what you may with a good conscience
undertake, by Commission from this great General The Lord of Hosts. Be not
therefore daunted with such words as those, What? will you fight against the
King? If you fight against the King, who do you fight for? surely it must be
for his enemies? and who are they? You know, and all the world may know you
fight for none but the Parliament and the Kingdom; what shall the Parliament
and the Kingdom be accounted enemies to the King? how can they be under his
protection if they be his enemies? and if the King should put them out of his
protection, what do you think would follow upon this? No certainly, when
things come to be examined, you see there is no such matter: No, this business
is for no hurt to the King. Those men who go up and down pillaging and
plundring, and doing mischief to all extremity wheresoever they come, who make
a spoil of this Kingdom, and that of Ireland, and all under the name of the
King: These are the men who wrong the King, rendering him to the Subject as if
he were another Maxentius, who reduced the City of Rome into such a condition,
as there was no forest of thieves wherein the lives of Citizens were not more
safe then in their houses. In his Orations he made to his soldiers, no words
were more frequent then these, Fruimini, dissipate, prodigite, Enjoy, riot,
spend. These men do what lies in them to put men upon examining, Whether the
relation between King and people may not possibly be broke? Whether Kingly
power be such an indelible character upon any person, as nothing can ever
possibly put it out? Whether that which is by compact and covenant, do not bind
mutually? Are not they then like to perjudice the King more then any? If there
be any possibity of such thoughts risen in people, what can occasion them
sooner then the doing such open violence, and committing such outrages aganst
the Subjects in all places, and that with boldness and confidence in the name
of the King? If it were as they say, if people did believe these men, it might
cause strange thoughts of heart in them, even such thoughts, as these, How can
we be in a worse condition under any? What, has God tied us, if once a
supreme Governor be acknowledged, that he must ever be acknowledged,
Whatsoever he does against us, even to destroy us? Where does the Scripture say
so? It need be a very clear Scripture that shall tie us to this, to lie down
under such intolerable burdens as these are, to see our ruin, and the ruin
of our wives and chileren before our faces. We must not resist those who have
high power. True, so long as they go according to their power given them, or
as long as they have it, but may they not possibly be discharged of it?
Resisting the Priests is condemned in Scripture; what? can nothing therefore
discharge the Priest of his priestly office, and my acknowledging of his
priestly power? What, did our forefathers so far give all power out of their
hands, as they have not left us so much as the benefit of the Law of Nature to
help our selves withal? What has God made such difference between man and
man, as that one should spoil, and destroy, and do what he list, and whole
Kingdoms should lie down under him and say nothing, and do nothing to help
themselves? Has God made all the world to be under the lusts of twenty or
thirty men? Nature has not made such a difference between one man and
another, we see them to be of the same mould we are of; God has not
revealed from heaven by his Prophets, that this or that family must be so much
above others, rather then other families. That then that now makes the
difference between man and man, is from men setting up this family rather then
another, or this person rather then another; but is it possible to conceive
that any Commonwealth should set up any to their own ruin? Were it that men
kept in due order, or that when the most abominable injustice and violence that
is offered, men did not presume so audaciously to make use of the name of the
King, these reasonings would never be occasioned in men's hearts: woe therefore
to them by whom such dangerous offenses come. The Lord deliver us, and the Lord
deliver His Majesty from these men, and such fearful scandals as they cast
upon him. How dangerous a temptation is this to Princes, to have such an
apprehension infused into them, whatsoever they do, whatsoever spoil of
Kingdoms they make, and violence they offer, they shall still enjoy what they
had, and be acknowledged as they were? That Land is in a sad condition where
these thoughts are applyable to the Prince thereof, and lie boiling in the
hearts of the people. For our parts we desire as long as ever we are able, to
charge only even in our very hearts the actors of all the violence and spoil
amongst us, and our brethren in Ireland, as the Authors of it: and therefore we
judge it is the best service we can do for the King, to deliver him from these
mischievous men, that his throne being established in righteousness, his Crown
may slourish upon him and his posterity.

These things I have spoken out of conscience of my duty to God, and to the
Kingdom, knowing that if some do not open these things as they are able, to
satisfy the ignorant, and doubting, and erroneous consciences of many, they
will he found guilty of betraying themselves, their brethren, their
posterities, their religion and liberties.

Now having endeavored to clear, that what we do, we do by commission from
the Lord of Hosts, the Use 4.
way is clear to fetch soul-staying, supporting, satisfying comfort from this
glorious Name of God. It is not more glorious then comfortable to the Church of
God. Surely we need not fear wars, strength of enemies, roaring of Canons,
clattering of weapons, beating of drums, neighing of horses, so long as God,
our God is the Lord of Hosts.

Now I come to what I promised, to show you this name of God written upon the
Mercy-seat. Xerxes used to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking upon his
Army, when they were in fight, to encourage them. This our great General
stands on high, looking upon his people in their battles, let them look up to
him, and there is encouragement enough to fill any heart in the world. This
Title is an exceeding vast treasury of comfort and encouragement, Deuteronomy. 30. 3,
4. Hear O Israel, you approach this day to battle against your enemies, let
not your hearts faint, fear not, do not tremble, neither be terrified. Observe
the variety of expressions, Faint not, Fear not, Tremble not, Be not
terrified; Why? For the Lord your God is he that goes with you to fight for
you. If so much encouragement merely from Gods going with us to fight for us,
what is there from all those several workings of God in battles, which this
Lord of Hosts is pleased to declare himself in? Psalm. 46. 7. The Lord of Hosts
is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge: and ver. 10. Be still, and know
that I am God, I will be exalted: and again, I will be exalted. Quiet your
hearts in this. If any distracting, sinking, discouraging thoughts arise in
your hearts, still them all with this. And therefore ver. 11. in the next words
he repeats that again, The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge.

Luther was wont in sad tumultuous times to say to those about him, Come, let
us sing the 46. Psalm. It is a Psalm most suitable for these times to be sung
often. Isa 51. 12. Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man? Surely
thou do not know what thy privilege is, thou know not what interest thou
have in the Lord of Hosts, that thou art afraid of a man that must die;
wherefore it follows, v. 15. I am the Lord thy God that divided the sea, The
Lord of Hosts is his Name.

But you will say, Ah! if we knew indeed that the Lord of Hosts were ours, that
he were with us, then we might well comfort our selves in these times of wars,
but that is all the question to us, for want of the assurance of that our
hearts are troubled.

First, Though you do not know certainly that you have any special interest
in him, yet it is a great comfort to know that all things in wars are carried
on by him, yea, though he were a mere stranger to you, and you to him: as
suppose you were sure there should be nothing done in all these stirs about
wars but by the will of the most wise, the most holy, and most merciful man in
the world, that has all the holiness, all the wisdom, all the mercy that all
the men in the world ever had, although this man were a stranger to you, you
never saw his face in your life, yet would it not be a stay and comfort to your
hearts to hear that all things were committed to the dispose of this man, and
not a stroke struck, nor any hurt should come to any, but as this man gave out
his commissions? certainly it would quiet our hearts much: but that all is at
the dispose of this Lord of Hosts is far better, whose holiness, wisdom, and
justice is infinite; although yet we do not know any further of him, we cannot
say we have any special interest in him.

Secondly, Although you do not know your interest in this Lord of Hosts, yet
your hearts may be stayed, yea, comforted in this, that the cause has a deep
interest in the very heart of this Lord of Hosts, and therefore that shall
prosper howsoever. The satisfafaction the soul takes in this is a special
argument of interest in this God.

Thirdly, Yet further I will tell you how you shall know whether you have any
special interest in this Lord of Hosts or not, from that Scripture, Psalm. 84.
3. O Lord of Hosts my King and my God. Here are these two, Lord of Hosts, and
my God. Now all the question is about the Copula, that which joins these two
together: there you have it my King, that is set between them; if then you can
say, O Lord of Hosts my King, you need not stay there, but may confidentlie
go further to the other, my God: If you can out of the uprightness of your
hearts say, O Lord thou know the desires of our Souls are that thou may
rule over us, O when shall we hear that blessed voice, The Kingdoms of the
earth are the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore! O that
thy Kingdom might come more powerfully in our hearts, and that it might be
more conspicuous in Church and State! The special reason (thou know) why we
are willing to venture our selves as we do, to endure any hardship, to part
with our estates, is that Antichrist may never rule amongst us again, but that
we and our posterity may be under the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Surely this is
the voice of those who have the Lord of Hosts to be their God. That is an
everlasting rule, If he be thy King, he is thy God.

Now then for the full comfort and encouragement the Church of God may take
from this glorious name, Consider the Relation that the Church has to this
Lord of Hosts, and the Relation this Lord of Hosts has to the Church.

For the first. 1. The Church is the City of the Lord of Hosts, it is not
only Gods City, but his City, under this Title, Psalm. 48. 8. As we have
heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts; We may comfortablie
say, This City of London is the City of the Lord of Hosts. God has precious
Saints here, abundance of them, and it has done worthily for the honor of
the Lord of Hosts of late, and therefore surely the Lord of Hosts will defend
it. If there be any City under heaven that may be called The City of the
Lord of Hosts, then I am confident the City of London may. But we are to take
here the City in a spiritual sense for the Church of God, as it is usual in
Scripture. Now we know when an Army has to do with a City that is in the
inheritance of the General, then if there be any power in General or Army, it
will be all put forth to the utmost, either for the defense, or gaining that
City: As the City of Breda in the Low Countries, when that was besieged, it was
soon won by the Army of the Prince of Orange, because that City was the Princes
own City, his proper inheritance; he had a special eye and care over that
City. Surely the eye and care of this Lord of Hosts, though it be over Towns
and Countries, and walled Cities, yet it is most over his Church; if he has
any power in all the Armies in heaven and earth, it shall be put forth for the
defense of, and supplying good unto this City. Hence that passage in the prayer
of Solomon, 1 King. 8 44. If thy people go to battle, and shall pray to the
Lord toward the City which thou have chosen, then hear in heaven. Jerusalem
was the City God then chose, which was but a type of every Church in the time
of the Gospel.

2. The Church is the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts. Esaias For the Vineyard of
the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel. Certainly God will not suffer the
wild beasts and boares of the field to devour and lay waste his Vineyard. A
General will be very careful in keeping enemies out of fruitful Countries,
but especially our of his own Vineyard. We read 1 Kin. 21. 2, 3. how loath
Naboth was to part with his Vineyard, though King Ahab was sick for it, yet God
forbid that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee. Gods
Vineyard is beloved of him and deer to him. Esa. 27. 3. I the Lord keep it, I
will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

3. It is the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts. Zac. 8. 3. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, I was jealous for Sion with great jealousy, I was jealous for her with
great fury, He gives the reason in the latter end of the 3. ver. Jerusalem
shall be called the City of truth, and the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the
holy Mountain. As if the Lord should say, What? are they come to hurt my
Mountain, my holy Mountain, my Church? Fury rises up in the face of God
presently. Yea, Esa. 31. 4. When the Lord comes to fight for mount Sion, he
comes forth as the young Lion roaring on his prey, so shall the Lord of Hosts
come down to fight for Mount Sion. God will leave heaven to fight for his
Church; will not you leave your shops and your houses?

4 The Church is the house of the Lord of Hosts. Hag. 1. 14. The Text says,
They did work in the house of the Lord of Hosts. which typified Gods Church. A
General will fight to maintain his own house, it were a sign the enemy had
prevailed indeed, if he should come and plunder the Generals own house. In
regard of this that is said of the Church to be Gods House, we have that
expression, Psalm. 24. 9, 10. Lift up your heads O ye Gates, even lift them up
ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Who is the King of
glory? The Lord of Hosts he is the King of glory. You know when a Prince comes
to his own house, the great gates are set open; when other men come thither,
they come in at the wicket, at some less door; but when he comes himself,
then all is set wide open.

5. The Church is the place of the name of the Lord of Hosts, Isay 18. 7. To
the place of the name of the Lord of Hosts, Mount Sion; now Gods name is dear
and precious to him. It is a great privilege God grants to his Church, that it
is the place he chooses to set his name there, Exodus 20. 24. Nehem. 1. 9. As
God would have us highly to esteem that place, to seek after that place, as
Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Unto the place where God shall choose to put his name, there shall
ye seek, and thither shall thou come, and thither shall you bring your burnt
Offerings and Sacrifices, etc. -- So surely God himself puts a high price upon
that place, and he will preserve it.

6. The Church is the place of the glorious reign of Isa. 24. 23. The Moon
shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in
Mount Sion and in Jerusalem before his Elders gloriously. God has yet a
further and more glorious Kingdom to be set up in his Church then ever has
been, at which all the glory of the world shall be darkened by reason of the
brightness of this glory, and it is the Lord of Hosts that shall thus reign.
Surely then all the Hosts shall have their strength put forth in defense of,
and providing for this place of this glorious reign of their great General.

7. The Church is the people of the Lord of Hosts, Zep. 2. 10, 11. This shall
they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified
themselves against the people of the Lord of Hosts. The Lord will be terrible
unto them. They in their pride lift up themselves, and magnify themselves
against the Saints, as if they were a company of silly weak men, they do not
know that they are the people of the Lord of Hosts, therefore God threatens
there that he will be terrible unto them.

And thus you have the Relation of the Church to God, revealing himself in
this name, The Lord of Hosts, yet mark further, the Relation that God has to
them in this his name: As

1. The Lord of Hosts is the portion of his Church, Jer. 10. 16. The portion of
Jacob is not like them, he is the former of all things, The Lord of Hosts is
his name. Wherefore if there be any thing in The Lord of Hosts, that can do
them good, they may challenge it, for God The Lord of Hosts, is their portion,
they may make use of all that is in him for their good.

2. Hs is their Redeemer: That you have in the Text, Our Redeemer, The Lord of
Hosts is his name. The The Lord of Hosts, and one you may certainly confide in,
for he is The holy One of Israel.

3. He is the pleader, yea the through pleader of the cause of his people. Jer.
50. 34. Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his name, he shall
thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet
the inhabitants of Babylon. God has begun to plead the cause of his people
already, and he has shown himself The Lord of Hosts in it, but he has not
yet thoroughly pleaded their cause as he means to do; when he shall do that,
he will then give rest to the Land, and disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon.
This work will cost the inhabitants of Babylon dear; they were never so
disquieted amongst us as they are at this day. They have troubled the Saints,
and God now troubles them, but will yet disquiet them more; although they
think to defend themselves by gathering Armies, yet the Lord of Hosts shall
disquiet them, and give rest to his people: There remains yet a rest for the
people of God, even in this world.

4. The Lord of Hosts is the Husband of his Esa. 54. 4, 5, 6. Fear not, etc.
For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name. The Lord has
called thee as a woman forsaken, grieved in spirit, when thou wast refused,
says thy God. Alas, says the Church, I am a poor desolate widow, a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit, every one neglects me, I am rejected of all.
Well, says God, I took thee when thou were thus forsaken to be my Spouse, I
have married thee to my self, therefore now fear not, I am the Lord of Hosts,
the God of the whole earth. Surely a General if he has the heart of a man in
him, he will fight for his Spouse, he will not suffer his Spouse to be ravished
before his eyes. What says Ahasuerus concerning Haman, Will he force the Queen
before my face? Vile men are risen up, and they seek to ravish the Church, the
Spouse of the Lord of Hosts, and do you think he will suffer this before his
face? Shall not all the Armies in heaven and earth rather come together, and
fight for her deliverance?

Now then if all these things be thus, we have cause then to quiet our hearts
in the midst of all our fears and distractions, to stand still, and see the
salvation of God, the salvation that this Lord of Hosts is working for us. This
is the business that I have been endeavoring, to enlarge before you the
object of your faith, and to lessen the object of your fear. Surely if the
Lord of Hosts has such a relation to his Church, and the Church such a
relation to him, he cannot but be exceedingly provoked against any that shall
meddle with his Church to do it hurt. I will give you one notable expression
of his anger against such, Esa. 3. 15. What mean ye that ye beat my people to
pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? says the Lord of Hosts. God here
speaks angerly, What am I the Lord of Hosts, and will you offer this? What mean
you? As when we fly upon a man in anger, (whom we see does things to our
prejudice, or the prejudice of any near to us, in an absurd manner) we say, What
do you mean to do thus? what are you mad* Do you know what you do? Do you
know who they are you thus abuse?

From all these gracious expressions of this Lord of Hosts to the comfort and
encouragement of his people, the result is that in the 8. of Esaias 12, 13. Say
not, A confederacy to them that say, A confederacy; oh! many of their forces
are joined together; fear not their fear, but sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. The Name of God
is a strong Antidote to drive fear out of the hearts of the weakest. Upon what
we have seen in this title of God, we may well say to the fearful in heart, be
strong, fear not, as we have it Isa. 35. 4. Let women and all such as are
naturally fearful, take heed of sinful fear. The fearfulness of women
hanging about their Husbands, and children, and friends, crying out when they
should go forth in this service, and going up and down wringing their hands,
and making doleful outcries, may do abundance of hurt, exceedingly hinder the
work that the Lord has now in hand. Let women take heed they be not
hindrances, but let them learn to exercise faith and take spirit to
themselves, that they may further their Husbands, children, and friends in this
work of the Lord of Hosts. Mark that Scripture, 1 Pet. 3. 6. Ye are the
daughters of Sarah so long as you do well, and be not afraid with any
amazement. Ye would all willingly be accounted the daughters of Sarah. Observe
how the holy Ghost puts it upon this, that you be not afraid with any
amazement: it may be nature may cause some fear, but grace must keep it that
it be not with any amazement.

Why is it thus put upon this?

As Abraham is most commended for his faith, and so by believing we are the
children of Abraham, so it seems Sarah his wife in those difficulties that
Abrabam went through, she was no hinderance but a furtherance to him, she did
not cry out to him, Why will you leave your fathers house, and all your
kindred, and go up and down in a strange country in the midst of dangers and
many straits? no, but she rather was a help to him, and an encourager of him:
so says Peter, who speaking to Christians who lived in troublesome and
dangerous times, You shall show your selves the daughters of Sarah, if you have
such a spirit as Sarah had, not to be afraid with any amazement, not through
your inordinate fear, either hinder your selves, your husbands, or any other
in the service of the Lord. If God call you or them to suffer, you must not
through fear pull back, but go on with courage undauntedly, then you are
indeed the daughters of Sarah.

And that a spirit may be put even into women in these times that call for all
to be above sinful fears, let them consider these three things.

First, The first time that ever any speaking to God the Lord of Hosts, it was
a woman, and that was Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 11. She vowed a vow, and said, O Lord
of Hosts if thou will indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, etc.

Secondly, One of the principallest Psalms wherein this title of the Lord of
Hosts is most magnified, is a Psalm tuned to that Musical instrument that
virgins and women use to play on, from whence the Psalm has its title, A Song
upon Alamoth, Ps. 46. Which is as much as A song upon the Virginals: for the
Hebrew word comes of a root that signifies to hide, and so we formerly made use
of it: but from thence because Virgins used to be covered and hidden, hence
Gnalamoth signifies Virgins, and here used for the musical instrument of
Virgins. Virgins and Women it seems had wont to sing this Psalm. and play to it
upon the instrument. Now it is supposed that their hearts should be some way
suitable to what they sung and played, and here they rejoycingly sing, The Lord
of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, ver. 7: And again, The
Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, ver. 11. besides
other passages, yea almost all the same tending this way.

3. The most brave expression of a strong, valiant spirit, triumphing over
enemies in time of battle, is Jud. 5. 21. it is the speech of Deborah, O my
soul, thou have trodden down strength. As if she should have said, They come
with a great deal of strength, that they think to prevail with, but to me all
their strength is but as the dirt in the streets, my soul is above it; though
my body be weak, yet O my soul, thou have trodden down strength. Where have we a
braver expression of a more raised spirit either in Scripture amongst any of
the Lords valiant ones, or in humane story amongst any of the great Captains
and Conquerours that ever were? I cannot but repeat it again, O my soul, thou
have trodden down strength. Let not women then so complain of their weakness, as
thereby to think to excuse their sinful fears. I will give you a notable
speech coming near this from another woman that Ecclesiastical story records
of, one Julitta; there are many famous things recorded of her, but this speech
of hers to other women of her acquaintance is most remarkable, Cease to accuse
(says she) the fragility of the Foeminine sex, What? are not we made of the
same matter that men are? Yea after Gods Image are we made as well as they. God
did not use flesh to make women of, in token of infirmity: We are bone of his
bone, in token we must be strong in the living God. If the spirit of The Lord
of Hosts were with you, even you may daunt your enemies. You may make such
preparations for your own defense, as not to let your lives go at a cheap rate,
but that the loss of every one of yours may cost the life of one of them at
least. Even you may cast shame upon them. If there were such a spirit in you,
they would fly before women, for their spirits are base and vile.

If God be the Lord of Hosts, if he has such wonderful workings of his
providence in wars and battles Use 6.
, hence in all war and battles there is some special thing of God to be looked
at. Surely this great Lord of Hosts does not use to raise War, to go into the
field for nothing; there is some great thing aimed at, especially where he
appears in more then an ordinary way; as certainly he does in these wars of
ours.

We should not hearken after or speak of Wars only as matter of news, but
observe what the way of God is in them, what his aim looks to in ordering of
them, what his intentions work at, how he brings his own ends to pass, and
furthers his glory by them. Whosoever lives to see the issue of these great
stirs and warlike commotions amongst us, shall see that God had a hand in them
to bring great things to pass, that the mercy he intended for us was worth all
the trouble these have brought upon us, yea all the blood, the most precious
blood that has been shed amongst us. God has many promises to his Churches to
accomplish, many Prophecies to fulfill, many glorious things to declare, many
mercies for his Saints to bestow, and these stirs amongst us will make way for
all.

We have had much mercy from God on free-cost; that mercy that is to come, it
may be is of an higher nature; therefore God intends it shall be more costly to
us, it may cost many of our lives; but we or our posterity shall see that when
it comes it will pay for all. That this Lord of Hosts had great thoughts of
heart for the good of England when he raised these Civil wars amongst us,
though it be the sorest judgment, yet it may make way to the greatest mercy.
It is our duty diligently to observe how God works in his Providence to the
attaining such ends of his.

6. God is The Lord of Hosts. Hence know from whence it is that we have enjoyed
so much peace as The Lord of Hosts, who has all power in his hands, to keep
off or bring war as he pleases. It it is he alone that has kept off from us
those hideous things others have suffered; it is from him that we have not all
this while wallowed, not sweltred in our blood; that our garments have not been
rolled in blood, as our brethrens have; but we have enjoyed our houses, beds,
tables, wives, children; we have had all comforts for soul and body about us.
Micah 4. 4. They shall sit every man under his vine, and under his figtree, and
none shall make them afraid. From whence is this? The words following will tell
you, The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. The Vines and Figtrees we
have sat under, have not been empty Vines, nor barren Fig Trees to us; we
have not only had refreshment from the shadow of them, but much comfort from
the fruit of them. It was this Lord that promised to Israel that he would cause
their enemies not to desire their land, when they went up to Jerusalem to
worship. What a mercy is it for us to be as Gedeons sleece, dry, when all about
us have been wet, not with dew, but with blood? These beginnings of wars tell
many Countries and Shires in England, what a blessing peace was, which they
never understood before. Peace is sweet and good, but let us take heed we buy
not our peace too dear.

7. This name of God shows us how nearly it concerns all people in times of
wars, to seek to make up Esaias 22. 11, 12, etc. Ye made a ditch also between
the two walls for the water of the old poole, but ye have not looked to the
maker thereof. It follows, And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and behold, joy, gladness, killing oxen, drinking
wine. This was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this
iniquity shall not be purged till you dye, says the Lord of Hosts. Mark, three
times in that verse is mention made of The Lord of Hosts. He takes special
notice of this. And the rather should we get our hearts afflicted and humbled
under the mighty hand of this God, because our adversaries are so proud,
because of that high hand of pride and blasphemy that they go forth withal
against God. There is no such stratagem of war like this to get the advantage
of our adversaries, in this very thing. Do we hear of their pride and
blasphemies? let our hearts be the more humble before the Lord; let us labor
so much the more to sanctify the Name of this holy God, whose name the Angels
celebrate, as Holy, holy, holy, the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 6. 3.

With our Humiliations, let Reformation, turning to this God be added. It must
needs be a dangerous thing in times of wars, to carry with us, or harbor
amongst us any Traitors against this Lord of Hosts, as the truth is all sins
that we retain are. What acceptance can we then expect from him, or success
by him? You know what trouble the accursed thing of Achan caused in the Camp;
it made the Children of Israel fly before the men of Ai. If any accursed thing
(though secret) be such a disturbance in the Camp, much more accursed Officers.

Hos. 12. 5, 6. Even the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his memorial,
therefore turn thou to thy God.

Zach. 1. 3. Say to them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye unto me, says
the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. Here we
have also this name of God three times, as a provocation to us to return unto
him. Let us all know, and especially those who are in service in the Army, the
great General, the Lord of Hosts calls to us, he calls to you to return to him,
and promises to return to us, to return to you. As if he should say, You have
been very vile and wicked, your consciences cannot but tell you so, and I know
it; yet return now to me, and I profess my self notwithstanding all that you
have done, I am here ready and willing to return to you, all shall be
forgiven, as if it had never been committed. Surely there is no such valor, as
in a spirit cleared from the guilt and filth of sin.

8. This name of God shows us our duty to seek him much by Prayer in times of
war, and to depend upon him wholly for success in it, for he is the Lord of
Hosts.

For the first. Where should we seek for light, but in the Sun? where for
water, but in the rivers? where for heat, but in the fire? where for valor and
victory, but in the Lord of Hosts? The Heathens were wont to offer their
Sacrifices to God in times of War. Hence a Sacrifice has the name Hostia,
because when they went against enemies, they offered it. Saul thought it a very
hard thing to go forth to War, not having offered Sacrifice before. 1 Samuel 13.
12. Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and
I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced my self therefore and
offered a burnt offering. When Jehosaphat heard of an Army coming out against
him, before he would go out to battle, he set himself to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. He gave his whole self, so Totum se contulit.
the words are.

Moses his hands lift up in Prayer, and Joshuahs stretched forth in the battle,
makes a victorious army: Our Prayers are our Guns, says Luther. Prayer has
done mighty things in battles. The praying Christians Preces nostrae, bombardae
nostra.
in Marcus Aurelius his Army, were called The thundering Legion. Sozomen and
Nicephorus tell us that Theodosius by Prayer made the weapons of enemies turn
upon themselves. I am sure it has done as great things. One of the strangest
victories that ever was heard of, was that we have recorded Numb. 31. 8. They
slew five Kings of Midian, they slew all the males, and all the women that had
known man, and burnt all their Cities, and took booty six hundred thousand, and
seventy and five thousand sheep, and threescore and twelve thousand beeves, and
threescore and one thousand Asses, and thirty and two thousand women that had
not known man, ver. 32, 33, 34, 35. Now here was the wonder of this battle,
that in all this great victory the Children of Israel lost not one man, for so
says the Text plainly, ver. 49. Thy servants have taken the sum of the men
of war which are under our charge, and there lacks not one man of us. And
mark what was done when they went forth to this battle, ver. 6. The holy
instruments and the trumpets sounded in the hands of Eleazar the Priest. It was
an ordinance of God amongst them, that the Priests should sound with the silver
trumpets, when they wentforth to battle, Numb. 10. 9. Which was observed here,
and see what a victory was obtained. An Army of prayers is as strong as any
Army of men whatsoever; yea one man praying may do more then many men fighting.
Elisha has his sword to slay, as well as Jehu and Hazael. 1 King. 19. 15, 16,
17. when Elijah thought there was no help, Yes, says God, Go and anoint
Hazael, and Jehu, and Elisha. As if he should say, I have Armies in the field,
he that escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay; he that escapes the sword
of Jehu, shall Elisha slay. How should Elisha slay, but by his prayers? they
will reach and cut down a great way off. That Scripture is very observable,
Psalm. 76. 2, 3. In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in
Sion, there brake he the arrows of the how, the shield and the sword and the
battle. Where brake he them? there in Salem, in Sion, where his Tabernacle was,
in the congregation of Saints praying, there the arrow of the bow, the shield
and the spear is broken. It is reported of the King of Sweden, that as soon
as he set foot in Germany, he fell down to prayer to this Lord of Hosts, and
what great things did he in a little time? In this Gods servants have the
advantage of their adversaries, they can pray to the Lord of Hosts, the other
cannot: They can blaspheme, but pray they cannot. In this they have always the
advantage of the hill, and the wind of their enemies, and this is a great
encouragement in battle. It puts heart mightily into Soldiers that know any
thing of God, to think that they go forth with the blessing of prayers with
them, and that they have prayers continually sent up to heaven for them. At
that great fight near Banbury, October 23. when many ranaway, those that were
left fell on with courage, and gave a mighty shout, Now for the fruit of
prayer, Now for the fruit of prayer, and so their spirits were raised to more
then an ordinary height, and they prevailed mightily, slaying near ten to one.

Wherefore then let us be encouraged to pray; let us strive with God in Prayer,
while our brethren are striving with the enemy in battle. They venture their
lives for us, and endure great hardship; shall not we pray? Yea let us put on
now with more earnestness, not content our selves in our ordinary way. Great
workings there are of God in the world, great things depend upon the success
of these wars. He is an unworthy member of Church or Commonwealth, who has
not an heart to pray now. Now we have need of praying Christians indeed. Every
fool can sin, and provoke Gods wrath; but men and women of choice spirits
only can pray, such as have interest in this Lord of Hosts. It is observable
in Solomon's Prayer, 1 King. 8. three or four times he prays against enemies,
and yet he was in peace; his time was a time of peace. If then, much more now,
when we have such raging enemies in our own bowels.

And as we must pray, so we must trust; we must rely upon this Lord of hosts
in all our Warlike undertakings. Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in horses, some in
Chariots, but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God; He is our
strength, our fortitude, our shield, our buckler: Cursed be the man that makes
flesh his arm. Our adversaries come out to us with Sword and Canon; but
(though means are to be used, yet) let us go forth against them in the name of
the Lord of Hosts. 1 Chronicles. 5. 18. We read of the sons of Reuben, the
Gadites, half tribe of Manasses, that they were valiant men, skillful in War,
and that there went out of them forty four thousand seven hundred and sixty:
here a complete Army of skillful Warriors, yet they rusted not to their
strength or skill, but ver. 20. They cried unto the Lord, and he was entreated
of them because they trusted in him. There must be depending upon God added to
crying unto God; we must so cry to God as to make account here is good to be
done, here is our strength and help when all is done. It was a notable speech
that Josephus reports Herod made to his Soldiers, it came from the mouth of a
Herod, but it well beseem the mouth of the most godly Christian Captain, Some
may say, says he, our cause is just, but we are few and weak; where truth and
justice is, there is God, and where God is, there wants neither multitude nor
fortitude. It was an observation of Origin, that others since have observed,
that God in all the victories he gave his people to possess them of Canaan, he
never used the help of horses. The adversary had horses and chariots, both the
Egyptian and the Canaanites; but Gods people had none. Well, if our enemies
should exceed in horses, (which yet we hope they shall not) but of that they
boast; yet let us look higher: we may have Canaan, though we should want
horses. After all our endeavors, then must all be referred to this Lord of
Hosts. It was a most brave expression of a valiant Commander of Joab, 2 Samuel
10. 12. Be of good courage, let us play the men for our people and for the
Cities of our God, and the Lord do what seems him good.

From this glorious name of God, we learn how infinitely Use 5.
fit it is that those who have a special interest in this God, who have him to
be their God, their Father, that they should have spirits full of courage, and
fortitude; such a spirit as beseems the servants, much more children of such a
God whose they are, whom they serve. God loves to see the impression of his
spirit upon these who are his. He is a God of wisdom, he loves to see the shine
of his wisdom upon the spirits of his Saints; he is an infinite holy God, he
delights to see the luster of his Holiness glorious upon them. He is the Lord
of Hosts, he loves to see a spirit of valor, a spirit of magnanimity in them.
What Captain, what Soldier of renown, but delights to see his children and
alliance, those who challenge any interest in him to be valiant? It is reported
of Manlius Torquatus his son, that having by a spirit of valor overthrown the
enemies of the Romans, and killed with his own hands a man of note in single
combat, being full of joy, he seeks out his father who was the General of the
Army, bearing in his hands the spoils of his enemies, and saying aloud: Father
behold the cause why I may be esteemed your son. If we have a spirit of courage
suitable to our Father, we may with more comfort and better acceptance come to
this Lord of Hosts to be acknowledged for his children; but otherwise we shall
be a dishonor to him.

We read of Alexander the Great, who having a Soldier in his Army of his name
that was a coward, he comes to him and bad him either change his name or be
valiant: If Alexander thought it a dishonor to him to have one of his name to
be a coward, he would have thought the dishonor much more if he had had one of
his blood, his own child a coward. What an unworthy thing were it for the son
of such a brave warrior as the K. of Sweden was to be of a low, mean poor,
cowardly spirit? he would be a reproach to his Father, and the very mention of
his Father would be a reproach to him. Christians, do not you profess God to
be your Father? do you not know your Father is the Lord of Hosts? where are
your spirits of magnanimity and fortitude, of courage and valor, beseeming the
children of such a glorious Father the Lord of Hosts? If you be of the right
breed, you must needs be generous; it is impossible but you should have
something of his spirit in you; if you be of low, unworthy, sensual, cowardly
spirits, you are not begotten of him; God has no children but they have some
beam of every excellency of his that such creatures are capable of.

Now this is the question, what have you of the spirit of this great God? The
spirit of the Devil, although it be a proud spirit, yet it is a base cowardly
spirit. If you resist the Devil he will fly from you. The truth is, all the
men in the world have vile spirits, Gods children are men of another spirit.

God breeds up all his children to be Soldiers, there are none in heaven but
were bred Soldiers, and as they grew up were brought up in military
discipline. Many Nations bring up their children to be Soldiers, from their
tender years they discipline them this way: The Parthians bring up their
children in teaching In pacedecus, in bello praesidium.
them the use of the bow, the Scythians in the use of the dart, the Germans in
the use of the spear. All Gods children are here members of the Church
militant, it is fit for them to be skilful, not only in the use of the
spiritual Armor, but of bodily also. Who so fit to be used in the battles of
the Lord, as they who have most interest in the Lord? who so fit to venture his
body to the sword in time of war, as he that can give his body to the fire in
time of peace?

Isay 13. 3. Soldiers whom God chooses for his battails are called his
sanctified ones, an honorable title given to soldiers, Gods sanctified ones,
and who so fit to be Gods sanctified ones, set apart for such services, as
those who are sanctified by his Spirit, set apart for himself eternally? The
valor of that people, the Gauls, was admired by the Romans; it proceeded from
that instruction they had from their Druides, of the immortality of the soul.
Those are fittest to venture their lives in fight, who are able to see beyond
life, to see what is on the other side of the shore of this mortality, even
eternal life and glory: All the Saints, especially in these days, should be
full of spirit, strong in the might of the Lord, because Jesus Christ is about
to pull down that great enemy of his, That man of sin, and in his conquest, he
is said to come with his garments dipped in blood, Apoc. 19.

Now that true spirit that beseemes one who has this Lord of Hosts to be his
Father, is

1. A spirit that scorns to be base, he will not be a Alexander, Pompey,
Themistocles, etc. they were all vassals to their lusts.

And although he be willing to serve men under God, yet he will never be a
slave to their lusts, but will maintain the liberty of a man and a Christian to
himself and posterity.

Philo Judaeus reports of a Heathenish people, who in their wars, used only
this expression to put spirit into their Soldiers, Estote viri, libertas
agitur, be men, your liberty is in question.

But what is this bondage, that the spirit of a Christian Quest.
will not, should not bear?

There is a natural slavery, that as a man, he should Ans.
not, he will not be subject to, that is in these 3. things.

1. To give up his own propriety in what he has, so as whatsoever God and
Nature has given him should not be his own, but wholly at the will of another.

2. Subjection to that government, that he no way either by himself or others
has ever yielded consent unto, neither is bound to by the Law of God in his
word, nor by the Law of Nature.

3. To be in such a condition as that whatsoever service he does, he shall
receive nothing for it by way of justice, but merely out of favor, this is
slavery which an ingenuous spirit cannot bear.

And as a Christian, he will not subject his conscience to any, but reserves
that to do his homage unto God by it.

A spirit of the right breed though it foresees dangers Esther was a speech
that came from a brave spirit, though a woman, If I perish, I perish; but it
was a fruit of fasting and prayer. Ay, that is the way to get a spirit of
courage indeed.

The like we have of the three Children in Daniel, Chap. 3. 16. O
Nebuchadnezar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; Behold, our
God whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of thine hand, O King: But if not,
be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy
golden image which thou have set up. That famous expression of Paul has the
like true Christian valor sparkling in it, when it was prophesyed that he
should be bound at Jerusalem, at which many Act. 21. 13
of the Saints with him fell on weeping, Why do you weep and break my heart?
says Paul: I am not only ready to be bound at Jerusalem, but to dye for the
name of Christ. That expression that is recorded of Ignatius is famous likewise
in this kind; it is in an Epistle of his to the congregation of Trallis, Let
the fire, the gallows, the devouring of wild beasts, the breaking of bones, the
pulling asunder of my members, the bruising or pressing of my whole body, and
the torments of the devil or hell it self come upon me, so that I may win
Christ Jesus. Here was one that had the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts in him. The
like had Luther, when he said, If all the tyles of the houses of the City of
Worms were devils, he would go thither, knowing he was called by God to
witness to the truth there.

This resolutenesse of spirit manifests it self in dangerous times, in a
readiness to join with our brethren in difficult services, wherein there is
much hazard and trouble. A man of a true raised spirit, that has true courage
in it, will not see his brethren in hot services, and let them alone in them to
shift out as well as they can; for his part he is loath to meddle or stir, he
may bring himself into trouble when he needs not, no, he will not, you cannot
bring him to it: To such men it may well be said as Moses to the children of
Gad, and the children of Reuben, Numb. 32. 6. Shall your brethren go to war,
and shall ye sit here? Why shall they encounter with dangers, and suffer hard
things, and you sit still and have your ease? you may have shifts and pretenses
for this, but to you I say this day as Moses to them, ver. 23. If ye will not
join with your brethren, behold ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure
your sin will find you out.

3. A spirit of valor. Such a one as is indeed the spirit of a soldier of
this Lord of Hosts; when hardness, when troubles come, it is able to endure
them. 2 Timothy 2. 3. As a good soldier of Jesus Christ, endure hardness. Many
seem to be resolute before troubles come, but when they come, they cannot bear
them. Romanu^ est fortia pati, a speech of Mutius Scaevola: More true,
Christianum est fortia pati; if part of a Roman to suffer great things, much
more of a Christian. If you be dainty, and cannot suffer, you are not fit to be
a Christian; Nimis delicatus es, says Tertullian, you are too delicate.

The Eagle shows the generousnesse of her spirit, that though she suffers
hunger, she will not make a noise, as other fowls do when they want meat; it is
not for a soldier to complain of cold, of want of a meal or two, of hard
lodging, etc.

From this ability of his spirit to endure hardness, 1. He does not repent of
his engagements of what he has undertaken or done, when he meets with
troubles, and many sore afflictions in his way, as the base spirit of a coward
will do. That Scripture Exo. 13. 17. is very observable for this; God says
there, that he would not lead the people of Israel through the land of the
Philistims, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people
repent them when they see war, and return into Egypt. God saw they were of a
low, mean spirit, though they groaned under the bondage of Egypt, and cried for
deliverance, and God had delivered them with a mighty hand, yet when they met
with any danger, they would begin to repent that ever they came out of Egypt,
and wish themselves there again. And indeed we find in the History of their
being in the Wilderness, that upon every strait they were in, they began to
murmur, and often said, Oh that we were in Egypt again: But what would they
have done then if they had presently met with wars, when the Spies told them of
the children of Anak, that they must fight with? When they were even at the
borders of Canaan, they were disouraged, and were about making themselves a
Captain to return to Egypt: These were men of a poor vile spirit, hence God
swear against them, that none of them should ever come into Canaan, only Caleb
and Joshua, who were men of another spirit, as the holy Ghost testifies of
them, they should go in and possess the land. Thus it is this day with us, how
did we not long ago groan under our bondage? our liberties, our religion, our
estates were almost gone, we scarce knew what was our own; our Ministers were
banished, every man that departed from evil made himself a prey, superstition,
oppression, cruelty prevailed throughout the Land. The whole Kingdom was
filled with complaints, and sighs, and groans, by reason of their cruel
bondage. Vile men were exalted, and men of precious spirits were cast out as
filth. Now when we knew no means of help, but lay down under our burdens, and
were as a Kingdom devoted to misery, then did the Lord appear in a glorious
manner, when he saw there was no man that would stand up and help. Nay such was
the malady, as it seemed even to be past help. The Lords own arm has brought
salvation; never did God more wonderfully appear for a nation, then he has
done for us; strange have the workings of the Lord bin, and behold how great a
deliverance has he wrought, and he has given an opportunity to this Kingdom
to deliver it self fully: if we have hearts, the thing is soon done. But now
because some troubles arise, because we see war in our gates, how vile and
unworthy are the spirits of many? they begin to wish themselves to be as
formerly, they would rather return into Egypt again, we were better be as we
were, we were not wont to hear the beatings of the Drum, the noise of the
Cannon, the rattling of warlike instruments amongst us.

2. This strength of spirit does so support him under the heaviest, sorest
afflictions, that he will never seek to deliver himself out of them, by
forsaking the cause of God, or using any shifting indirect means, but as Paul
told those officers that were sent from the Magistrates of Philippi to fetch
him out of prison, Acts 16. 35, 36, 37. They have cast us into prison, let them
come themselves and fetch us out: in this Paul showed what a spirit he had, he
stood upon an honorable way of deliverance; the same does every true soldier
of Christ stand upon, God himself has brought me into affliction, now
temptation shows some back door to get out of it slily, Nay, says a spirit of
courage, certainly I will never go out that way, let the Lord come himself and
fetch me out.

Fourthly, A spirit beseeming the child of this great Captain, aims at doing
great things for God, has high things of great consequence to bring to pass,
rich glorious mercies for his Churches, but great difficulties must be passed
through to reach these: Men of low and mean spirits look upon them as things
above them, and so they mind them not much; they had rather satisfy themselves
in lower, meaner things, so they may have ease, and not hazard present
comforts. It is otherwise with a true raised spirit that has courage and
magnanimity in it, such an one rejoices in Gods highness, as we have the
expression, Isay 13. 3. I have commanded my sanctfied ones, I have also called
my mighty ones, even them that rejoice in my highness. If God has high things
to accomplish, these Sanctified ones, mighty ones, will rejoice in this
highness of God, contrary to that spirit of Issachar, of whom Genesis 49. 14, 15.
Issachar is a strong Ass couching down between two burdens, and he saw that
rest was good, and the Land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to
bear, and became a servant to tribute: He was loath to hazard his peace, he
had good farms, a fat soil, he had rather live in the Country, bring up his
cattle and be quiet, though he pays great taxes, and be brought to be very
servile, yet that he may not be troubled, his spirit can bear that servility;
let who will mind great things, he loves to be quiet: This was a low, poor
spirit, and his posterity were for the general very unworthy and vile: For you
shall find in the division of the Land of Canaan that Issachars lot fell in
Galile, Josh. 19. from the 18. ver. to the 23. The description of their lot
there from the cities, as Jesreel the first, and the outgoings of their border
were at Jordan, shows Galile was their place. Now you know what was (...) said
of that place, Does any good come out of Galile? usually it is so, the
posterity of men of servile spirits, are vile, and lewd.

5. Difficulties are so far from disheartning men of courage, that they raise
their spirits; They love a business Alexander said when he met with a great
danger, here is periculum par animo Alexandri, Here is a danger fit for the
spirit of an Alexander.

The example of David in this case is very remarkable in 1 Samuel 18. When Saul's
servants told David that he might be the Kings son in law, David was troubled
at it, and did not seem to entertain the motion, ver. 22, 23. but when they
after told him of the terms upon which he should have this honor put upon
him, that it was to bring an hundred of the foreskins of the Philistims, ver.
25. which was a work of difficulty and hazard, for on Saul's part it was
propounded on purpose to be a snare to him, for so says the Text, Saul thought
to make David fall by the hand of the Philistims; now mark, ver. 26. when
Saul's servants told David these things, it pleased David well to be the Kings
son in law: that which he seemed to be troubled at, when it was propounded
absolutely, that he is well pleased with, when it is propounded with such a
condition as had some difficulty in it, whereby he had an opportunity to show
forth the excellency of his spirit: A base low spirit would have been better
pleased with it to have had such a thing without any such condition. It is
reported of the Lion, that such is his spirit, as if he meets with a prey that
another has killed before, he will not meddle with it, but he will seek for
one to kill himself; if it be done to his hand, as we say, he cares not for
it, but he will have one that shall be his own, that he must do something
himself for it, or else it pleases him not.

6. A spirit of courage and true valor is not only Romans 5. 2. We glory in
tribulations. Moses accounted the reproach of Christ greater riches then all
the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 27. Ignatius has this expression, He had
rather be a Martyr then a Monarch: When he heard his bones crash between the
wild beasts teeth, Now, says he, I begin to be a Christian, Cruaelitas vestra
est gloria nostra, says Tertullian to the persecutors, Your cruelty is our
glory. Many of the Martyrs prepared themselves for their sufferings, as Brides
use to prepare themselves for their Bridegroomes, with joy and gladness of
heart. The wounds they receive in the cause of Christ have more glory issue
forth from them then blood; they are an ornament to them, they put a beauty
upon them. They account it far better to lose for God, then to enjoy for
themselves; that part of their estates they part with in a good cause, they
account the best part of their estates; they account themselves more rich in
that, then in what they still retain. Heb. 10. 34. They take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods. The reason of all is, because their spirits are raised
above creature comforts, their happiness consists not in them, they are not
beholding to them for their peace and joy, they can find matter of joy in the
parting with them, as well as in the having them, through that divine principle
of holiness that God has put into them.

8. A spirit of true courage has all its fears swallowed up in the fear of
God; it has learned to fear this Lord of Hosts, and makes him to be the fear
and the dread of it only. Cornelius the Soldier, the Centurion of the Italian
band, is commended for his fear of God, Act. 10. 2. a strange commendation of
a soldier to be commended for fear, yes, for the fear of God: This drives
out all base fears; by this he comes to fear nothing else, but to be feared by
his enemies.

9. He reserves all his valor for this Lord of Hosts, valiant for the truth,
as Jer. speaks, Chap. 9. 3. But it is our wisdom, if we have any metal in us,
any spirit of courage, not to lavish it out in mean and unworthy things, in our
own causes, but to reserve it for God, God may call us to such things as we may
find need of all the metal and courage we have in our hearts, though it were
much more then it is. When soldiers have but a little powder, and fear an
enemy, they will not spend that they have vainly, but keep it till they have
use of it; they know not what they may need. Be not you so presently on fire;
if you be crossed, keep the activity, the vigor of your spirits for God, for
the maintenance of his truth and cause.

Lastly, he had rather dye honorable, then live basely. Viri fortis est aut
pulchre vivere, aut fortiter mori: It is the part of a valiant man either to
live honorably, or to dye valiantly. It was a speech of Cyrus, and it was a
true one, One of the two he will have, the world cannot hinder him: And as
things are now, if we venture our estates and lives to preserve Religion,
Liberties to our selves and our posterity, God may, and we hope he will give us
our lives, Religion and Liberties, and so we may enjoy them with comfort and
honor: Of if our estates and lives should be lost, suppose the worst, they will
be lost honorably: The loss of them will be better then that enjoyment we
shall have of them (if I may at all call it an enjoyment) that we are like to
have of them, if nothing now be ventured; What will our estates or lives be
worth, if our Religion be gone, faithful Ministers be gone, the Saints be fled,
imprisoned or massacred? When our Liberties are gone, our Lives then will hardly
be worth the account of the lives of Men, much less of Christians. He must
needs be very greedy of a life, that desires it upon such terms. We read of
Anchises, Aeneas his father, when Aeneas would have saved his life in such a
way as he judged not to be honorable, he makes this answer to him, Absit ut
excisa possim supervivere Troja, God forbid that I should outlive Troy. If it
be spoiled, what is my life worth? Will our lives be worth the taking up in the
streets, if we outlive our Religion and Liberties? Put all these together, and
here is a spirit indeed beseeming our relation to this Lord of Hosts: Had we
such spirits, how comfortably may we pass this our pilgrimage? we might go
through all difficulties and oppositions, conquering and to conquer. The world
and devil would have little heart to meddle with us, we should free our selves
from many temptations, we should honor our profession, we should do God
abundance of service, and at last have an abundant entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Army of such
soldiers would be the most glorioos sight in the world. We read of the Suns
standing still once, and it was to behold the prowess of Joshua, that brave
soldier, and to enlighten his conquests: If ever it stand still again, it is
like it will be to admire such a glorious sight.

Let the cosideration of the glory of our God in this his Name, teach us to
give glory to him, for all Use ult.
the good we enjoy by Armies, it is all from him. He has of late been
exceeding gracious to our Army; he showed himself indeed The Lord of Hosts in
that batel at Keynton. This was the acknowledgment both of General, Captains
and Soldiers: Never less of man in such a business, never more of God. The
Lord was seen in the Mount; He showed us that it should not be by a multitude
that he would help us, it was by his spirit coming mightily upon a handful
that were left in comparison of the adversaries. When the adversary thought,
yea cried out the day was theirs, God turned it suddenly by a mighty hand. O
how free is the grace of the Lord to us in this! That Scripture Jer. 51. 5. is
fully made good to us, Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of
the Lord of Hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy one
of Israel. The fullness of sin in us has not abated the fullness of grace in
God toward us. The Lord is God, the Lord is God, he is the Lord of Hosts, holy
and reverent is his Nause.

There have been times wherein the Lord has dealt in another manner, even with
his own people: and that I may set forth unto you the fullness and freeness of
Gods goodness to us in our preservation, from being delivered up to the rage
of vile men: I will show you what the severity of God in this kind has been
toward his own people who were as worthy of mercy as we. We must not think
that every particular is to be applyable to us only in the general; thus far
the consideration of the grievous afflictions of the Church formerly, sets out
Gods goodness to us in preventing such evils amongst us: So that it cannot be
said it is with us as it was with them. Not long after God had delivered his
people out of their Captivity, therein fulfilling many gracious promises to
them, and they being returned, built the Temple and the walls of Jerusalem,
there was a glorious reformation, the work of the Lord went on prosperously,
through many and great difficulties. Yet after a little time, when Antiochus
rose up against them, God suffered him to prevail exceedingly in all his
Warlike affairs against them. Dan. 8. 9. There came a little horn, which waxed
exceeding great, not only toward the South, and toward the East, but toward
the pleasant Land, that is, toward the Land of Judea, for indeed it was a
pleasant Land. The word signifies Decus, gloria, ornamentum, toward the glory
and ornament of the whole world. So was that Country especially in regard the
worship of God had been newly set up again in that Country: Yet Antiochus
comes against it, and waxes great for a while, although at first he was but a
little horn, for he was a younger brother, and had been a prisoner not long
before in Rome, but now having got liberty and some command, he rages
especially against the people of God, ver. 10. He waxed great even to the Host
of heaven. Here the Church is called The Host of heaven; howsoever despised by
the world, yet this Lord of Hosts accounts his Church The Host of heaven, and
yet Antiochus waxes great against this. We have many through Gods mercy in our
Host, godly and faithful, but we presume not to give it this title that God
gives his people, The Host of heaven, and yet God suffers the enemy to
prevail against that Host, and is pleased to magnify his mercy to ours, to
give them so great a deliverance, yea so to prevail against that, as to cast
down some of the Host, and of the stars down to the ground, and to stamp upon
them. He prevails as if now he had power over the heavens, to pull down the
stars, and to stamp upon them. The more eminent any are, the more is he
enraged; if they be stars in this heaven, if he can get to them, he pulls them
down and stamps upon them. Oh the rage of our adversaries against the most
eminent Ministers of our Kingdom! They stamp for anger that they have them
not, and if they had them, how would they stamp then? That which one Antiochus
did there, many Atheists and Papists would gladly do amongst us if they had
power; but this Lord of Hosts delivers us in mercy from them: yea, ver. 11. He
magnifies himself even to the Prince of the Host, to this Lord of hosts, he
sets himself against him. Oh! what rage even against God himself? what horrid
blasphemies are there against this Prince of the Host of his people? but
although he does magnify himself and blaspheme, surely he can never prevail
against the Prince of this Host: yes, he is suffered for the present to take
away the daily Sacrifice, and to cast down the place of his Sanctuary, and ver.
12. An Host was given him against the daily Sacrifice by reason of
transgression, and cast it down the truth to the ground, and it practiced, and
prospered, upon which the people of God were exceedingly troubled, ver. 13. One
Saint speaks to another Saint asking this question, (with hearts full of
sorrow enough, God knows) How long shall the vision be concerning the daily
sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the Sanctuary and
the Host to be trodden under foot?

Here you see that for any to set himself against Gods worship, is to set
himself against God himself, proud malicious adversaries, especially aim at
this, and God here suffered the adversary to prevail even against this; God
proceeds against his people for their transgression, an Host comes upon them;
yea, the Text says, if we observe it, that an Host was given him against the
daily Sacrifice, by reason of transgression: Antiochus had never been able to
raise such an Host, had it not been for the transgressions of Gods people; yea
so far was God provoked with the transgression of his people, as that he
suffered this Host raised against them, to cast down the truth to the ground,
to practice and to prosper. We have cause to lay our hands upon our hearts, to
acknowledge our transgressions as great as any they were charged with; and yet
although God has thus far chastised us as to raise an Host against us, yea
such a one (so many of them being Papists, and such horrid blasphemers) as we
have cause enough to fear they would take away the daily Sacrifice, and cast
down so much of the Sanctuary as is built up already, and even cast down the
truth to the ground, but oh the riches of the infinite goodness of our
gracious God! he has not suffered them, he has turned the rage of man to his
praise, he has wrought gloriously for us, he has delivered us out of their
power, (although many of our brethren suffer hard things) we may yet have the
daily Sacrifice and the Sanctuary, that is, the true worship of God amongst us
if we will, yet the truth is preached in our Congregations, it is held forth in
the beauty and excellency of it, it is not cast down to the ground, they
indeed have practiced, but through Gods mercy to us they have not prospered,
this is of the Lord of Hosts, let this glorious name of his be magnified by us
for ever.

Yea, yet further, for the setting out mercy to us, that glory may be given to
this Lord of Hosts, Consider what the Holy Ghost says, ver. 23, 24, 25. of
this 8. Chap. concerning Gods taking advantage against his people for their
sins, which he has not done against us, as it appears this day. When the
Calvin upon the place.
transgressors are come to the full, a King of fierce countenance, one of an
extreme bold daring spirit, a Prince that will venture upon such desperate
things, as few Princes in the world would dare to venture upon the like; if any
of his Nobles or others come before him and speak any thing to him not
agreeable to his designs, he looks with a fierce countenance upon them, his
countenance showing the extreme fierceness of his spirit: Hence it was that
his name was changed from Epiphanes to Epimanes, for his fierce cruelty: but
beside his fierceness, he shall carry things subtly too, he shall be one
that understands dark sentences; by his wit and subtilty, and by the help of
those about him he shall make such expositions of dark things, as a man would
wonder at it, no man could have thought that such things could have been picked
out of passages as he shall pick up, and by this he shall be able to put such
a color upon the foulest things, as they shall appear very specious to many.

And his power likewise shall be mighty, God will suffer him to grow to a great
strength, but not by his own power, so says the Text, although you could not
see how he could raise any such power of his own, yet he shall have a great
power, he shall have money, Ammunition, strength, from foreign Princes, or as
some would have it, God himself shall give power to him, beyond what he has
of his own. Surely if the power against the Church be Gods rather then the
adversaries own, then the power for deliverance of the Church must be
acknowledged to be Gods rather then our own, but I rather take the former
sense to be the intent of the Holy Ghost in that place. It follows, he shall
prosper and practice, he shall not be always consulting, demurring, delaying,
but he shall be doing, and thereby he shall prosper: The word is faciet, he
shall do something, The prosperous success of (...)
war depends much upon action.

Alexander was asked, How he did so great things in so little a time? He
answered, By neglecting no advantage. I have read of Charles, the son of
Charles Duke of Anjou, who was King of Sicily and Jerusalem, he was called
Carolus Cunctator, that is, Charles the Delayer, but not in that sense that
Fabius, who was the Shield of Rome in his time, he was called likewise
Cunctator, but that was because he used to stay till opportunity came, but the
other used to stay till opportunity was lost, Antiochus was no such Cunctator,
stayer till opportunity was lost, he practiced and so prospered; and because he
prospered, therefore he still further practiced. But when he saw delaying, and
gaining time might advantage him, then he would seek to put off, and spin out
time as much as he could. There is a famous story of Pompilius, being sent by
the Senate of Rome to this Antiochus, to declare to him the pleasure of the
Senate, that he must not go to Egypt; Antiochus now requires time to
deliberate, but Pompilius makes a circle about him with the staff he had in
his hand, and told him he must not go out of that circle, til he had given his
absolute answer, I or No: But Antiochus would feign have put him off with a
complement, but Pompilius rejects his complement, and bids him answer speedily,
otherwise he knew what to do. These speedy resolutions are of mighty advantage
in many of the great affairs of the world, esecially when we have to deal
with cunning adversaries, who lie to catch advantages. The Text farther says,
He shall destroy wonderfully, he shall make such spoil of fair plentiful
countries, make such waste where he comes, leave all so poor and miserable, as
will be a wonder for any to see it, who knew the Country in the plenty and
riches of it, but a few weeks before he came into it, Yea he shall destroy the
mighty and the holy people, men of brave spirits, even gracious, godly men, and
stout, valiant men, yet they shall fall before him: And ver. 25. Through his
policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand: If there be any
devices, shifts, cunning underminings, any false ways in the world, he will
make use of them, and he shall get advantage by them, and he shall magnify
himself in his heart. When he has got an advantage any way, by falsifying
promises, protestations, or by what means soever, it shall please him at the
heart, he shall magnify himself in his very heart, and others about him shall
puff him up, and seek to magnify him, and by peace he shall destroy many:
That is,

1. By promising peace, by treatles of peace, they shall think all is well, now
there will be peace, and so being secure, he shall come upon them unawares, and
destroy many.

Or 2. by peace, that is, by his prosperity that he shall enjoy, all shall
account him happy, and thereby be ready to join with him; they shall promise to
themselves to be delivered from many troubles by coming in to him, Surely he
will have the better of it, it is best for our safety (if we would hold our
lands and estates) to come in and join with him, and thus by his peace he
shall destroy many.

Or 3. In pace, in peace, Calvin interprets thus: In a silent quiet way he
shall withdraw himself and his Forces; there shall not be much noise of him,
but he shall weary the Forces of the other and their party, and gain time and
advantages of them. When he seems to be quiet, and comes not against them in a
hostile way, even then shall he destroy many, yea he shall stand up against
the Prince of Princes. He shall not acknowledge the Majesty, the power of God,
he shall set himself against those ways of Providence that are apparently
against him, howsoever he will not see it; but then says the Text, he shall be
broken without hand. God himself in some wonderful way that you know not of
shall break him, when all means fail, and all people shall be afraid that all
will come to ruin and misery, then shall he be broken without hand.

We complain much of sad things that we suffer, but we suffer not such things
as the people of God, so dear unto him, suffered in those times. Our sins cry
as loud as theirs for the like miseries; but God is free in his grace. It is
from the Lord of Hosts that we are preserved from such fearful evils as these.

It may be some may say, Why, are we in any danger of such miseries as the Jews
suffered under Antiochus?

If bloody Papists, and cursing and blaspheming Cavaliers might have their wills
on us, our miseries would soon parallel theirs, if not rise above them, seeing
so many of them are got together, and they are grown to such a height in their
rage, it is only from this great Lord of Hosts that they break not in upon us
as a deluge of the most hideous woes, and dreadful miseries that ever befell any
Christian Nation upon the face of the earth: but blessed be the Lord, who has
not given us as a prey to their teeth. Let the Crown of all our mercies, and
more especially of that great mercy in the late battle be set upon the head of
this glorious Lord of Hosts. We read 2 Samuel 12. 27, 28. when Joab fought
against Rabbah, when the work was almost done, he sent to David to come and
take the City, that he might have the glory of it, that the Kings Crown which
was of gold and precious stones might be, set upon David's head. Although God
has made use of instruments in this great work, and due honor is to be given
to them, yet let the crown of the work be set upon the head of the Lord of
Hosts.

I find in a Treatise of Plutarchs about the evil of (...).
taking honor to ones self, a notable relation of one Pytho, who having
slain a great enemy of the country, whose name was Cotys, whilst the
officers of the (...).
people were striving who should do him most honor, he speaks thus unto them:
These things some of the gods have done; as for us we have but lent our hands
to this work. It is true, the General and many of our Captains and Soldiers
have done worthily, but it is as true that they have only lent their hands to
this work. The Lord of hosts has done this great thing both for them and us;
If we would express our respects to the General, and honor him as he has
deserved, in this thing especially, we should do it to speak well of him
before this Lord of Hosts, and to pray much for him.

It was a custom among the Romans, when a victory was got, to use solemn
Processions for many days together, offering Prayers and Sacrifices to their
gods in behalf of their General. The manner was, after the victory to send to
the Senate Letters dight with Laurel, wherein was required that they would
decernere Supplicationes, appoint such solemn Supplications for the General.
The conclusion of all is, the glory of this great work must stick no where, but
pass through all, to this our strong redeemer the Lord of hosts. Let that
Doxologie of the Angels, Esaias 6. 3. be ours this day, Holy, holy, holy, Lord of
Hosts. The whole earth is full of thy glory. Let our streets, our
congregations, our families, our hearts be now full of the glory of this Holy,
holy, holy, Lord of Hosts.

And thus you have had one part of the glory of this great name of God opened
and applied.

If you will give me but a little time more, I will give you some little
glimpse of the other part of this glorious name, and wind up all suddenly.

God is the Lord of Hosts in respect of that absolute command he has over all
creatures, he has all creatures in heaven and earth under him, as a General
has his Soldiers: The Angels they are his Hosts. Psalm. 68. 17. The Charyots
of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, The Lord is among them as
in Sinai. In the Hebrew, the word is in the singular number the Charet, to note
the joynt-service of all the Angels, they are but as one Charet, although they
be many thousands, yea Myriads of thousands as we have it here, there never is
any mutiny amongst these Soldiers, their harmony is most blessed, their union
firm, indissoluble. That which your English turns, Twenty thousand, even
thousands, is Myriades thousands, and the word translated Angels is not
elsewhere found in Scripture in that signification, it comes of Shanah to
second, as being second or next to God, the chief Princes, the Nobles of Gods
Court, as Dan. 10. 13. Michael one of the chief Princes: The Seventy
translates the word (...), The cheerful ones, who serve this Lord of Hosts
readily, and freely, and joyfully in his wars, they derive it from the Hebrew,
Shaan, which signifies to be in tranquillity and joy, as in Sinai, that is, as
God was in Sinai with ten thousand of his holy ones when he gave the Law,
Deuteronomy. 33. 2. so he is in Sion likewise, the Angels Gods Hosts, makes Sion as
dreadful to all her enemies, as those Angels as appeared to God on Mount
Sinai, made it dreadful to the people. Thus Dan. 10. 20. The Angel tells
Daniel, That he was to return to fight with the King of Persia; God has his
Angels to stand out against the great Princes of the earth, they go forth to
fight with them; they often meet with terrible strokes from Angels when they
little think of them.

The stars in Heaven they are the Hosts of God, Judges 5. 20. They sought from
heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. The waters are Gods
Host, they drowned Pharaoh in the red sea, and here, ver. 21. The River Kishon
swept away the mighty Host of Sisera: The winds are the Hosts of God, Psalm.
148. together with the hail, and snow, there reckoned up with many others,
fire, and vapor, beasts, and creeping things. Livy reports of the winds in
Cannensi pugna, raising dust in the eyes of the Romans while they went in fight
that they could not see: The locusts are Gods Hosts, Joel. 2. 25. What an Host
did God muster up against Pharaoh? frogs and flies, lice and caterpillars; They
were all the Armies of God against him. God gave commission to the fire and it
burnt up Sodom; he gave commission to the earth, and it swallowed up Corah,
Dathan and Abiram.

But the chief thing I intend in this is to show you the glory of God in this
title of his, from this consideration.

1. God is glorious in this that he has an exceeding great Army: The
greatness of an Army is the Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. His Army of Locusts is
called a great Army, Joel 2. 25. this then of the Angels is much more to be
esteemed a great Army.

2. His Army is exceeding strong and powerful, Senacherib, 2 Kings 19. 35.

3. He has multitudes of Armies, it is the glory The Lord of Hosts has Armies
in the heavens, Armies in the air, armies in the seas, Armies on the earth
dispersed in every Country, all the whole world is filled with the multitudes
of the Armies of the Lord.

4. All these Armies of the Lord are always in a readiness, they are prepared
Armies, it is but giving

5. Gods Armies always accomplish what God intends by them, they always
prosper in their fight, Psalm. 140. 8. Fire, hail, snow, vapor, stormy wind,
fulfilling his word: Many of you Mariners will not fulfill Gods word, but God
when he has you at Sea he sends stormy winds, and they fulfill Gods word upon
you. Psalm. 103. 21. Bless ye the Lord, ye his Angels that excel in strength;
that do his Commandments, harkening unto the voice of his word.

How many men, who think themselves great, demean themselves as if they
thought themselves above Gods Commandments? but the Angels that excel in
strength, they do his Commandments, they hearken to the voice of his word:
They stand listening to hear what it is that God has to command them, and are
ready to obey. And that which is said of the Angels, is true of all Gods Hosts,
for so it follows, ver. 21. Bless ye the Lord all ye his Hosts, ye ministers
of his that do his pleasure: Bless ye the Lord all his works, in all places of
his dominion. God says to one, Do this and he does it; to another, Come, and
he comes: yea Gods Armies are ready to destroy themselves in the service of
their Lord. The command of a General in an Army is powerful; he may keep his
Army from spoil if he please. Plutarch in the life of Pompey tells of him,
that hearing of his soldiers offering violence in an unjust way, he caused all
their swords to be sealed up, so as no man dared break open the seal without
leave. He did more then bid them, yea more then command them that they should
not spoil.

6. Yea God forces his enemies to fight for him, O nimium dilecte Deo cui
f^ndit ab anti is, Aeolus armatas acies, cui militat ether Et conjurati
veniunt ad classica venti.
and can turn their weapons against themselves, which is a high power beyond
all other Captains and Generals in the world. Sozomen and Nicephorus tell us of
a great work of God in the defense of that good Emperor Theodosius, by a
mighty wind the arrows of his enemies were turned upon them, which Claudian
likewise mentions, Oh thou beloved so exceeding much of God, for whom the skies
and the wind fight, etc. There are no other creatures but devils and men but
do readily and faithfully fight for God, and even these God forces to fight
for him whether they will or no, even then when they seem to fight most
against him. As many men who say they defy the devil, yet even then are the
slaves of the devil, and do his will; so many whose hearts and ways are
opposite to God, yet even then God uses them to fight for him, and to
accomplish his own purposes.

7. The glory of Gods infinite wisdom appears Joel 2. 7. it is said of the
Locusts, They shall march every one in his ways, and they shall not break
their ranks, neither shall one thrust another, they shall walk every one in his
path. To order and guide in ranks such infinite multitudes of Armies, is
infinitely beyond the skill of any Commander upon the earth. When David Psalm.
104. was meditating upon the glory of God in his works, ver. 24. In the midst
of his meditation he could not hold, but breaks forth with admiring
expressions at Gods wisdom in them all, O Lord how manifold are thy works! in
wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. Let our
hearts be raised in our meditations of the riches of Gods wisdom, appearing in
marshalling all his Armies. Certainly if we did look into this, and cause our
thoughts to dwell upon it, it would cure us of our Atheistical thoughts. How is
it possible but a God must needs be acknowledged, where such admirable art and
skill appears, even in the works of nature, which they know nothing of
themselves? Is it possible for any man that should see a mighty Army marching
along all in comely order, and yet think that all these men fell into this
order merely by accident, as they came running together? must he not needs be
convinced that here surely has been the military art of some skillful
Commanders working? The same conviction of a God, of his wisdom must there
needs be, if we saw in what order all creatures are put.

8. All these Armies God maintains every day at

9. God is able to put as much power as he pleases Pharaoh in the very flies?
that is observable; whereas upon the judgment of the Hail, he did but promise
that he would let Israel go, Exodus 9. 28. but upon Gods Army of flies he bids
them go, Chap. 10. 8. But that place Joel 2. is most remarkable for this;
observe what high expressions God has of a mighty Army of his, and the truth
is, it was but an Army of Locusts and Caterpillars. Ver. 2. he calls the day of
their coming, A day of darkness, of gloominesse, a day of thick darkness:
he calls them a great people and a strong, there has not been ever the like,
ver. 3. A fire devovreth before them, and behind them a flame burns; the Land
is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness,
yea and nothing can escape them: And ver. 4. The appearance of them is as the
appearance of horses, and as horsemen, so shall they run. Like the noise of
chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame
of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array. I
know some interpret it of the Babylonians thus described; but if the Text be
looked into, we shall clearly see it meant of the Locusts and Caterpillars,
therefore the expressions are metaphorical all along: As horses, as a strong
people in battle array: And ver. 6. Before their face the people shall be much
pained: all faces shall gather blackness, even those who had impudent, brazen
foreheads in ways of wickedness, and would not fear the mighty God, even
these stout hearts shall tremble before the Locusts. God will put so much
terror into these poor creatures, that all faces shall gather blackness, they
shall look swarte for fear of them. Ver. 7. They shall run like mighty men,
they shall climb the wall like men of war: And ver. 8. When they shall fall
upon the sword, they shall not be wounded. They shall run to and fro in the
City, they shall climb up upon the houses and enter in at the windows. Ver. 10.
The earth shall quake before them, the heavens shall tremble; the sun and the
moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. They shall
bring so much terror with them, as even to affect the very heavens, it shall be
like as if the sun and moon had lost all their light, as if there were
earthquakes in every place where they come. Ver. 11. And the Lord shall utter
his voice before his Army. As Commanders speak with a voice of majesty before
their Armies, so the Lord shall utter his voice before this his Army, he shall
even glory to be the Leader of such an Army as this; for says the Text, His
camp is very great, and strong that executes his word: the day of the Lord is
great, and very terrible, and who can abide it? All this still is the army of
Locusts and Worms, for so it is ver. 25. I will restore to you the years that
the Locusts have eaten, the canker-worm, and the cater-piller, and the
palmer-worm, my great Army which I sent among you. Now if God can raise to this
height Locusts and Worms to be such a dreadful Army, how dreadful then is the
Lord able to make all his other great Hosts? Surely a glorious Lord of Hosts is
this God.

10. This great General is himself the strength God gives all the strength,
he supports it, he draws stout, he blesses it, it is only in the power of his
might that any of them is able to do any thing; and if all their force were
united in one, God has infinitely more in himself without them, and can do
infinitely more by his word alone in an instant, then they can do as long as
the world stands. Oh how great is this God, this Lord of Hosts!

To apply it in a few words.

1. Who would not fear this God then? Job 13. 11. Shall not his excellency
make you afraid? Behold here a great part of the excellency of his name; let
it strike a reverentiall fear into our hearts. Psalm. 76. 4. Thou art more
glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey. The stout-hearted are
spoiled: At thy rebuke O God of Jacob, the chariot and the horse are cast into
a dead sleep. Then the inference, ver. 7. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and
who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?

2. Surely then it is good being on Gods side, to I could pray to my Father,
and he would send me twelve Legions of Angels. David, Psalm. 27. though alone,
yet he thinks himself safe enough with the Lord of Hosts, ver. 3. Though an
Host shall encampe against me, my heart should not fear; Though War should
rise against me, in this will I be confident: In what? ver. 1. That the Lord is
his light, his salvation, and the strength of his life. If we be with the Lord,
we may be sure that we shall ever have with us more then against us. 2 Chronicles.
32. 7, 8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of
Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us
then with him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God,
to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people, says the Text, rested
upon the words of Hezekiah. Here is a full object for our faith to rest upon.
If we look upon God only in this latter consideration of him as The Lord of
Hosts, we need never fear want of Soldiers, seeing all creatures in heaven
and earth are his armed trained Soldiers, and he himself is infinite in
himself. Oh how happy should we be, if we could in all our straits exercise
faith in this Lord of Hosts, looking upon him in this consideration!

You will say, It is true, this Lord of Hosts is indeed a full object of faith,
were it not that we have sorely provoked him to come out against us; yea we are
afraid he is now appearing in wrath against us.

I will give you one Text of Scripture in such a case as this is, when your
provocations of him lie heavy upon you, and it is as sweet, and full, and
encouraging a Scripture as any I know, Zach. 1. 17. The Lord had professed in
the beginning of the Chapter, that he had been sore displeased with their
Fathers, ver. 2. yea and it appears by the 3. and 4. ver. that they were no
better then their Fathers, and ver. 12. it is said, The Lord of Hosts had had
indignation against Jerusalem these threescore and ten years; so that even at
that present when the Prophet spoke to them, it seems God was in such a way
toward them, as his indignation appeared against them: but that their hearts
might break, and their faith be raised; mark what a gracious promise comes in
to them even now, in this 17. ver. Cry yet, saying, Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, My cities through prosperity (or through good, so the word is in the
Hebrew) shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Sion, and
shall yet choose Jerusalem. Mark, here are four yets in this ver. and they are
very gracious ones, Cry yet, shall yet be spread, shall yet comfort, and shall
yet choose Jerusalem, and all these from the Lord of Hosts, yea and from the
Lord of Hosts sorely dispeased, yea although he was provoked to indignation. We
have sinned, -- cry yet. We have provoked wrath, -- shall yet be spread. We are
miserable wretched creatures, -- shall yet comfort. We are unworthy, -- shall
yet choose. O the free grace of our God to his people! Thou troubled,
distressed soul, look up to him, as making himself known by this glorious
name, cry to him by this name, Lord thou command Angels, heavens, earth,
seas, now let thy power work for the good of my soul; give commandment from
heaven to this distemperd heart of mine, to yield to submit to thee, to these
lusts that rise against thee, that they may be subdued, yea destroyed. Lord, in
any difficulties we find our selves brought into, let us not be discouraged,
We cannot see how Antichrist should be brought down: But Revel. 18. 8. Her
plagues shall come in one day, he shall utterly be burnt with sire, for strong
is the Lord God who judges her.

And further, it is most honorable to join with, to be under this General.
Soldiers boast much of the power, greatness, magnificence of their General;
they account themselves honored by it. The people of God have infinite cause
to make their boast of this Lord of Hosts, under whose banners they fight, he
is their praise and their glory. Psalm. 148. God is gloriously set forth with
his Hosts about him. The conclusion, ver. 14. is this, He is the praise of all
his Saints: Not only Objectively, because the Saints are exercised in his
praises; but Relatively, he is a praise and honor to his Saints; his Saints
glory in this, that they serve under such a Commander. There are two Captains
in the world, under whose command all the world serve, this Lord of hosts, and
the Devil, for he also has his Armies fighting for him, the Dragon and his
Angels; all wicked men are under him, and fight for him: his great Lieutenant
is Antichrist. It is no dishonor to run from these Commanders, to get under
the Banners of the Lord of Hosts.

3. Let us honor this Lord of hosts by being willing to be put into what rank
he shall please, to be ordered in what place he shall appoint, and there to
keep out ranks. If God will put us in the forefront, where there is hottest
service, let us not murmur; the hotter the service is, the greater will the
reward be. We must not choose our own places. All other creatures, except the
Angels, are only passive to the work of their Lord in ordering them. We should
be active in yielding our selves freely to his ordering, and be well pleased
with it, and keep our ranks. It is an easy matter to keep rank whilst we march
along; but when we come to fight, we shall not find it so.

Lastly, how dreadful must this glorious name of God needs be to all ungodly
ones, who walk on in ways of enmity against such a God? Esaias 45. 9. Woe to him
that striveth with his Maker: let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of
the earth. With what infinite indignation must God needs look upon such vile
worms, who dare resist such a glorious Majesty as he is? God can but speak to
any humor of thy body, and it shall make thee lie roaring out in anguish, and
grievous torture; thy life shall be more bitter then death unto thee. This God
may give commission to the next crumbe of bread, and it shall choke thee, and
send thee down to hell.

God himself is against thee, he walks contrary to thee in all his Attributes.
The swords point of his infinite Justice is at thine heart. All the creatures
of God stand ready armed against thee, and would fly upon thee, if God did but
give out the word. The Angels stand prepared, Lord shall but one of us go and
cut off that wretch who dares presume to blaspheme thy name, to lift up
himself against thee? As Abishai said to David, 2 Samuel 16. 9. Why should this
dead dog curse my Lord the King? let me go and take off his head. The Air
cries, Lord shall I conveigh infection into his body, and poison him? The
Water, Shall I stop his breath? The Fire, shall I seize on him, and burn him?
The earth, Shall I open, and swallow him up? The beasts of the field, Shall we
run upon him, and tear him? Thy meat, thy drink, Shall we choke him, or be bane
to him? Thou art in the midst of Gods Hosts, compassed about on every side. 1 Chronicles. 13. 14. When Judah looked back, behold the battle was before and behind,
and they cried unto the Lord. Look about thee oh distressed soul, and see the
Hosts of the Lord before thee and behind thee, and cry to the Lord. Certainly
there is no creature near thee, but thou have cause to look upon it with a
shaking heart: thou know not but that it may be thy ruin, sent of God to
cut thee off, that thou might go to thine own place. Certainly it cannot be
but ere long some creature or other will break in upon thee, and be an
executioner of Gods wrath upon thee, if not prevented by thy repentance. When
God awakens a guilty conscience, every creature is terrible to it, the wrath of
God is seen in the face of every creature. Cain cries out, Every one that
meets me, will kill me. Why? Who was there in the world then to kill him? not
many besides his father and mother, and yet every one will kill him: especially
if it be some extraordinary work of God in the heavens, or seas, or elsewhere,
as in extreme thunder, storms and tempests, or the like: how terrible is that
to such a conscience, as to Caligula and others? The Prophet Elisha prayed to
God to open the eyes of his servant to see Gods Hosts about him, to deliver him
from fear: my prayer is, that God would open thine eyes, that thou may see
Gods Hosts about thee, that thou may fear: if thy eyes were open, it would
be with thee as it was with those who came there against Elisha, when their
eyes were 2 Kings 6. 17, 19.
opened they saw themselves in the midst of Samaria, in the midst of their
enemies. Certainly so long as God is thine enemy, all creatures in heaven and
earth are thine enemies. Wherefore consider how unable thou art to stand out
against this glorious God; lay down thy weapons of enmity, cry out bitterly of
thy desperate folly, make it thy great work above all things in the world, to
make up thy peace with him. God yet offers mercy to thee, as Alexander did
those he warred against, while the Lamp burned: If they staid until it was
out, there was nothing but blood expected. The Lamp of thy life is still
burning; come in that thy soul may live. There is no standing out against this
God, he will have glory from thee in spite of thy heart.

FINIS.
A brief Answer to Doctor Fernes Book, tending to resolve Conscience, about
the Subjects taking up of Arms.
By JER. BURROUGHES.
THere came to my hand a Book of D. Fern, tending to resolve Conscience in the
case of the Subjects taking up Arms. I find it carried on without giving any
ill terms, but in saw expressions, suitable to a Treatise that concerns
Conscience, and the more likely to prevail with it. Only now and then some
bitterness breaks forth; I shall very briefly, yet faithfully give you the
strength of it: Where he speaks right, I will acknowledge it; and where he
mistakes, I will fairly discuss and show you whence the mistakes arise. I
confess he has great advantage in the subject, because it is for the King: 1.
Because it is safer to plead for the King, though a man mistakes; but if there
be a mistake in lessening the Kings right, a man endangers his utter undoing.
2. Truth about this argument, has always been tenderly handled; those who
have pleaded for the King, have with courage vented themselves to the utmost;
but others have been forced to be silent, or else but even to whisper and speak
half out, lest they presently meet with (not arguments, but) things of another
nature to answer them. In which regard the power of Kings has been raised to
the height, and men have drunk in such opinions of absolute power in them, as
they have heard confidently affirmed, practiced, and seen in Books, and feeled
by many taxations and censures; but whatsoever might inform them has layne in
the dark, not daring to appear: Therefore well might the D. call what now
people begin to hear, and enquire after, a new doctrine; it is an old truth,
but newly discovering it self. The name of King has taken such impression in
the hearts of people, that for a while they will be prejudiced against
whatsoever may but sound of limiting his power, or maintaining our right
against it.

What there is in the Epistle that may prejudice any man's conscience, will be
answered in what follows.

Preamble to SECT. I.
SO many good people that are come to a sense of Religion and godliness, are
miserably carried away by a strange implicit says, to believe whatsoever is
said or done in the name of the Parliament, etc. to be infallibly true and
just.

It seems those who have not a sense of Religion, do not so easily believe the
truth and justice of what is done in the name of the Parliament. This is most
Ans.
certain, who are hardest to believe what the Parliament says, but Papists,
and notorious blasphemers, and profane livers? I condemn not all, but compare
the generality of the one side, and of the other; you shall find an apparent
difference in the lives of the one, from the lives of the other: Yea, so it is
now that if a man as heretofore were not profane, or loose at least, or
zealous for ceremonies, he was accounted a Puritan; so now a Roundhead, that
is, in their ordinary interpretation, one for the Parliament.

If it be said, This is because Religion is pretended on the Parliaments side:
So it is on the other, with as loud a cry as the Parliaments. In such things
where I must have regard to humane testimony, to what part I see the most that
have the sense of Religion to adhere, that side I will be on, except I see
better grounds then yet the D. brings to draw me from it. Prove. 2. 20. That
thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.

SECT. 1.
IN this Sect. these special things are considerable: 1. What he grants 2. what
we grant. 3. What he says we grant. He grants we may deny obedience to the
King, not only in things unlawful by the Law of God, but by the established
Laws of the Land. It is well this is granted; Heretofore we know this was the
general Tenet, whatsoever was commanded by the King, yea by any men in
authority, if but by a Prelate, except it were against Gods Law, we were bound
to obey it; any thing that was not sin, must be yielded to and that for
conscience sake. The D. in this is ingenuous; he confesses that not only Gods
Law, but man's Law limits Kings power: This is a great case to many men's
consciences to know so much.

And further, if this be true, that all those Scriptures that urge obedience to
Kings and men in authority, must be understood with this limitation, that is,
if they command according to the Laws of God, and according to the Laws of the
country over which they are.

1. He says, In point of resistance we grant it must be in such a case where
there are Omnes ordines regni consentientes, an unanimous consent of the two
Houses.

There is no determination that the greater part present of either House agrees
upon, but is as truly valid and legal, as if there were an unanimous consent
Ans.
of them both. It is so in all bodies where things are carried by vote.

2. He says, We yield it must be a mere defensive resistance.

If the King should send any to mischief us, to say, we must only defend
ourselves, so as not to offend them, is a contradiction; as for the Kings
person, is it Ans.
not the profession of the Parl. to defend it? therefore we need not dispute
now, about defending our selves against it.

3. He says, this likewise is granted that the Prince must first be bent to
overthrow Religion, Liberties, and Laws, and will not discharge his trust,
before there must be resistance.

By this he would insinuate that our Arms taken up are unlawful, because the
King has not declared himself thus. Ans.


What need we be put to meddle with any thing but this in the case in hand?
That a Kingdom seeing it self in imminent danger of enemies to infringe the
liberties of it, may stand-up to defend it self; yea although they come forth
against it in the name of the King: This is our case, and if the D. disputes
against any thing but this, he sights with his own shadow.

If this be case as certainly it is, then a great part of the Doctors book is
impertinent to the business of the Parliaments raising forces: For forces may
be raised upon other grounds then the Kings being bent to overthrow Religion.

SECT. II.
THe strength of this Section, and almost all the book, is in that place of
Romans 13. and in this place I believe the D. will see, or if he does not, others
will, that he is utterly mistaken in the sense of that place.

The Apostle says expressly, Whosoever resists, shall receive damnation.

But he does not say expressly, whosoever resists the highest men shall receive
damnation, but whosoever shall resist the power: Let every one be subject not
Ans.
to the wills of the highest men, but to the higher power: there is a great
deal of difference between these two: The higher power, that is, that
authority that God, and man has put upon such a man, it is (...), not (...),
that must be subjected to, and not resisted. We profess against resisting
power, authority, though abused: If those who have power to make Laws, shall
make sinful Laws, and so give authority to any to force obedience; we say here
there must either be flying or passive obedience; but if one that is in
authority command out of his own will, and not by Law, I resist no power, no
authority at all, if I neither actively nor passively obey, no I do not so much
as resist abused authority. This may seem strange at the first; but if you
think of it, you will believe it. The D. thinks the answer to this place is
only from the limitation of the person, or the cause of resisting, as if we
held that no particular men upon any cause, but States may resist upon such and
such causes; whereas we do not answer so, but we distinguish between the man
that has the power, and the power of that man, and say, although the power
must not be resisted according to the letter, and the sense of the Text, yet
the illegal will and ways of the man may be resisted, without the least
offending against the Text. But we shall meet with this Scripture again and
again, and shall fellow it with answers accordingly.

He comes to examples, as first, the peoples rescuing of Jonathan from Saul. He
says, 1 Samuel 14.
the people were in Arms already, and did but use a loving violence.

This example is only brought to prove that Subjects may withstand illegal
commands of Kings, and no further, and that it plainly proves; only, he says,
it is a loving Ans.
violence. Well then, it is a violence; they resolve that the Kings command
shall not be fulfilled, yea though he adds an oath to it. It was indeed a
loving violence to Jonathan; so is all the violence that the Parliament offers,
a loving violence to the Kingdom, yea and there is true love to the King too
in it. The King has not yet sworn that he will have such things as the Parl.
will not suffer, so as to come to our cognisince; but Saul swore that he would
have such a thing done, and yet the people would not suffer it to be done, and
yet you dare not blame them for this, nay you commend them for it.

The second example is, David resisting Saul, the D. says, It was to save his
person from Cutthroats. 1 Samuel 26.


And is not our Army to save Parl and people from Cutthroats?

2. He says, David did no act of hostility, but only defended himself.

David had no authority over any that followed Saul, for he was then a private
man; but our Parl. has authority over Delinquents that follow the King. Ans.


2. David was loath indeed to venture upon a pitched battle, or to exasperate
Saul or his Subjects, because his strength was weak, 600. to a King, therefore
he flies up and down and takes not every advantage, that if it were possible
he might gain fa^our in the eyes of Saul and his Subjects: but if they had
fallen upon him, and his power had been equal to theirs, who knows what he
would have done? but we are sure as it is, it is defensive, and that is all it
is to prove that Subjects may take up Arms ^o defend themselves against the
injustice of their Kings.

For that example of David at Keilah, all the answer to that is, that it is an
uncertain 1 Samuel 23. 12.
supposition.

But examine the place, you shall find it as certain as a supposition can be;
It appears plainly that David had some expectation that the men of Keilah
would have Ans.
stood to him and kept often Saul coming against him, and if they would, it is
apparent by the Text, that David would have stood to it though Saul had come
against him. In the Text it is as plain, as this: Suppose the King were near
Hull going aagainst Sir J. Hotham, and Sir J. Hotham should seek to make sure
of the men of Hul, and enquire whether they would deliver him or not if the
King came, and he should come to know that certainly they would, and upon that
very ground slies away, is this now an uncertain supposition that Sir John
Hotham would willingly have the Town stand to him, and if they would stand to
him he would stay there and defend himself against the Kings forces?

Hi, last answer to David's example is, that his example was extraordinary
because he was anointed to be King after Saul.

But yet for the present he was a private man, although God had bestowed
something Ans.
extraordinary upon him more then upon other men; but it follows not therefore
that in this case he had an extraordinary power to resist the Prince: Prince
Charles has no more power to resist his Father then the Parliament has.

For the example of Elisha using the Kings messenger rough'y, that came to take
away his head, he says it says little to the question in hand.

Yet he grants as much as it is brought for, that defense is lawful against
sudden and Ans.
illegal assaults of Messengers sent by the King; if against sudden, why not
against deliberate and plotted? for, they are worse: This is one end of the
raising of the Army, to prevent such assaults: If it be lawful to be done by
violence by 2. or 3. when the messenger is but one, then it may be done by 2.
or 3000. when the messengers are 1000.

For the example of the Priests thrusting out the leprous King.

1 Chro. 26
That which this is brought to prove, is thus much, That there may be such
uncleanness Ans.
in a King, that may cause Subjects lawfully to resist him, when he would do a
wicked act.

The Doctor says, First Gods hand was upon him.

So when God shall leave a King to some horrible way of evil, certainly Gods
hand is upon him then.

Ans.
He answers, But he hasted to go out himself.

But the Scripture tells us, the Priests likewise thrust him out; they would not
suffer Ans.
him to be in the Temple.

The next thing in the Sect. is, a similitude from the natural body: Though a
member may defend it self against outward violence, yet no member must be set
against the head, for that tends to the dissolution of the whole.

If the similitude may be followed, we say, that some members are as necessary
to the life of the head, as the head is necessary to the life of those members.

2. Ans.
A Kingdom may sometimes have one head, sometimes another, but so cannot a
natural body.

Further, he grants, Personal defense does not strike at the order and power
that is over us, but general resistance by Arms (he says) does.

No, it may maintain and regulate order, and there may be as little injustice
on the one side as the other.

Ans.
But the case is not as Elishaes, for the King professes he will use no
violence, and we cannot know his heart.

But that example of Elisha is brought to prove the lawfulnes of using force
against Kings in using violence: and what violence has been already used, the
world knows.

Ans.
Page 10. He comes to Scriptures, denying resistance: let us see what full
Scriptures these are.

Ans.
The first is, Number. 16. 1. etc. The conspiracy of Corah and his company
against Moses and Aaron.

It is strange that this example must be paralleld with our Parl. taking up
Arms: Was Ans.
it not a most unjust and vile conspiracy, merely out of the pride of
malicious spirits? Can the D. or any man think, that in justifying Arms in some
case, we justify all villainous conspiracies and outrages?

Besides, this place condemns rising up against the Priest, as well as the
King. Yea certainly, if they had risen against the meanest officer that God had
appointed in Church or Commonwealth, as here they did against Moses and Aaron,
it would have bin a very heinous offense; Yea if Moses himself should have thus
risen against any Officer appointed by God, it had bin a vile sin in him;
therefore this proves no more against subjects resisting Princes, then Princes
resisting subjects, or one subject resisting another.

Further, we do not rise against His Majesty, as they rose up against Moses and
Aaron; we desire not that he should have less power then God and the Laws have
given him, but we would preserve this in him, and keep off the stroke of any
further power, so that we need not for this thing so much as examine the cause
upon which they rose, whether it were supposed or not, for the case is far
differing in the end of the rising.

But Corah and his company supposed the cause sufficient.

Supposed causes for any thing is not enough; now we are not examining the
truth of the cause of taking up Arms, but whether they may not be taken up by
the Subject Ans.
against the mind of the King for any cause.

Well, our consciences need not be much scrupled from this Scripture: Let us
examine the rest he brings.

The second is, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 18. where the oppression of the King is
mentioned, and no means of help mentioned but crying to the Lord.

Is the bare relation of the oppression of a King without mention in that place
of any means of help, but crying to God, a sufficient proof that though Kings
oppress never Ans.
so much, yet there is no help? Suppose I bring a place of Scripture, where
there is a relation of Subjects rising up in a wicked way against their Prince,
and in that place there is no other help mentioned, but only the Prince
committed this to God, and God revenged it, can there be drawn from thence an
argument, that when Subjects rise against Princes that they have no other help
against them, but committing the cause to God? We need not go far for a
Scripture in this kind, the very place the D. brought before will do it; Number.
15. when Corah and his company rose against Moses, we there read of no other
help that Moses used, but he committed the thing to God, and God revenged it.

But you will say, yet there are other places that show that Princes may make
use of other help.

So there is for Subjects to make use of other helps against the oppression of
their Princes, many Scriptures have been mentioned formerly and cleared. Ans.


Further, besides this, we answer, that the power of all Kings is not alike, it
is no argument because one King has such and such power, therefore all must
needs have. The power of Kings is limited or enlarged by the several Laws of
several Countries.

Let us see what the third Scripture says, for yet our consciences are not
scrupled, it is Numb. 10. That the people might not go to war but by order from
him that had the power of the Trumpet.

Because there was a positive order there that Moses must make trumpets and
thus use them; Does it follow that this must be so every where? you may by as
true a consequence Ans.
urge the necessity of silver trumpets, and that the Priests should blow them,
as well as the former: The consequence would be full as good. No King can use
Trumpets in war but by the blowing of the Priests, for it is commanded there,
as that no people can go to war till the Magistrates use the Trumpets, because
it is so ordered there; we know the Law is judicial, and for those judicial
Laws the equity binds no further then according to rules of prudence and
justice, every country shall see behoofefull for their conditions. Besides if
this did bind, then it were a sin for an Act to pass to put the Militia for
any time into any other hands, for certainly it might not then be done, no, not
with Moses and Aarons consent.

The next Scripture is, 1 Samuel 26. 9. who can stretch out his hand against the
Lords Anointed and be guiltless?

Why does the D. speak of stretching forth the hand against the Lords
Anointed? Ans.
who endeavors it? does not the Parliament profess the defense of the Kings
Persons 2. Doctor willet upon this place gives you this Answer, That indeed it
is not lawful for a private man to lay hands, no not upon a tyrant; for it is
not lawful for a private man to kill a thief of a murderer, much less a
Magistrate, a Prince. But secondly, he tells us of some that have laid hands
upon a King, and yet have been guiltless, as Ehud upon Eglon King of Moab:
therefore from that Scripture there cannot be a general Proposition drawn,
that no man in any case may stretch forth his hand against a King. Yea Doctor
willet answers in the third place, that yet Tyrants and wicked Governors may
be removed by the whole State. He indeed limits this, and says, it must be
understood of such Kingdoms as go by election, as in Polonia, and gives this
reason, From whom Kings receive their authority, by them may they be
constrained to keep within bounds. This it seems was good Divinity in those
days. This distinction he used, to deliver the opinion from opposition in
England; but if the distinction be examined, there will appear little strength
in it: We do not find that D. willet was ever reproved, or his writings
censured for this thing.

Concerning that restriction of his to Kingdoms by election, we shall, when
we come to show from whence all Kings have their power, see, that if it proves
true of them, it will prove true of others; for the foundation of all power
that such and such men have over others, will be found either from election or
covenant, which will come to all one.

D. Fern proceeds thus, If the King had come into the battle, his person might
have been hurt as well as any.

This had been but accidentally; If a father should voluntarily go into the
Army of the common enemy, against whom the child is in service, and the child
in discharging Ans.
upon the enemy should slay his father being there, especially he being desired
and beseeched by any means not to be there, but to withdraw himself; does the
child contract guilt in such a case?

His next Argument from Scripture is, That the Prophet reprechending the Kings
of Israel and Judah for Idolatry and oppression, none ever called upon the
people for this duty of resistance.

First, There is much difference between Kings now, and those Kings: The
people then did neither give them their power, nor limit their power; They do
both now when Ans.
first they are set up.

Secondly, if this be a good argument, that because when Kings oppressed, the
prophet did not call upon people for resistance, therefore all resistance in any
case is unlawful; then, if when people have resisted, and cast often the
Government of their King, and the Prophets have not reproved them for it; then
it is lawful for people in some case to resist. He that will harken to his own
reason, must acknowledge there is par ratio. If the Prophets exhorted not to
resistance, then there may be no resistance, says the Doctor? Then if when
there is resistance, the Prophets rebuke not that resistance, then there may
with as good reason be resistance, say I.

When the ten Tribes cast off the Government of Rehoboam for his oppression,
and harkening to his young Cavalliers about him, rather then to his ancient
grave counsel; the Prophets did not rebuke the ten Tribes for what they did,
but rather seemed to take their parts. 1 Kings 12. 24. ^eturn every man to his
house, for this thing is from me.

Now the D. comes to his great place again, Romans 13. which he says be will
free from all exceptions.

Nay, bare me an Ace of that. The truth is, he vever so much as mentions, nor
thinks of the great exception, which duly considered, will clear the Text to be
nothing Ans.
to his purpose.

First he supposes that the King is the supreme, as Peter calls him, or the
higher power, as here.

1. It is true, Peter calls the King Supreme, but in the same place he is made
an ordinance of man, and therefore to be limited by man. He may be the chief
man in authority, Ans.
and yet limited in that authority; he is supreme, but not absolute; We grant
that the Houses of Parliament, and we all, are his Subjects, but not Subjects
to his will, but to that power of his that Law gives him.

2. He takes for granted the King is the higher power. Here observe his
mistake. Let it be granted that the King has the highest power, yet what
propriety of speech is it to say that he is the highest power? It is proper to
God to say that he is Power in the abstract.

Well, The King has the highest power, and we must be subject to this power of
his, and not resist it. Who denies all this? When all this is granted, the D.
has got nothing at all; for if we resist not that power which Law has given
him, we do not resist the higher power, although we do not do nor suffer what
he would have us to do or suffer.

Then he reasons from the person, whosoever, every soul. There was then says
he, the Senate, etc.

But what power the Senate had for the present upon agreement, or how much of
their power was now given up to the Emperor by agreement, he shows not; and if
he Ans.
shows not this, he says nothing.

Then he tells us of the cause Christians had to resist, because their Emperors
were enemies to Religion, and had over thrown Laws and liberties.

To the first we acknowledge we must not resist for Religion; if the Laws of
the Land be against it, we must either suffer, or seek to enjoy our Religion in
the uttermost Ans.
^arts of the earth, rather then resist.

For the Emperors subverting Laws and Liberties, he must prove that the people
and ^enate had not given absolute power to them for the present, for the
preventing further wills they feared, or else it reaches not our case, for we
know our people and Senate ^ave not given any such absolute power. We must not
be put to prove, they had, for it (...) his argument; therefore if he will make
it good, he must prove they had not. And yet ^ppose they had not, if we should
gratify the D. in that thing, yet the Argument would ^e but weak: for the
Apostle requires them not to resist their power, their (...): he ^oth not
charge them not to resist their tyranny. Certainly they could have no power at
that which was given them by some agreement; if they challenged further, it was
no ^uthority at all: such kind of tyranny as they would assume to themselves,
the Apostle ^^rbids not the resistance of in that place.

As for that he says, that some affirm that prohibition was temporary, let
them main^^in it that affirm it: I am full of the D. mind in that, this
prohibition is a standing rule.

As for that distinction which he says, some make that they resist not the
power, but ^e abuse of the power.

We answer, it is not resisting abused power, for it is resisting no power at
all. Abused power is the ill use of what is given to men; but the ill use of
what was never given to them more then to any other, is abuse of their wills,
but not abuse of their power. By Power I do not mean Strength, but Authority.

Further, he says, These Emperors ruled absolutely, therefore upon that
ground men might resist, if for any thing.

1. Although the Emperors might use some force to bring themselves to an
absolute Ans.
power, yet whether the people were not brought to consent to prevent farther
danger, that must be disproved, when our case ever falls, so as we shall be
brought to consent to an absolute power, although it be out of fear (which God
forbid) then this argument will concern us, but not before.

2. What they got and held merely by force, without any consent and agreement,
was no power, no authority at all but might be resisted, no withstanding that
prohibition.

The last thing in that Sect. is, whereas we say that our Religion is
established by Law, theirs was not: He answers 2. things. 1. Shall the
prohibition be good against Christians under Emperors persecuting Religion, and
not against Subjects enjoying their Religion?

If those who have power to make Laws should prove so wicked as to make wicked
Ans.
Laws against Religion, yet I am rather bound to passive obedience in that
case, then if men never so good should command according to their own will, and
not according to Law; for there is an authority in the one, though abused, but
none at all in the other.

His second answer is, This prohibition did not concern Christians only, but
all people under the Emperor.

As before, 1. we know not but these people had given up their right. 2. If
they had not that prohibition does not reach them in those things wherein they
had not.

Ans.
Thus his Scriptures are answered, and I profess I have not answered from a
humor of seeking to overcome in a dispute, to put glosses upon the one side,
or to seek evasions from the strength of the other, but as in the presence of
God to find out truth and to satisfy Conscience that has to do with God in a
special manner.

SECT. III.
THe first Sect. is spent about the original of the power of Kings.

He first contends that the power is from God, and that he needs not contend
for we grant that the power not only of Kings, but of all lawful authority is
Gods Ordinance, but that such and such men should have this power, and how much
of this power should be put upon this man, and how much upon that, that is from
man. Hence it is very observable when the Apostle speaks of the power, Romans 13.
he says, it is of God; bu^ when Peter speaks of the men upon whom that power
is put, whether Kings or tho^^ sent by him, he says, that is a humnne
ordinance, 1 Pet. 2. 13. yea, a humane creation,(...) the words are, (...). Rea
the D. grants this, that though the power be from God, yet the designing the
person to bear that power, yea, and the qualification and l^mitation is from
men by the Laws made with consent.

The supreme Magistrate is called the Minister of God, Romans 13.

We acknowledge him so, he is also said in the same place, to minister for thy
good.

I have said, Ye are Gods.

Ans.
This is true of inferior Magistrates as well as superior, and yet none will
say, b^ inferiors may be resisted.

His conclusion is in this Sect. that though the power be of God, yet the
person d^signed, and the qualification of power in several forms of government,
and limitation, this, is by the laws of men: This is as much as we desire. Many
go no further then the designation of the person to be from man, but the D. is
more fair, he says the qualification is from man also. If so, mark what
follows, then no man can have any of this ruli^^ power, but according as he is
designed to it, qualified for it, limited in it by men, whatsover the name be
by which you call him, Emperor, King, Prince, Duke, Lord, etc.

SECT. IV.
THis Sect. is about the power of people to reassume what power they have
conferred upon Magistrates, although Gods power, yet conferred by them. He
argues thus, If the power be Gods, then people cannot reassume.

If the King gives power to an inferior Magistrate, the power that this
Magistrate Ans.
has is likewise from God, for so the Scripture says, Romans 13. All power is
from God: may not this power be reassumed therefore? Let none put this off,
with saying, But people are not above Kings, as Kings are above inferior
Magistrates, for that is nothing to the argument. The argument that he makes is
this, If the power be of God, it cannot be reassumed: Now the answer is, That
the power of inferior Magistrates is of God, and yet it may be reassumed,
therefore his consequence is not good.

Further, a servant by stipulation makes a man his Master, who was not before:
Now the power of the Master is Gods, may he therefore never be deprived of that
power? Servants must serve Christ in serving their Masters, as truly as
Subjects must obey God in obeying their Prince. Pastors and Teachers have a
ruling and a ministerial power, and this power is Gods, may it therefore never
be taken away from them.

His second Argument is, We cannot recall what is once given, as in things
devoted.

1. That can never be proved, that a thing devoted to a religious use, can
never lawfully be employed to no other. This is a groundless conceit, because
he brings no proofs for it, Eadem facilitate rejicitur, qua asseritur. But this
that we speak of is a civil thing. And for Kings, that the power they have
may not be taken away, he gives that reason, Because the Lords hand and his
oil is upon them.

So the Lords hand and oil is upon Captains and other Magistrates. Joshua and
Ans.
Zerubbabel are called The anointed ones. Prophets, Priests have Gods hand and
oil upon them, and cannot the power for no cause be taken from these? And yet
how confidently does the man conclude, This will not a true informed conscience
dare to do. Certainly notwithstanding all the information in this argument, he
may do it.

But he proceeds. How can conscience be satisfied, that this their argument
grounded upon election and derivation of power can have place in this Kingdom,
when as the Crown descends by inheritance, and has often been settled by
Conquest.

1. There is no body here that yet has attempted to take any power away from
Ans.
the King that Law has given him.

2. Howsoever, the point of inheritance or conquest cannot hinder; For first,
none inherits but that which his Progenitors had, and his Progenitors had no
more originally then by consent was given them: therefore the difference
between Kings by inheritance, and Kings by election, in this case is not much.
And for Conquest, that only settles former right, or makes way to some farther
agreement, to add to, what was former. The right comes not from power to
conquer, or act of conquering, but from some agreement, precedent, or
consequent.

He further argues, It is probable indeed that Kings were at first by choice
here, as elsewhere; but can Conscience rest upon such remote probabilities for
resistance, or think that first election will give power against Princes that
do not claim by it?

1. Is it but a remote probability that Kings were here first by election? I
demand, what first invested such a Family with Regal power, more then another?
Ans.
It must be either God from heaven designing it, as David, or men appointing
it, or taken by force: there is no quartum. It was not the first, and to say
the third is the right, is an extreme wrong to the King If mere force can give
right, then whosoever is most forcible has right; it must therefore be
something else: what can that be but the consent of people to such a family?
which is in effect all one with elect on. You may give it what name you will,
it is not therefore a remote probalilitie, but a near certainty, that even
here Kings were at first either by choice, or by that which in effect is all
one.

The Doctor says, that Kings of England do not claim their right by election.

It may be they use not that word; but if the Doctor shall presume to dispute
Ans.
their claim for them, and think to get a better and surer claim then the
agreement of people, that the Regal power shall be in such a family, surely he
will have no thanks for his labor. Let him take heed of this. Although he is
pleased to call Election a slender plea, yet I believe he cannot bring a
stronger.

He is at his place in Romans 13. again, with the absolute Monarchy of Roman
Emperors.

This has been answered again and again.

The next thing he discusses is the covenant the King enters into, and the oath
he takes. And here he tells us our Kings are Kings before they enter into the
Covenant, or take this Oath.

Although they be Kings before they personally do covenant or swear, yet their
Ans.
right comes in by their Progenitors, who had their right conferred upon them
by some agreement or other: so that they have covenanted in them.

But this clause in the covenant or oath is not expressed, that in case he will
not discharge his trust, it shall be law full to resist.

We do not stand so much upon the oath that every King takes, as upon the
original agreement between people and King, whereby this power was conferred
first upon such a family, and for that we say that no more power was conferred
then was done by virtue of that agreement; and why there should not be the same
reason in the Covenant between a Country and a Family in matters of so high a
nature, as there is in other Covenants amongst men, let the Doctor show, or any
for him.

The Doctor confesses, Page 16. line 21. That Laws are for the restraint of
the power of Princes.

But at length after the discussion of the business, he tells you that to argue
any forfeiture of power by breaking his covenant, is an inconsequent argument.
You must believe him, because he says so: If his bare word will not satisfy
you, you are like to have nothing else.

Yet we would have him and all know, that we do not think that every breach of
promise, and not performance of covenant in every thing, makes a forfeiture:
this indeed were a dangerous consequent. But the question is, Whether no breach
of Covenant may possibly in any case make a forfeiture? We confess our selves
not willing to dispute this too far.

He presently seems to grant that there may be some force in the argument in
States elective and pactionall, but not in this Kingdom.

If the ground of all power that one man has over another in Civil
Government, be some kind of election, explicit or implicit, or some kind of
agreement Ans.
at the first, let the Doctor show how this Kingdom is freed.

But what if the King will not keep to his agreement, may the Subject do
nothing? The Dr. (...), Yes, they may use fair means by Petitions, and they
may ^ery him Subsidies and ayds.

To what purpose are Subsidies and ayds denied, if the King has power to take
Ans.
our estates when he pleases, and there must be no resistance?

Though this he says may seem unreasonable to people, and very impolitique to
the Statesman, yet plain Scripture and reason forbids it.

But this Scripture and reason lies hid from us as yet, we have examined them
as they have come, and we have found plain mistakes in the alleging them.

SECT. V.
THis Section is spent in the argument of means of safety to a Kingdom in
case the King should tyrannize; if they might not resist, it seems God has
left them destitute of all help, they must needs perish.

To this he first answers, That is the same argument that is used for the Popes
curbing of, or deposing Princes in case of Heresy, otherwise the Church has
no means to preserve it self.

The good of a Church is spiritual, and God has given it spiritual means
enough to preserve its spiritual good, although there be no such power of the
Pope over Ans.
Princes, and we know the Church was preserved and flourished in spiritual
beauty when there was neither Pope nor Prince to preserve it.

But the good of a Kingdom is civil and natural, therefore it must have
civil and natural means to preserve it self by in case of danger. Hence
then although it be no argument that Popes may by power of Arms curb Kings,
and because else the good of the Church cannot be preserved, yet it may be a
good argument the people may in some case take up Arms to defend themselves
against violence, although the King gives not his consent, because otherwise
the civil and natural good of men in a Kingdom cannot be preserved.

The second thing he says is, What means of safety had the Christians in and
after the Apostles times?

God called them then to suffer; for they were not the State; though many
particular men that are not a State, may easily be brought into such a
condition as they have no means for safety, but they must needs suffer; and so
many States, when the external violence is too strong for them; but when God
and nature gives them means of deliverance, there is no necessity they should
perish. When the Doctor disproves resistance better, we will either fly or
suffer.

As for the Christians why they could not resist, the Dr. speaks of a reason
that he seems to be satisfied in, because things were so enacted by Law,
therefore they could not resist: therefore he leaves their example, as invalid
in our case, and so it were well that every one else would leave off urging,
that we may never hear of the example of the Christians in the primitive times
applied to our case more: For though it seems to be something at first view,
yet it is nothing when it is examined.

But then he says, The Edicts that concerned others were Arbitrary.

To this the Answer has been already, either the people then gave up their
whole right to their Emperors, which we have not done to our Kings, or
otherwise they Ans.
were not bound to their Arbitrary government, but might have resisted for
their own preservations.

But if Parliaments should degenerate and grow tyrannical, what means of
safety could there be for a State?

I confess the condition of such a State would be very dangerous and like to
come to confusion; particular men could not help themselves, and the whole
State ought Ans.
to suffer much before it should help it self by any ways of resisting: but
if you can suppose a Parliament so far to degenerate, as they should all
conspire together with the King to destroy the Kingdom, and to possess the
lands and riches of the Kingdom themselves, in this case whether a Law of
Nature would not allow of standing up to defend our selves, yea to reassume
the power given to them, to discharge them of that power they had, and set up
some other, I leave to the light of nature to judge.

You will say, this cannot be, because the higher powers must not be resisted
by any.

This is not properly to resist the power, but to discharge the power, to set
the Ans.
power elsewhere. The servant does not resist the power of his master, when he
upon just grounds leaves him, and goes to another, if he be such a master, as
is his master by his own choice, for such and such ends and purposes, and had
his power limited by agreement.

I know this will be cried out of as of dangerous consequence, wherefore God
deliver us (as I hope he will) for ever making use of such a principle.

It is hard to conceive it possible that a Parliament can so degenerate, as to
make our condition more grievous by unjust acts, then it would be if the power
in a Kingdom should return to the law of nature, from whence at first it rose.

Diverse lines together ofter the objection from want of safety in case of
degenerating of Parliament he spends in commending the temper of our government
in the three Estates, with complaints of some distemper for the present.

In the one I join with him: but for the other, I undertake not to satisfy all
his Ans.
apprehensions of distractions in the Parliament. The man I believe lives at a
distance from Parliament, and so looks at it through multitudes of reports
which usually (and especially in these times) are exceeding false mediums to
look through: Straight things will seem crooked, when the object is seen
through water that is too thick a medium: Reports do so gather soil before
they come to him, that when they come, they are an exceeding thick medium to
see Parliament proceedings by.

Whereas it is said, that many see more then one, and there is more safety in
the judgment of many then one: He answers, Why should an hundred in the House
of Commons see more then three hundred? and twenty in the Lords House see more
then sixty that are of a contrary judgment?

If there were so many of a contrary judgment more then the others, why do
they Ans.
not come and out-vote them in what things are amiss?

2. This adds much validity in common reason to what they determine, that
they are always a competent number, allowable by Law to be Houses of
Parliament, and they debate and determine things in such an Assembly that is
open for so many, which all the Countries and Cities in the Kingdom have
chosen, to come to debate or contradict as they think fit. Such determinations,
although I do not say they should be accounted infallible, yet they carry with
them more likely reason, then those who are carried by a few in some secret way.

Further, why should such an Objection be made against the Houses of
Parliament, that no Court of Justice, no Society that carries things by Vote,
will admit, if it be once set? that in such Assemblies there shall be so many
at the least, there may be three times more, yet so many makes up the Assembly,
so as to enable it to such and such purposes. How can this Objection, without
wrangling, be admitted? Oh but many were of another mind, or some belonging to
the Assembly were not present.

After this the Doctor proceeds to the commending of Monarchy above
Aristocrasie, and the Kings Negative voice.

This is nothing to our business. What though Monarchy be the best? and what
though the King should have power of a negative voice in the passing all Bills?
this is Ans.
granted.

Then he comes again to his 13. to the Romans

The argument from this place is worn exceeding bare by this time.

If it were lawful to resist power abused, it would open a way to people to
overthrew Ans.
powers duly administered.

1. We do not say that power abused should be resisted; but Will, where there
is no Power, may be resisted. Ans.


2. True, there is danger in the peoples abusing their liberties, and danger in
Magistrates abusing their power.

He says he intends not to lay the least blemish upon the Parliament.

Yet in the Page before he says, The Temper of the Parliament is dissolved:
and upon that says, the distractions in the Commonwealth, show the
distempers, and Ans.
the danger of dissolution, and what is the cause of it. It would fill much
paper to gather together the blemishes that this man casts upon the Parliament,
especially in his last page. But that is not my work, I would gladly have
consciences resolved.

He proceeds to show the difference between the Low Countries and us, which no
question is something, but not so as can make what they have done lawful, and
yet the Doctors tents right, nor what we have done unlawful.

He farther enlarges himself in discourse about the evils that accompany
resisting of power.

Still we say power should not be resisted, and where it is resisted sinfully,
yea where Ans.
men in power are resisted, any way, there are like to follow sad consequences
of affliction. But what is all this for the satisfaction to conscience about
the Lawfulness or unlawfulness of resisting men that have power in any case?

Then be comes to the oath of Supremacy and the Protestation.

The Answer to this depends upon what has been said, we swear only to the
Legal power, we protest no further then the maintenance of that. Ans.


He says, conscience will look at that power he has as the ordinance of God.

True, what power he has, that is, what the Laws give him, we say is an
ordinance of God. Ans.


But his abuse of power is a judgment of God, that we must cry to God against,
and a true informed conscience in that case will rather suffer then resist.

He still takes abuse of his power to be the doing whatsoever he please: we
deny that to be abuse of his power. We say in that he does not exercise his
authorative power at all, therefore he does not abuse it. If indeed some unjust
Law should give him any power to do wrong, the execution of this would be the
abuse of his power, and therein it is granted a true informed conscience would
rather suffer then resist. But in the other case, when he does what Law inables
not to do, all the arguments of the Doctor cannot so inform our consciences, as
to believe the State must rather suffer then resist.

Now the Doctor casts up his reckoning, and thinks he finds it comes to thus
much, that he has found Scripture and reason, speak plainly against resisting.

He cries victory to himself, he tells himself what the issue of his own
thoughts come to; but he reckons without his Host, his conquest is too hasty,
we are not of his mind.

I will only observe one thing more in the conclusion of his Section.

If any shall be carried away with the name of a Parliament, as Papists are
with the name of the Church, etc.

If the Church could do as much in matters of Religion, as the Parliament can
do in matters of the State, the Papists were not so much to be blamed for being
taken Ans.
so much with the name of the Church, as we are not for being taken so much
with the name of the Parliament.

For 1. The Church cannot make new Articles of Faith, or nullify the old; but
the Parliament can make new Maxims to be accounted Law, that were not before,
and undo what were before.

2. The Church has not a judicial power of interpreting the Law of God, but
the Parliament has a judicial power of interpreting the Law of the State, so
as that is to be accounted Law, which they interpret to be so. I do not say
that we are bound to believe, that whatsoever interpretation they make was the
scope and intention of that Law when it was first made: But this I say, that
their interpretation must be accounted as much binding to us for obedience, as
the scope and intention of that Parliament that first made that Law.

Thus I have done with his Scriptures, and the rational part of his Book; and
I hope others will have done with it too.

If men's consciences be satisfied in the lawfulness of the thing it self,
Subjects taking up Arms against the will of the King: His other part, every one
who understands how things are with us, that is willing to be satisfied, will
be soon able to satisfy himself. The substance of all that follows is, suppose
that Subjects may take up Arms? yet whether there be sufficient cause for us to
do it.

Toward the conclusion of the book the Dr. begins to be hot, and somewhat
bitter, but I shall not here follow him in particulars, but in the general thus

What the condition of our Kingdom is, whether in danger or not? What the
condition of our Houses of Parliament, whether they be safe or not? whether
their privileges be broke or not? Judge you whether Doctor Fern or all the
Remonstrances and Declarations we have had from both Houses be able best to
certify us: we have received information enough, and seen and felt enough to
make us believe that our Kingdom is in great danger: but it may be the Doctor
sits in his study like another Archimedis drawing his lines, and the Swords
must be about his ears before he will see or believe any danger to wards us.

The Doctor puts the case thus, whether the conscience can be so persuaded,
that the King is such and so minded, as that there may be sufficient cause to
take up Arms Ans.
against him; in this he is as miserably mistaken, as in all his other grounds
from Scripture, and his reasons, if he thinks this be the controversy.

For 1. we take up no Arms against the King,

2. Whatsoever the Kings mind be, there is sufficient cause to take up Arms to
defend our selves against others that seek our ruins We know of the plots of
bringing the Armies in the North upon Parliament and City: We know of the great
preparations of Arms in foreign parts to send over hither, and time has
discovered their further attempts, although it has indeed withal discovered
they could not bring their attempts to their desired issue. We know of many
Delinquents that are fled from the Justice of the Parliament, which cannot be
attached without force; and if they may so escape as they do, to what purpose
does a Parliament sit? it will soon be made ridiculous in the eyes of the
world. We know what is done in the execution of the Commission of Array, and
that by force of Arms, and all these things by those who are under the
authority of the Houses of Parliament: wherefore if they cannot prevent these
evils imminent, nor rectify these disorders extant, but by power added to
their authority, although there be no such horrible things as the Doctor
speaks of, namely, the Kings intentions to subvert Religion, and our Laws and
liberties, if the King do but deny to assist in the delivering us from those
dangers, not upon groundless jealousies feared, but upon certain proofs we
know we are in, and in the delivering up of such delinquents as justice must
not, our safety cannot suffer to escape, there is cause enough to satisfy our
consciences in the lawfulness of our taking up Arms. Yea, our protestation and
duty, though we had never so protested, binds us to maintain by all our
strength the Parliament in this; and in maintaining them, we do not at all
prejudice the King in any lawful power of his.

This general is enough to satisfy in what is said in the two last Sections:
As for particulars mentioned there, many of them are answered already in the
former discourse; others being matters of fact, it is more easy for any one to
answer that has a mind to examine what passages have fallen out. To go through
them particularly I shall leave to some who have more time to spare then I,
they are far more easy to answer then what was before, but not so profitable,
and yet the answer would exasperate more, they are Subjects more suitable for
Lawyers and Statists to treat about then for Divines.

Wherefore where as in the conclusion of all, the Doctor defires those who will
run the Hazard of this resistance; first to set their consciences before the
tribunal of God, and confider whether they will excuse them there when they
have shed blood, to say, we supposed our Prince would change Religion,
overthrow liberties.

No Doctor, We can comfortably, and will freely and really set our conscience
before Gods tribunal in this case, but we will not make that our plea, but we
will stand thus before the Lord.

Lord thou who art the searcher of our hearts, and our Judge, thou know we
aimed at no hurt to our King, we desired to live in peace, we according to our
solemn vow and Protestation, have only endeavored to deliver our Kingdom and
Parliament from the rage of ungodly, and violent bloody men, to bring forth the
wicked unto justice, to preserve what thy Majesty, what the law of nature, and
the Law of the Land has made our own. If thou will please to call us to suffer
for thy Name, we hope we shall be ready; but because thou tellest us that it
is not the part of a Christian but of an Infidel, not to provide for his
family, therefore we have not submitted our selves, wives and children to the
rage of these bloody men: for the substance of what we have done, it has been
in thy Name, that we may be faithful to the King, Kingdom, Parliament, and to
posterity. What failings thou have seen in the managing of it, Lord pardon to
us for Christ his sake.

Thus we are willing to meet the Doctor at Gods Tribunal, but he shall not lay
our plea for us, we fear he will have enough to do to answer for himself, yea
to answer for that Book he has put forth in such a time as this.

For a Conclusion of all.
LEt none think that though we thus justify taking up Arms, that therefore we
are of those that delight in War; God forbid. Our souls desire after peace, we
pray for peace, we would gladly lay down our lives (if we know our own hearts)
for peace.

Lately my name was injuriously added to a printed paper, wherein there was a
Petition against Accommodations: It says I went along with it, whereas I knew
nothing at all of it, until near a week after it was delivered to the House:
Thus are we at the mercy of every malignant spirit, if he can get a Printer to
assist him, to be rendered to the world as odious as he pleases. As great an
injury I suffered before, though in another nature, when a few pieces of a
Sermon I preached to young men were gathered together, and patched up with a
deal of nonsense, and additions of their own as they pleased, and then put
out as mine. Although we live amongst men set on fire, yet God forbid but we
should follow peace: but it must be the peace of Jerusalem, not the peace of
Babylon.

And the truth is, had the people known their liberties before, it is very
probable these wars would have been prevented. This I am confident has been
the great encouraging, fomenting argument for these wars, If we go in the
name of the King, none will dare to stir against us; What will they take up
Arms to resist their King? Had they seen the weakness of this their Argument,
as it is applied to this business in hand, that blood that has been shed
would have been prevented; And if the people of the Land knew the Liberty that
God, and Nature, and Law gives them, there would soon be an end of these
Wars; but a few such Doctors as this is, may help to prolong them, by
dividing the people, and putting them into a maze, coming in so plausible a
way to inform Conscience; whereas in truth he gives no bottom for Conscience
to rest on, but rather puts it to a stand, or rather into a labyrinth.

There is a necessity that in these times peoples Consciences should be
further satisfied in their liberties in this case then formerly, because the
time is (we hope) at hand for the pulling down of Antichrist, and we find by
Scripture this work at first will be by the people: Revel. 18. 2. The Angel
came down from heaven and cried mightily with a strong voice, Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen: And verse. 4. I heard another voice from heaven, saying,
Come out of her my people: ver. 6. Reward you her as she has rewarded you: and
so to the 9. ver. her destruction is threatened. Now ver. 9. the Text says, The
Kings of the earth who have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with
her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, saying, Alas, alas. Ver. 11. And
the Merchants of those things which were made rich by her, shall stand weeping
and wailing, ver. 15. All her Proctors, and Commissaries, and Chancellors that
grew rich by her, they shall lament. No marvel then though so many Proctors
get together to seek for peace upon any terms.

Here you see Babylon must down, and yet the Kings lament her fall: Who then
must pull her down but the people? Not that the people can raise a War merely
for Religion, but God will so order things, that the Papists shall by their
malice be put upon such plots and enterprises, that they shall make themselves
liable to the justice of the Law, so that Kings shall have no legal power to
rescue them from it, but inferior Magistrates, assisted by the people, shall
in a just way fall upon them, even then when the Kings of the earth and their
Merchants shall lament them. Hence Revel. 19. 6. the Hallelujah that is begun
upon the Lord God omnipotents reigning, is begun by the people, I heard the
voice as of many waters, saying, Hallelujah. Now the Scripture frequently sets
forth the people by waters, as Revel. 17. 15. The waters which thou saw,
were peoples. We read Cant. 5. 11. where the glory of Christ is set forth, it
begins at the head; but Cant. 7. 1. where the glory of the Church is set forth,
it begins at the feet, How beautiful are thy feet? Surely the right knowledge
of these liberties God has given people, will much help forward the great
things God has to do in this latter age.

This makes me willing to publish what help I can in this thing, although I
know full well I run the hazard of suffering much in it. Let Babylon fall, let
the Church prosper, it is enough, our lives are not much worth.

And now I have shown the Commission of the Lord of Hosts for wars; I shall
not yet cease to pray for peace; such a peace as may have as good a Commission
from the Prince of Peace, as the present wars of the Kingdom have from the Lord
of Hosts.

That which I have done is but as the taking of my pen to write a Letter to a
friend; but a little strength is enough to oppose a little strength.

FINIS.

