MOSES HIS SELF-DENIAL.

Delivered In a Treatise upon Hebrews 11. the 24. verse. BY JEREMY BUROUGHS.

LUKE 9. 24. He that loses his life for my sake, shall save it. Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 5. Non magnanimitatis est magnos petere honores, sed
contemnere. LONDON: Printed by T. Pain, and are to be sold by H. Overton and
T. Nichols, at their Shops in Pope's Head Alley. 1641.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, EDVARDO, DOMINO MANDEVILL, VICE-COMITI HEROI SVMMI
CANDORIS, PIETATIS AC LITERARUM FAUTORI.

LIBELLVM HVNC IN PERPETUAE OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIUM, D.D.D.

JER. BUROUGHS.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe corruption of Nature is exceeding great; it appears sundry ways, in none
more then in selvishnesse: he which at first was made altogether for God, is
now altogether for himself. The disease is Catholic, and spreads to the ends
of the earth. Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own. The people flocked after
Christ by Sea and Land, here was great seeming selfe-denyall, Christ they must
see, Christ they must hear, a Christ they must have, but this Christ-seeking
was altogether selfe-seeking; Christ tells them that it was not himself, his
Doctrine or Miracles that drew them, it was the loaves, they found more virtue
in that bread, then in the bread of life. Genesis 11. 7.


It was selvishnesse that made Laban change Jacobs wages ten times, and become
a deceiver. This made Naball churlishly deny relief to David and his, in their
distress. This made Gehezi run after Naaman, and take talents of silver, and
change of garments. 2 King. 5.
Elishaes excellency appeared in his selfe-denyall, and Gehezies baseness in
his selfe-seeking. This humor is in all, and predominant in most parties.

Some great pretenders of holiness are polluted and poisoned with this venom.
You may see it in the Jesuits Maxims and practice: They say there is not a
mixture in every congregation, their Society is without spot or wrinkle, they
have all living, and no dead members. Augustini Ardingelli paradoxa Jesuitica.
And again, their Society exceedes all others in this, that they have
Antidotes and Spices, which will preserve them from corruption, so that there
is no danger of their degenerating after some Centuries of years, as other
orders have done: Happy men, if their sayings and Societies were the same. When
they deal with Princes and Potentates, they tell them not of their faults,
Secreta instructio societatis Jesu.
but those opinions Qua liberiorem faciunt conscientiam.

Thus they do to advance themselves and their cause, that they may be thought
the Non-suches of the world; they boast of their grace, and say the Monks come
short of them, they can dally with the fairest women without danger. Paul
himself was not so perfect in that kind as they are. Here is selfe-seeking
with a witness, they throw down an Apostle to lift up themselves; they care
not who fall, so they may rise; they blast all others to beautify themselves:
But God in justice has made them odious even among Papists as well as
Protestants.

Great selfe-seekers in a Church or State ever gain great hatred. If men will
pollute Gods worship with their devices, he will make their names to stink.
Nothing makes us more honorable in the eyes of God and man, then the advancing
of his worship, and preserving it unmixt. If temporalls come in place of
eternalls, and that which is man's, instead of that which is Gods, God will make
the Authors of such evil contemptible before all the people, Mal. 2. 8, 9. It
is not unknown how divine providence proceeded against the Danish Prelates;
Had they denied themselves, maintained the pure Worship of God, sought the
public good of Prince and people, they might have stood to this day; but
because they were shamefully wicked, and sought themselves too much, they were
wholly cast out by Prince and people, Chryteus Chron. Saxon.
in the year 1537: Self-seeking is self-undoing; Absalom and Adoniah, whilst
they sought themselves, they lost their lives.

The argument of this Book is selfe-denyall, a hard, yet a safe lesson; it is
no other then Christ taught and practiced; If any man will be my Disciple, let
him deny himself and follow me, Matthew. 16. 24. there is the doctrine, see his
practice, Ioh. 6. 15. when they would make him a King, he withdrawes; the
greatness and glory that was in royal Majesty, could nothing prevail with
his spirit; He did not his own will, but the will of his Father. It liked not
him to have his works blown abroad; his whole life and death was an absolute
self-denial. This way would he have all his to go, and it is a way wherein is
no death. He that does most deny himself, he lives most free from sin. Take
a true selfe-denying man, and passion is a stranger to him; he sins not with
anger, because he rejoices in his wrongs; he swells not with pride, because
he is content to be contemned; he frets not at afflictions, because he
deemes himself worthy of all punishments. Selfe-denyall breeds great joy, and
brings great ease. It unburthens a man of himself, his sinful self: What
joy, what ease was it to Joseph to be rid of his enticing Mistress? he let
go his coat, and saved his innocence. And let a Christian rid himself of his
sinful self, and his joy and ease will exceed Joseph's; if he let go his
Flesh, he shall advance his Spirit.

Would it not be another Heaven to be rid of our sinful opinions, sinful
wills and affections? deny thy self, and this Heaven is thine. A selfe-seeker
only makes himself miserable; he is an absolute Tyrant, his self-love
turns charity out of doors, and eats up all the love that God and man should
have; neither others good, nor Gods glory are dear to him, he is a clod of
the earth that sucks the sap of his soul only to himself. It is the
selfe-denying man that is the man for God and public good. Such a one was
Moses, Heaven and Earth have been honored by him; such a one will venture
even where danger and difficulty is, self shall not hinder public good. A
selfe-denying man will stand by Gods cause and people, when others shrink for
fear and shame. History of Church of Scots.
One Douglas a Scottish Knight having heard Master Whiscart preach, said, I
know the Governor and Cardinal shall hear of it, but say unto them, I will
avow it, and not only maintain the Doctrine, but also the person of the
teacher, to the uttermost of my power. Had he minded his credit with great
ones, his estate or liberty, he would not have appeared for a persecuted truth
and man; selfe-denyall had stripped him of private respects. Antoninus Pius, when
he undertook the Title of Emperor, said he did then forgo the property and
interest of a private person; and when we take the name of Christ upon us, we
should then forgo all selvish and domestic respects.

It is the honor of a Christian to be like unto his Master Christ; he denied
himself thoroughly, and was acted altogether by the Father; let us do the
like, and be acted wholly by Christ. I live not, says Paul, but Christ lives
in me; his judgment, will, affection, life, were transformed into Christ's:
here was no halving, himself was fully laid down, and Christ was all in all,
and he gained enough by it; there is no better way then to deny our selves,
and to do it fully. It is a failing, and that a great one in many, they will
deny themselves in some things, in many things, but not in all; if they
mortify most lusts, yet to some one they will show mercy. This mercy to thy
lust, is cruelty to thy self. Iron fetters thou knockest off with
indignation, but pleadest for golden shackles, some petty beloved corruption.
Why do thou deny thy self in part, and not altogether? Curvis jam pluribus
rescissis manner in parvo ligatus. Limitations here, will prove thy
lamentations; deny thy self wholly, or not at all: if there be not through-
selfe-denyall, ere long there will be God-denyall. Have thou loved thy self
too much heretofore, nunc opus est odisse, now hate thy self: have thou leaned
upon thy own wisdom too much, now despise it, acknowledge God in all thy
ways. The further off thou art from thy self, the nearer thou art to God.
Selfe-seeking sets us at the borders of Hell, and selfe-denyall sets us at the
gate of Heaven.

Reader, would thou have two Heavens, live in Heaven on Earth, and go to
Heaven at death, study this Book of Self-denial. Vergerius, by reading of
Luther was taken off from Popery; and Pighius, by reading Calvin, was brought
to be of his mind in point of Justification. Who knows but thou may by
reading this learned Treatise of Selfe-denyall, be brought off from all thy
self-love and selfe-seeking. This Author would pull from thee that which would
ruin thee. If thou will let the Physic purge out ill humors, take away ill
blood, to save thy life, be not unwilling that a grave and godly Divine should
purge out thy self-love, and take away sinful humors, to save thy soul. It
is his aim to do thee good, follow his counsel, and thou shall never be
troubled with soule-sicknesse. It is our sinful selfe-seeking, that breeds
all the distempers of our spirits. Let us deny our selves, and then we are as
God would have us to be; we shall make high account of God, and find great
sweetness in the things of God. They that fast most, find the greatest
sweetness in their meat: And those that are the greatest selfe-denyers, find
the greatest content in God, and most blessings from God. They are ever in the
valley of Berachah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 26.
in the place of blessings and rest: And what the Prophet crowns true fasting
withal, the same will God crown selfe-denyall withal, joy, gladness, and
cheerful feasting. Zach. 8. 19.


Thy friend in Christ, W. GREENHILL.

The Authors Advertisement to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
MVch of this treatise was preached before an auditory suitable to the subject,
especially the former part of it. But many things are added, especially
exemplifications of History and quotations It is not my manner to fill
Sermons, either with histories or quotations. But I may have leave to put them
with my notes, and so you have them here. It may be they may draw some to the
reading of some things that may stick by them, which otherwise the very title
of the treatise would have caused them to reject. What you find suitable to
you, take for your profit, and thank God: what there is else, be not offended
at it, but leave it to others who may perhaps gain something by it.

I. B.

CHristan Reader by reason of the authors absence diverse faults have escaped,
especially this one, in many places the person is changed, the first is put in
for the second and third; It may seem harsh and strange that when there is
speaking to those of high rank the author should speak in the first person
we and ours, but the coppie was otherwise. p. 9. (...) r. (...) p* 59
partaker* part p. 31. f. us r. you etc.

MOSES HIS SELF-DENIAL.
HEB. 11. 24. By Faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs Daughter.
IN this Chapter we have a divine record, The sense and meaning of the words
cleared, and Doctrines raised.
a famous catalogue of the worthies of the Lord, manifesting the power and life
of that blessed grace of faith in the glorious effects of it; amongst whom
Moses is one of the most choice and eminent, holding forth unto us the glory
and efficacy of his faith, in diverse wonderful blessed fruits of it, both
actively and passively, in what he did, and in what he suffered; his wonderful
self-denial, his strange choice, his fixed eye upon Heaven, his undaunted
courage, his glorious constancy, his clear sight of the invisible God.

The first is his self-denial, which the Holy Ghost here records, as a high
commendation, as a most famous testimony of the pretiousnesse of his faith; and
indeed so it is, faith above all graces fills the heart with the fullness of
God, but most empties it of its self, raises the heart the highest in
communion with God, but keeps it down the lowest in selfe-abasement. By faith
Moses, when he was come to years refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter.

[He refused] not a bare willingness, and contentedness to be without that
honor, but, when he was put upon it, he denied it, so the word is: Yea,
horruit, aver satus est, says Chrysostom upon that place, he trembled, he
was astonished at such a thought, that he should embrace the honors of the
Court, rather then to own the people of God in their most afflicted, distressed
condition: He abhorred, he detested the entertaining such a thought in his
heart and therefore turned away from it with disdain. We never read that he
refused, or denied in words, that ever he said to Pharaohs daughter, or any
other to this effect, that he would not be her heir, or be called her son,
but actions have as loud a voice as words. When Moses came down from the
Mount, his face shined so gloriously, as the people were not able to behold it;
here his faith raises him higher then the Mount, and puts an unexpressible
luster and glory up on him. Here is a Worthy of the Lord indeed, bright and
glorious in the shining beauty of his faith, set out unto us in the full
expressions of it by the Holy Ghost himself.

By faith [Moses] Moses a man complete every way, for his parts admirable, the
Holy Ghost witnesses of him, that he was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians: so Act. 7. 22. Philo Iudaeus in vita Mosis says, that there were
sent for learned men at exceeding great charge out of foreign parts, to
instruct him in the liberal arts, and out of Caldaea, such as might instruct
him in Astrology, besides the most learned of Egypt; Lib. 9. de praepar.
and Eusebius cites another, affirming that Moses was not only learned in the
learning of the Egyptians, Evan. c. ult.
but that he taught the Egyptians the use of letters; and therefore was
honored of them by the name of Mercurius. Stromat. lib. 1.
And Clemens Alexandrinus cites one, saying, that Moses taught the Israelites
letters, and from the Jews he says the Phoenicians had them, and from the
Phoenicians the Graecians.

For the beauty of his body it was incomparable, 2.
when he was borne he was exceeding fair: so Act. 7. 20. The words in the
Greek have a greater emphasis with them then our English expression has; (...)
fine, elegant, so as citizens are when they are trimmed up in their bravery,
upon days of festivity, that is the propriety of the word, and this is said to
be exceeding, in the text, it is (...) fair to God, divinely beautiful, a
kind of divine beauty was upon him, a beauty beyond humane beauty, such
beauty as in his very face a divine luster appeared. The Scripture uses this
phrase to signify the highest degree of a thing, as Jonah 3. a very great
city, it is in the Hebrew magna Deo: so here, exceeding fair, venusta Deo.
Joseph. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Josephus reports of him, that by that time he was three years old, God added
an admirable grace to his countenance, so that there was none, but was amazed
at the beauty of Moses, and would leave their serious business, to feed their
eyes with Moses his incomparable beauty, and their eyes were held with it, that
they could not tell how to look enough upon him; and he says that they never
went from him but unwillingly.

And for the sweet temper and disposition of his spirit, 3.
that was exceeding amiable: the Scripture says that he was the meekest man
upon earth. Josph. lib. 4. cap. ult.
Numb. 12. 3. And Josephus in his fourth book, and last chapter, says he was
so free from passions, that he knew no such thing in his own soul; he only
knew the names of such things, and saw them in others rather then in himself.

And fourthly, 4.
for honor in the world, he was very eminent, the adopted son of Pharaohs
daughter; the name of this Pharaohs daughter, Joseph. lib. 2, cap. 5.
Josephus tells us, was Thermuthis: he says likewise she was the only child
Pharaoh had, Pharaoh had no son to inherit the kingdom, and that this his
daughter Thermuthis had no child, and therefore having found Moses, she set
her heart upon him, and feined her self to be with child, and kept Moses hid,
until such a time as it might be thought to be her own child, to that end,
that he might inherit her fathers crown.

And further he tells us, that this daughter of Pharaoh was much beloved of
her father, and that, in respect to her, he loved Moses also, which appears in
this relation that he has. He says that when Moses was a little one,
Pharaohs daughter brought him to her father, and put him into his arms, and
he, to gratify his daughter, took off his own diadem, and set it upon Moses
head. There were likewise diverse prognostications that Moses should hereafter
do great things. Josephus says, that Amram, Moses his father, had a special
revelation concerning this child, that he should be delivered from the danger
of being slain, and that he should be a deliverer of his people. He tells us
likewise, that when Pharaoh put his diadem upon his head, he, though but a
little child, took it off, and stamped it under his feet; whereupon some of
his Magicians would have had him put to death, saying that it was a sign, that
this child in time would cast down Pharaohs Crown.

And one Gualmyn a later writer, Gualmyn de vita Mosis. p. 1. 2. 10. 11.
writing of the life of Moses, has this relation; that when Moses was three
years old, Pharaoh made a great feast, and his Queen holding him by the right
hand, and his daughter together with Moses by the left, his Nobles being bid to
sit before him, Moses before them all took Pharaohs crown from his head, and
set it upon his own, whereupon all being amazed, one Balaam a Magitian, put
Pharaoh in mind of a dream he had had, which was this: There stood before
him an old man, having a pair of scales in his hand, and in one of the scales
there appeared to him as if all Egypt, the children and women had been in it,
in the other scale he saw only one child, which downe-weighed the whole
Kingdom, and all that was in the other scale. This is Moses, whose faith,
whose self-denial is set down unto us thus glorious in this Scripture, one
who might have lived a most brave life in the enjoyment of the highest honors,
the swetest pleasures, the choicest delights that heart could wish, and yet
this Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. This Moses
chooses rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God: this Moses is
contented to be scorned and contemned for Christ, he ventures upon the wrath
of the King and endures it all.

In this excellent argument of the self denial of such a worthy of the Lord,
1.
we are to consider: First, what he refuses, namely, to be accounted the son
of Pharaohs daughter: for Moses was generally reputed to be her own son, and
honored as her own son, but he thought it a greater honor, to be a son of
Abraham, to come of the promised seed, to have his pedigree from Gods people,
this he accounts more noble, and this he will rather glory in, though he
does prejudice himself in great p^eferments, dignities, and riches, and all
kind of outward glory that otherwise he might have enjoyed: from whence the
point is:

That nobility of birth, Doct.
and court honors, and all outward delights are to be denied for Christ.

Secondly, 2.
we are to consider the time when this was, it was when he was of full
years: the words in the original are, (...).
when he came to be great, and the observation from this is:

That it is then truly honorable indeed, Doct.
to deny honors and pleasures, when we have opportunity to enjoy them to the
full, in the very prime of our time.

Thirdly, 3.
we are to consider the principle which carried him on, which was faith; and
from thence the point is:

That faith is the principle, Doct.
that must carry through, and make honorable all a Christians sufferings. For
the first.

CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
That nobility of birth, Point. 1.
and all honors and delights whatsoever, are to be denied for Christ.
IT must be granted, that nobility of birth in it self is a blessing of God:
The children of nobles have an honorable mention in Scripture, Eccle. 10. 7.
Blessed art thou O land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. The chief, the
nobles in Israel, are called the renowned in the congregation, Numb. 1. 16. and
Isay 5. 13. that which is translated honorable men, is in the original their
glory, and so by Arias Montanus, gloria ejus. The Nobility are the glory of a
kingdom, and Jude. 8. where some are said to speak evil of dignities, the
word is glories, (...). Men in eminent places are, or should be, the glory of
those places, and of the whole country where they live. Soule-nobility is the
chief, yet I will not say the sole nobility; natural nobility must have its
due respect. It was a speech of Jonadab to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 4. Why art thou,
being a Kings son, soleane from day to day? As if to be a Kings son, were
enough to alay any sorrow, to make any condition full of joy and content:
seems it a small matter (says David) 1. Sam. 18. 13. to be a Kings son in
law? but to be borne of the Kings of the earth is accounted more, this is the
highest nobility; that which is under it, birth from other great men of the
earth is honorable likewise.

This puts great thoughts into men's hearts, this is a honor in which men do
much glory, Mihi Deorum immortalium munus and primum videtur and maximum in
lucem statim faelicem venire. Panegyr. Constable.
yet this Moses might have had in the account of the world, but he refuses
it; for God even this is to be denied. It was too high an expression,
savouring of flattery, that an orator making an oration, in the praise of
Constantine the great, had, the first and greatest gift of heaven, was to be
borne happy, and as soon to be in the lists of felicity as of nature, meaning
the happiness of a noble birth: but though this be too much, yet we acknowledge
it amongst outward privileges, not to be one of the meanest, but yet not so
great, but that there is infinite reason it should be denied in the cause of
Christ.

For first, 1.
though there be something in it, yet there is not much, not so much as any
should think it too great a thing to lay down for God.

For first, Reas. 1.
it is no such thing, but that the greatest enemies of God, hated of him, and
cast out for ever from him have had it as well as others; what a succession of
Princes and Dukes came from the loins of Esau? there reigned eight Kings in
Edom, before there was a King over the children of Israel; yea before the
government of Moses, and they flourished till the days of Obadiah, no less
then twelve hundred years, yea they lived to see the ruin of the second
Temple, as we find it related by Josephus: Joseph. de belle Iudaico. lib. 7.
cap. 22.
whatsoever is common to wicked men, Gods enemies, surely it has no great
excellency in it, neither should it be in high esteem with us. That is
observable that we find, Deuteronomy. 2. 12. and ver. 22. 23. where the Lord would
teach Israel not to insult upon their outward conquests: he gives this reason,
because they were such as he had given to others before them, who were wicked.
In Seir, says the text, The Horims dwelt before time, and the sons of Esau
possessed them, and destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead,
as Israel did unto the land of his possession: [as Israel did] Israel had not
yet possessed, but this is spoke prophetically, as it was afterward in the
days of Joshua; as if God should say, This is a favor indeed toward you, to
make you conquerours over your enemies, to give their countries into your
possession, this is an honor put upon you, but it is no other favor, no
higher honor, then wicked profane Esau has had before you, therefore you
have no great cause to be puffed up with it. That which the Lord says here of
conquest, is true of parentage, of riches, of honor, of al outward
excellencies, they are indeed favors of the Lord, but no such excellent
things, but that they have been made common to the enemies of the Lord; and
therefore there is great reason that our hearts should not be puffed up with
them, but sit loose from them.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
there is no such great matter in it, because the birth of the greatest is
defiled with sin, in the guilt and uncleanness of it, as well as the birth
of the meanest: the most noble blood upon earth is tainted with high treason
against the God of Heaven: whatsoever your birth be from men, yet you are
borne a child of wrath, an enemy to God, loathsome and abominable before him,
an heir of hell. When God would humble the Jews who gloried much in their
birth, he shows them the uncleanness, De parentibus illis venio qui ante me
fecerunt damnata^ quam natum Bern. in Medit. cap. 2.
the baseness of it, in that expression, Ezekiel. 16. your father is an Amorite,
and your mother an Hittite. I come of those parents, says Bernard, by whom I
was a damned creature before I was borne: your birth is such, what ever it be
in regard of outward greatness, as if there be not a second birth, it had
been better for you that you had never been borne, or rather that you had
been of the generation of Dragons, or the offspring of Vipers.

Thirdly, suppose it were not defiled, Reas. 3.
yet it is an exceeding poor and mean thing in the eyes of God: it may be
something before men, but before God it is nothing, for God is no respecter of
persons: so much a man is worth, Tantus quisque est, quantus est apud Deum*
as he is worth in Gods esteem: when you come to appear before God, you must
stand amongst the rest without any note of distinction of what house you came.
That which Pelicane a German Divine said concerning his learning, Melchior Adam
in vita ejus.
may be said of all honor of birth. When I appear before God, says he, I
shall not appear as a Doctor, but as an ordinary christian: so you shall not
appear as noble men when you come before God, but as other ordinary men. I
pray tell me, Dic quaeso quid genus est? nihil aliud certe quam verbi sonitus
ab omni re destitutus quod in extremo illo die probe scietis. Chrysostom. in Mat.
18. Hom. 59.
says Chrysostom, what is kindred? Dic quaeso quid genus est? nihil aliud
certe qua^ verbi sonitus ab omni re destitutus quod in extremo illo die probe
scietis. Chry. in Mat. 18 Hom. 59.
it is nothing but the sound of a word, an empty thing, which in the last day
you shall know very well. That is observable which we have, Exodus 30. 15. when
God requires a price for the ransom of the souls of his people, all must give
half a shekell, the rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give
less: when they give an offering to the Lord, to make an atonement for their
souls, God does not value the rich more then the poor, nor the noble more
then the man of mean birth.

Fourthly, 4.
it is not much in the esteem of men neither, who are wise, and rational:
hence it is observed by some, that we never read of any in scripture but
three, who solemnized their birth days, Nam genus and proavos et quae non
secimus ipsi vix ea nostra voco.
and they were Pharaoh, Jeroboam, and Herod, by which they gather how little
the glory that came from parentage was esteemed; he that boasts of his pedigree
boasts of another. Seneca in his four and fortieth Epistle writing to a
knight of Rome who was preferred for his valor, but yet of mean parentage,
for which he seemed to be troubled, Seneca cites him a notable speech of
Plato: Nemiuem regem non ex servis esse oriundum, neminem servii non ex regibu^
omnia ista longa varietas miscuit and sursum deorsum fortuna versavit. Sen.
Epist. 44.
there is no King but is raised from those which were servants; there is no
servant but had some of his ancestors Kings. Rehoboam was of a foolish childish
spirit, though above forty years old, and yet he came from Solomon the wisest
upon the earth. Nabal, whose name was a fool, whose disposition was
accordingly, who was of a sordid churlish spirit, yet he came from Caleb, a
man of a most choice and excellent spirit: 1 Samuel 25. 3. Jonathan that was that
idol Priest we read of, Jud. 18. 30. yet he was Moses his grandchild,
Cershoms son. Honor is but a shadow, and therefore it need be of
something that is our own; riches, places of dignity, titles of honor put
upon ancestors by Princes are accounted now the greatest nobility, and this
descendes to the honor of children; but that nobility which these things now
put upon men, heretofore Martyrdom was esteemed to do: and therefore amongst
Christians, in the primitive times, children were wont to glory in their
parentage as noble, if they had been Martyrs: Alius, patrem, inquit, habeo
Martyrem; Alij suae family viros obijciunt: frigida sunt ista verba. Nihil
nobis aliorum virtus prodesse valet. Aristippus.
but yet Chrysostom in his third sermon upon Lazarus labors to take off men
from glorying in this, because it was not their own; he says it is a frigid,
empty, vain boasting to boast of this, and gives this reason; for the virtue
of others cannot perfect us. It is not from whence a man comes, that is his
true glory, but what he is, and what good he does. It was the expression of a
heathen, that he regarded no more his wicked children that came from him, then
he would vermin that came from his body: if we be wicked, we may be a
disgrace to our ancestors, they can be no honor to us. Augustus Caesar had
three daughters, who were lewd, Tres vomi ca^ and carcinomata. utinam coelebs
vixissem, aut orb^s perissem.
and he used to call them his three ulcers and cankers, and was wont to cry
out, oh that I had lived unmarried, or had died without children. Although gold
comes from the earth none despises it, and although though dross and rust
comes from the gold, none regards it; the virtuous coming from mean parentage
are honorable, and the vicious coming from noble parentage are contemptible.
This is the first argument, that there is not much in nobility of birth, that
it should be counted too great a thing to be laid down for God.

But secondly, 2.
suppose there be some great matter in it, yet God is infinitely worthy that it
should be laid down for his honor: if there were ten thousand times more
honor in it then indeed there is, yet the denying of all were not a
sufficient testimony of that respect you owe to the great and glorious God. God
is worthy that all the Kings, Princes, Potentates, great ones of the earth,
should come and bow, and lie down flat before him, abased in his presence,
that they should all bring their Crowns, and pomp, and dignities, and cast
them down at his feet, as Revel. 4. 10, 11. the four and twenty Elders fell
down before him who sat upon the throne, and worshipped him that lives for
ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, etc. Such infinite distance
there is betwixt the excellency and greatness of the Lord, and all the nobles
of the world, that it is a wonderful favor of God to them, that if he do but
appear to them, they may live before him; it is their honor that their lives
may be preserved when God makes known his glory, 3.
as Exodus 24. 10, 11. And they saw the God of Israel, etc. and upon the nobles
of the children of Israel he laid not his hand, that is, to destroy them, but
they were suffered to live in his sight.

Thirdly, as God is worthy in regard of his infinite excellency, so it is due
to him; because whatsoever excellency and honor there is in the nobility of
your birth, Longelateque dilatata est magnificentia vestra supraterram, sed
audite consilium, studete quod in vobis est hanc gloriam ad illum refer a quo
est, si non vultis eam perdere, aut certe perdi ab ea. Ber. Epist. 207.
it is he that has made the difference between men: the rainebow is but a
common vapor, it is the sun that gilds it, that enamels it with so many
colors; we are but a vapor, it is the Lord that has shined upon us and our
fathers house, and has put more beauty, more luster upon us, then upon other
vapors. I may say in this respect, as Saint Paul says in another case; who
makes thee to differ? was not the lump of all mankind in the hand of the Lord,
as the clay in the hand of the Potter, to make one to this outward honor, and
another to meannesse and baseness as he pleases: he might have so ordered
things, as we might have been, not only of the most beggarly, and miserable
brood, but might have been begotten a toade, or a serpent, or any other the
vilest creature that lives upon the earth: that honor we have, God has put
upon us, and therefore it is his, the glory of it is infinitely due unto him.

Fourthly, there is no such way to add glory to your nobility, as to be
willing to use it or deny it for God. This proceeds from a noble principle
indeed, wheresoever it is. It is nature that causes the one kind of nobility,
but it is the grace of God, a sparkle of the divine nature, a ray of the very
glory of God himself, shining into the soul, that is the cause of the other.
Gratius ei fuit nomen pietatis quam potestatis. Tertull. Apol. advers. gentes.
c. 34.
Tertullian says of Augustus, that the name of piety was more esteemed of him,
then the name of power: and Ierom writing the praise of Marcella a noble woman,
says of her; that he will not make mention of her family, nor the honor of
her blood, Non praedicabo illustrem familiam, alti sanguinis decus, and
stemmata per Proconsules et praefectos decurrentia: nihil in illa laudabo nisi
quod proprium est, and eo nobilius, quod opibus and nobilitate contempta facta
est paupertate and humilitate nobilior. Epist. ad Principiam virginem.
Mircellae Epitaph.
what Proconsulls, and other great men she had to her ancestors; he says he
will praise nothing but what was her own, and especially he commends her in
this, that she was so much the more noble, in as much, as riches and nobility
being contemned, she was made the more noble in her poverty and humility.

Fifthly, Christ was the glory of his father, the luster of his glory, the
character and engraven form of his image, the only begotten Son of the
Father from all eternity: he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, he
was God blessed for ever, and yet how did he empty himself? he was made a
scorn, he was called the carpenters son, as one that was contemptible: he
made himself of no reputation, he came in the form of a servant, yea of an
evil servant that was to be beaten: yea he was made a curse, as if he had
been the vilest of men: and yet this was the glory of Christ himself, because
it was all for God, and good of souls: who is he then, that knows any thing
of Jesus Christ, that shall think much to lay down all the honor of nobility
of birth, or any outward dignity under heaven for him? It is a notable
expression that Bernard in a sermon upon the birth of Christ has: Quid magis
indignum, quid detestandum amplius, quid gravius puniendum, quam ut videns Deum
parvulum factum homo se magnificet. Intolerabilis impudentia est, ut ubi sese
exinanivit majestas, vermiculus infletur and intumescat. Bern. ser. 1. de nativ.
what can be more unworthy? what more detestable? what deserving more grievous
punishments then that a man should magnify himself after he has seen God
humbled? it is intolerable impudency, that where majesty has emptyed it self,
a worm should be puffed up and swell.

Sixthly, 6.
if we be godly God has honored us with a higher birth then what we have by
blood from our ancestors; God has given us a birth from above, he has
begotten us of the immortal seed of his Word, to be sons and daughters to
him, heirs, and coheires with Jesus Christ: we are borne of God, and the
glory of this birth should darken the other in our eyes: what great matter is
it though the glory of the other be lost, seeing God has so highly honored
you with this? Nunquam humana opera mirabitur quisquis se cognovexit filium
Dei: deijcit se de culmine generositatis qui admirari aliquid post Deum potest.
Cypr. lib. de specta^.
This birth has great efficacy to raise the heart to high and worthy actions:
whosoever knows himself to be the son of God, never wonders more at what
is humane: Noli degenerare a praecelsis cogitationibus filiorum Dei.
says Cyprian, he debases himself from the height of true generousnesse, who
admires at any thing now besides God himself. This birth you may glory in, and
it must not be denied; for those who are thus borne again, if they shall be
afraid or ashamed to appear in the ways of godliness, to manifest
themselves what they are, they fall to a degree of self-denial (if I may so
call it) beyond this of Moses, but it is a cursed self-denial. Moses refuses
or denies to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, they refuse and deny to
be called and accounted the sons of the everliving God.

CHAP. II.
How external Honor and Nobility is to be denied.
WHerein must those who are higher then others in their nobility of birth deny
themselves, Quest.
and refuse the honor of it?

First, Ans. 1.
by being willing to be employed in any, even the meanest service that God
calls them to; we must think no work of God too mean for us, but willingly
submit to it, though it darken our honors never so much in the eyes of the
world. Thus Jerome writes to Pamachius, Caecorum oculus sis, manus debilium,
pes claudorum: ipse aqua^ ports, ligna concid^^, focum extruas, ubi vincula,
ubi alapa, ubi sputa, ubi flagella, ubi patibulum, ubi mors. Ep. ad Pammach.
a godly young noble man, he would have him be eyes to the blind, hands to
the weak, feet to the lame, yea if need were to carry water, and cut wood,
etc. And what are all these (says he) to buffettings, to spittings, to
whippings, and to death. Constantinus, Valantinianus, Theodosius, three
Emperors called themselves the vassals of Jesus Christ, Vasallos Christi.
as Socrates reports of them. Theodosius did manifest it indeed in the work
of his humiliation for his sin, in the whole Church, casting himself down
upon the pavement, weeping, and lamenting for his sin in the face of the
whole congregation, which many haughty spirits, though much inferior to him,
would have scorned to do. Mean offices, Deo servire, regnare est.
if in service to Princes, are accounted honorable: the master of the horse,
the groom of the stool, they esteem these offices an honorable addition to
their nobility, the chiefest of the nobility of a kingdom think themselves
not disgraced but honored by them: shall any service then, performed in
obedience to, for the honor of the high and blessed God, be accounted
dishonorable, too lowfor the highest on earth?

Secondly, 2.
they must deny themselves in being willing to join with those of lower degree
in any way of honoring God. Thus S. Paul, Romans 12. 16. exhorts to condescend
to men of low degree: Aequeris p^uperibus inopum cellas dignanter introeas.
Saint Ierom, in his former Epistle to Pammachius, would have him equal
himself with the poor, and vouchsafe to go into the cells of the needy: the
thoughts of nobility and dignity must be laid down, they must be refused,
where God may be honored, and spiritual good attained, in joining with those
that are of an inferior rank, who it may be were in Christ before us, and
their ancestors were more godly then ours, who are far more honorable in the
eyes of God, and his saints, then we: where greater graces sit below us, let us
acknowledge their inward dignity, as their inferiority does acknowledge our
outward eminency.

And when we are willing to do thus, know that reason, and religion, teaches
those with whom we have to deal, to know and acknowledge that distance, that
God has put between us and them, never a whit the less to give us our due
honors and respects, because we are willing to lay them down, and deny our
selves in them; they will look on us with that respect that Jerome expresses
himself concerning Paula a virgin (who by her father was descended of Aeneas,
and the noble house of the Gracchi, Genere nobilis, sanctitate nobilior.
and by her mother of Agamemnon) saying she was by birth noble, but by grace
more noble; but let it be accounted injustice, that outward worth should be
respected which is the meaner, and that we should not acknowledge inward
worth, which is the better.

Thirdly, 3.
we must deny our selves, by being willing to suffer the most disgraceful
thing that can be put upon us for the cause of Christ: though we should have
all our kindred frown upon us, and cast us off, and scorn, and account us as
a disgrace unto them, we must be willing to be deprived of titles of honor,
of all our estates, of all that glory we have, that we are borne unto, to be
imprisoned, to endure any kind of torture, or death that God shall call us
unto for his names sake: Romanus that blessed Martyr was of noble birth, and
yet endured extreme tortures for Christ, when they whipped his body with cords
that had leads at the end of the^, so as they tore his flesh, that his very
bowels were seen, yet he cried out to his tormentors, that they should not
spare him for his noble birth. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 39.
Theodoret reports of Hormisda a noble man in the King of Persia his Court,
because he would not deny Christ, he was put into ragged clothes, deprived
of his honors, and set to keep the Camells; after a long time, the King
seeing of him in that base condition he was, and remembering his former
fortunes, he pitied him, and caused him to be brought into the palace, and to
be clothed again like a noble man, and then persuades him to deny Christ;
he presently rends his silken clothes, and says, If for these you think to
have me deny my faith, take them again: and so with scorn he was cast out.

It is reported likewise of one Sames a noble man, Hist. Trip. lib. 10. cap. 32.
who had and maintained a thousand servants of his own, yet was deprived of
all his estate by the King of Persia, and was compelled to serve one of the
most abject and base of his own servants, to whom the King gave his wife, that
by this means he might cause him to deny the faith; but he not at all moved,
kept his faith entire, willingly suffering all this wrong and indignity for
Christ; we have diverse later examples of men of noble birth, who have been
willing to suffer great things for Jesus Christ, and in this have shown the
true greatness of their spirits.

As that truly noble Marquess of Vico, Marcus Galeacius, whose story is
famous, and will make him honorable in all succeeding ages; He was a Courtier
to the Emperor Charles the fifth, Nephew to Pope Paul the fourth Marquess of
Vico, which is one of the paradises of Naples, Naples the paradise of Italy,
and Italy of Europe, and Europe of the earth; his father was not only a
Marquess, but was so in favor with the Emperor, as he was joined equally in
commission with the viceroy of Naples, to sway the Scepter of that Kingdom;
his mother was of honorable parentage, her brother was Paul the fourth, his
Lady was the daughter to the Duke of Niceria, one of the principal Peers of
Italy: yet being brought to hear a Sermon of Peter Martyrs, God pleased so to
work upon his spirit, that he began to enter into serious thoughts, whether his
way were right or not, then to take up a constant exercise of reading the
Scriptures, then to change his former company, and to make choice of better:
his father was moved against him with sharpness, his lady wrought what she
could by tears, complaints, entreaties, to take him off from that way: the
most part of the noble men, in, and about Naples, being either his kindred or
familiar friends, they continually resorted to him, to take him off to follow
their old pleasures together, yet at last having further light let into his
soul, to see not only the necessity of some truths that he understood not
before, but likewise of delivering himself from that idolatry that he
apprehended himself defiled with; therefore his resolutions were strong to
leave court, and father, and honors, and inheritance, to join himself to a
true Church of God; and according to this his resolution he went away: much
means were used to call him back, great offers of riches and preferments to
draw him; his children hung about him with doleful cries, his friends standing
by with watery eyes, which so wrought upon his tender heart (he being of a
most loving and sweet disposition) that, as he has often said, he thought that
all his bowels rouled about within him, and that his heart would have burst
presently, and he should there instantly have dyed: but he denied himself in
all, and chose rather to live in a mean condition where he might enjoy God,
and the peace of his conscience, then to have the riches, glory, pleasures of
Italy, and of the Emperors Court.

The History of the Lord Cobham, that we have in the book of Martys, is famous
in this kind: he was a man of great birth, and in great favor with King Henry
the fifth, so as the Archbishop Thomas Arundell durst not meddle with him till
he knew the Kings mind: the King when he heard of it, bad them have respect
to his noble stock, and promised to deal with him himself; and after he
privately sent for him, admonishing him secretly between themselves, to submit
to his holy mother the Church: unto whom he made this answer; Most worthy
Prince, I am always prompt, and ready to obey, for as much as I know you an
appointed minister of God; unto you (next my eternal God) I owe my whole
obedience, and submit thereunto as I have done, ever ready at all times to
fulfill whatsoever you shall in the Lord command me; but as touching the Pope
and his spirituality, I owe them neither suite, nor service, for as much as I
know him by the Scripture to be the great Antichrist, the son of perdition,
the open adversary of God, and the abomination standing in the holy place.

This was in the darkness of Popery, above two hundred years ago. The
blood-thirsty Papists never left till they got his blood, prevailing with the
King to consent to his condemnation, and when the sentence of his condemnation
was read, the story says, that this worthy noble man with a cheerful
countenance spoke after this manner: Though ye judge my body, which is but a
wretched thing, yet am I certain and sure, that you can do no harm to my
soul, no more then could Satan to the soul of Job; here were truly noble
spirits indeed, showing their nobility by refusing of it, by being willing to
deny it for Jesus Christ. Oh that God would raise up many noble spirits that
shall be thus willing to deny themselves. As Judge. 5. 9. My heart is toward
the governors of the people, that offered themselves willingly among the
people: bless ye the Lord; the eyes and hearts of Gods people are after you
the nobles and governors, if ye offer your selves willingly, how shall our
hearts be enlarged, and our members opened to besse the Lord. As Ignatius said
concerning Christ; Antiquitas mea, Jesus Christus, nobilitas nostra, Jesus
Christus.
my antiquity is Jesus Christ: so let us say of him; our nobility is Jesus
Christ, showing this, that we indeed are of the royal seed, that we are of
truly noble blood, that we have the blood of Jesus Christ running in our
veins, that raises our spirits far above whatsoever honor our natural
births have raised us unto.

It were a blessed thing, if those who are of noble parentage, yet in the cause
of God, they would not look at what nature has advanced them unto; But
wherein it is that they are begotten again by the almighty work of the grace
of God, by that heavenly principle, the sparkle of that divine nature that is
put into them? That in the cause of God it were with them, as it is said of
Levi, he must not know father or mother. We must not say as those Jews, Mat.
3. 9. We have Abraham to our father, we are borne of noble parents; but as John
to them, so I say to you, bring forth fruit, or else the axe is laid to the
root of the tree: stand not so much upon the blood we have, as upon the good
we do. If we would glory in our parentage, especially glory in our ancestors,
who have been godly, who have made themselves noble indeed by the worthy
things they have done for God and his people; and let it be our honor, to
continue this honor to our family, rather resolve to lose our life, then to
let this honor of our family die in us; that it may not be said, how did
Religion flourish in such a noble family, for two or three or more successions?
but now all is gone, ever since such a sons time all is gone, and things are
turned another way. It is a blessed thing to have the glorious name of God kept
up in succession in a family, Psalm. 72. 17. we have a prophesy that the name of
Christ shall continue from generation to generation: the words are, filiabitur
nomen ejus, it shall be childed, it shall be begotten from one to another; the
lineall descent of Christ's name, is more honorable then the lineall descent of
noble blood. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 41.
Pliny tells us that it was accounted a great honor, even the height of
felicity, that in one house and race of the Curios, there were known to be
three excellent Orators, one after another, by descent from the father to the
son, and that the Fabii afforded three presidents of the Senate in course, one
immediately succeeding the other: if this succession be so honorable, so
happy, how honorable, how happy does the succession of religion make families
to be? Melius est ut inte glorientur parents, qua^uttuin parentibus glorieris.
We glory in our ancestors, let our ancestors be made glorious in us: It is
better, says Chrysostom, that our parents should glory in us, Chrysostom. in Mat.
4.
then that we should glory in our parents: we should do nothing unworthy of
our ancestors.

It is reported of Boleslaus the fourth, King of Poland, that he used to have
the picture of his father hanging about his neck, in a plate of gold, and when
he was to speak, or do any thing of importance, he took this picture, and
kissing it said; Dear father I wish I may not do any thing remissely,
unworthy of thy name. Oh that many of our nobility, whose ancestors have been
famous for godliness, would often have such thoughts as these; that they would
often consider how unworthy of the name of their noble ancestors those ways
are, in which now they walk! Certainly our parentage is a mighty engagement
unto us for noble and virtuous actions. I see nothing in nobility to be
desired, says Jerome, but that noble men are constrained, Nihil aliud video
innobilitate appetendum, nisi quod nobiles quadam necessitate constringuntur ne
ab ^utiquorum probitate degenerent. Hieron. in Epist.
by a kind of necessity, not to degenerate from the goodness of their
ancestors. It is the happiness of godly parents when they dye, to see hope of
their godliness to live in their children, to preserve the lives of their
godly parents in themselves. Ambrose in his funeral Oration upon Theodosius
says, Theodosius tantus Imperator recessit a nobis, sed non totus recessit,
reliquit enim nobis liberos suos in quibus debemus eum agnoscere.
that though Theodosius be gone, yet he is not wholly gone, for he has left
Honorius with other of his children in whom Theodosius still lives. Oh that it
might be said of many of our ancient religious nobility, that although they
be gone, yet they are not wholly gone, for they have left their religious
truly noble children in whom still they live! Ambros. in obit.
but woe unto us, Theod.
how many of them are gone, yea they are wholly gone, nothing of their true
nobility is left remaining in their family, but only empty titles.

If meannesse of parentage be a dishonor to a child, Mihi dedecori sunt
parents, tu vero parentibus*
what dishonor then is the wickedness of children to noble parentage. It was
the speech of one being contemned for his mean birth, To me, says he, my
parents are made a disgrace; but we are a disgrace unto our parents, and which
in our consciences do we think to be most eligible? It is better, Melius est
de contemptibili clarum fieri, quam de claro genere contemptibilem esse. Chrysostom.
in Mat. 4.
says Chrysostom, to be famous from a contemptible family, then to be
contemptible from a famous family: This is the privilege of a truly noble
virtuous life, that we shall not only have those worthies, Omnes by majores
tui sunt, si te illis geris dignum Sen. Ep. 44.
from whom we have come by a natural line, to be our ancestors, but all the
worthies of the Lord, whose virtues and noble services for God survive in us,
shall be accounted our ancestors.

What abundance of service might be done for God, and his truth, if the nobles
and the great ones of the earth, did give up themselves and their honors to
the service of the blessed God: if they did encourage the hearts of their
brethren in joining with them, Minime Deus est acceptor per sonaru^, nescio
tamen quo pacto virtus in nobili plus placet, forte quia plus claret.
in doing or suffering whatsoever God calls for; I say their brethren, for so
we have it, Nehem. 10. 29. Certainly Christ will take it exceedingly well at
their hands; God is no acepter of persons, yet I know not how, says Bernard,
virtue in a noble man does more please, Bernard. ad Sophia^ Virgin.
it may be, because it is more conspicuous. It is an observation of Ierom,
that Saint John who was the beloved disciple was of noblestocke, and therefore
the rather beloved, in which regard he says he was so known to the high*
Priest, and did not fear the Jews, so as the other disciples did; He could
bring Peter into the Hall, and he alone of all the Disciples could stand before
Christ at the Cross, and receive to him the mother of our Savior.

Wherefore let us add Christian nobility to our natural, and then to our
Coronets we shall have added a crown of life, a crown of glory; to our costly
garments, the glorious shining robe of a Saviors righteousness, to ous jewels
and ornaments, the graces of that blessed Spirit, more precious then Rubies; to
our chains of gold, the golden chain of salvation, the linkes whereof are
described, Romans 8. We have vassalls under us now, the whole frame of creation
shall then be under us, and serviceable to us; to our attendance shall be added
the Angels, who shall be our guard, pitching their tents about us, ministering
spirits unto us. Certainly there will be no honor lost that is ventured for
Christ.

Moses who was content to deny himself in this honor he might have had, lost
no honor by it, for God raised him to the greatest honor that ever any man
was raised to before him or in his time. He who was content to deny the title
of the son of Pharaohs daughter, had after that great and high titles put
upon him even by God himself, to be called Pharaohs God, Exodus 7. 1. because
of that fear of him, that was struck into Pharaohs heart, and the power he
had to execute judgments upon Pharaoh and his people: God spoke with him face
to face, as a man speaks to his friend, God wrought wonderful things by him,
and made him the Prince and leader of his people, and that was a greater honor
then any he could have had in Pharaohs Court.

Oh therefore let it not be said of you, when God has any special service to
do, as it was of those Nobles in Nehem. 3. 5. But the nobles put not their
necks to the work of the Lord. It is true, the Scripture says, that there
are not many rich, not many noble that are called, and every generation finds
the experience of it, but the more rare the more honorable, Quid faciunt sordes
animorum in splendore natalium Cassiod. l. 4. v^r. 19.
in those who do give up themselves to the honor of God, upon whom they,
their honors, and all their goods depend. Do not stain the nobleness of
your birth with the filthiness of sin: It was a speech of Theodorick a King;
What does filthiness of mind do in splendour of noble birth: what benefit is
it for a river to come from a clear spring, if it be muddy? ye are the
children of nobles, and therefore honorable; so were the children of Israel,
but God regarded not their birth, when their lives were wicked: he speaks
this in dishonor of them, Amos 9. 7. are ye not as children of Ethiopians
unto me, O children of Israel? what? children of Israel to be as the children
of Ethiopians? what a debasement is this? you are noble, be not as the children
of the vilest of the earth before the Lord and his people, lay not a foundation
of dishonor to your posterity, Isay 14. 20. The seed of the wicked shall not
be renowned; they shall not be noble, for it is the same word that, Numb. 1.
16. is used for nobility.

God forbid that any of you should have a thought that the service of God
should be a disgrace unto you, that it should be too low a thing for you, that
it should be counted a disparagement to you to stoop unto it, that it should
be thought a stain to your honors: oh no, it is sin only that spots and
stains your honors. Take heed of being ashamed of Jesus Christ in any
service of his; his service in the meanest works of it, is a greater honor to
you, then you can be to it. It is the unhappiness of many who are of birth
and quality, they lose much spiritual good that they might have in communion
with Gods servants in their gifts and graces, because of that distance that is
between them; and although some duties of religion are taken up by them* which
may in their own thoughts stand with their honors, and correspond with their
friends of quality, yet other duties are looked at as too low, as praying in
their families when other help is wanting, instructing servants, leaving
unnecessary occasions and sports, to attend upon the preaching of the word,
calling over what of Gods mind has been made known to them. The Holy Ghost
sets it out as an addition to the honor of those noble men of Berea, Acts 17.
11. that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures after they had heard Paul preach, to examine what had been delivered
to them: After Oswald, King of Northumberland, was converted by one Aidan a
Bishop, Beda. Hist. lib. 3. Cap. 3. 6*
it is reported of him, that he disdained not to preach and expound to his
subjects and nobles in the English tongue, that which Aidan preached to the
Saxons in the Scottish tongue.

It still remains the glory and renown of that young truly noble Lord
Harrington in the blessed memory of him, that he was so diligent and so
constant in those duties of religion which now are accounted so mean and low
by many great ones. It is recorded in his life, that he prayed not only twice
a day in secret, but twice with his servants likewise in his chamber, besides
the joining at the appointed times of prayer in the family: he meditated of
three or four sermons that he had lately heard every day; every Lords day
morning he would repeat the sermons that he had heard the Lords day before,
and at night those he heard that day. There is no disproportion between such
exercises as those, and the dignity of nobility, if things be judged according
to righteous judgment: there is in truth no denial of the honor of true
nobleness in these, but because of the perverse judgment of the world, there
is need of much self-denial to submit to them.

The conclusion of this point is this: if you would be indeed honorable, as
your famous and religious ancestors have been, be as they were. Religion says
to us, as God to Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 30. them who honor me I will honor. I have
read of the Lacedaemonians, that for the stirring up of the spirits of young men
to noble and heroical enterprises, they used to have the Statues in marble or
brass of their most famous worthies set up in their Senate house, with this
Epigramme graven in golden characters underneath, si fueritis sicut hi: if you
will be like these, that is, in virtue and famous actions, eritis sicut illi,
you shall be like them in glory and renown. Thus the memory of the succeeding
generations after worthy ancestors has lifted them up in their due honor and
their deserved high esteem, with this Motto upon them, si fueritis sicut hi,
eritis sicut illi: be we like them in holy desires, for the honor of religion,
and the good of our country; and we shall be now, and in the succeeding
generations like them, in a blessed and glorious memorial of us.

Honor likewise, and all pleasures and delights that we enjoy, are to be
denied for Christ. It is true, they are the blessings of God in themselves:
many of Gods servants have enjoyed them, and made much use of* them for God and
his people; as Joseph, Ester, Mordecai, Obadiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, the
Lord deputy of Cyprus, Acts 13. 2. the great Lord Treasurer of the Queen of
the Ethiopians, Acts 8. 27. So it is said, that he had the charge of all her
treasure; and those that were of Caesar's household, Phil. 4. 22. And so in after
times. Church Histories relate unto us many worthyes of the Lord who lived in
the Courts of the greatest persecuters of Christian religion, and yet they kept
their faith entire, and their consciences unspotted. As Flavianus in
Vespasianus his Court, Dorotheus in Dioclesians, Terentius in Valentinians, and
multitude of others might be named in all succeeding generations. Court-honours
are to be denied for Christ, for they are his, it is he that has raised us
in these, higher then others.

And though they be blessings, yet not so great, that we should grudge Jesus
Christ the having the honor of them; the least of his honor has more
excellency in it, then all these in the height of them, and ten thousand times
more then these: for there is a vanity in them all: we know Solomon, who had
the highest of them that ever were, yet he saw, and had the experience of
vanity, yea exceeding vanity, and vexation of spirit to be in them: observe his
expression; First vanity, not vain only, but vanity it self. Secondly
excessive vanity, for it is vanity of vanity. Thirdly a heap of vanities, for
it is in the plural number, vanity of vanities. Fourthly, all is vanity.
Fifthly, he adds his name to that he says; says the Preacher, Choeleth, the
word signifies the soul that has gathered wisdom, or the soul that is
gathered to the Church, as some.

When Daniel, chap. 4. had the vision of the estate of the four great
Mornarchies of the world; the Persian, Chaldaean, Grecian, and Roman, it was
set out unto him by the four winds: what are all the Empires, all the
dignities of the world, but as wind? There is no reality in these brave Court
things, which are so admired and magnified by the most. When Agrippa and
Bernice came in great pomp to the judgment seat, Acts 25. 23. it was all but
a mere fancy, (...).
for so the words are in the original: they came with much fancy. Honor is
but a shadow, and when it comes from these outward things, it has not the
dignity to be so much as the shadow of a substance; for all these outward
things are as shadows, Prove. 8. 20. 21. wisdom there says, that she
leads in the paths of righteousness, and in the midst of the paths of
judgment, that she may cause those that love her to inherit substance: the
word substance is translated by some id quod est, that which is, that which
has a being, as if nothing had a being, as if nothing could be called a
substance, but that which wisdom (that is, grace and godliness) gives to
inherit. The fashion of this world passes away, says the Holy Ghost: (...).
the word in the original signifies the surface, the outside, as if all the
things of the world were a mere surface, and avaine outside. The shadow of a
man may be longer or shorter, Nemo istorum quos divitiae and honores in alto
fastigio ponunt magnus est, sed ideo magnus videdetur quia illum cum basi sua
metiris.
but the man remains the same still, it adds nothing to the man: honors and
preferments may be more or less, but the man remains the same he did before.
No man, says Seneca, whom riches and honors set high, is therefore great, he
only seems so, because we measure him with his Basis; but set a dwarf upon a
mountain, he is not higer, and set a mighty high statue in a pit, Pumilio
magnus non est, licet in monte constiterit colossus magnitudinem suam servabit,
etiamsi ste^erit in puteo. Se^. Ep. 77.
it is not the less. When gold is raised from twenty shillings to two and
twenty, the gold was as good before as it is now, it is the same piece still
that then it was, the raising of it is only in the estimation of men. It is
said of Eliakim, Isaiah, chap. 22. v. 24. They shall hang the honor of his
fathers house upon him; honor is but an external additament, there is no
internal excellency in it. Great letters in a word set out with gaies, take
up more room then others, make a greater show in the word then other letters,
but they add no more to the sense of the word then others do: so men enjoying
great honors in the world, they carry a greater port with them, they make a
greater show then others, but the men are not the better for the^.
Notwithstanding all the outward honors of Antiochus Epiphanes, yet still the
scripture calls him a vile person, as Daniel chap. 11. 21. all these things
are a mere fable. An non personam meam in hac mundi fabula satis commode
egisse videor? valete ergo, and plaudite.
When Augustus Caesar was near to death, who had been Emperor fifty years,
and living in much glory and pomp, commanding almost all the known world, yet
when he was to die, he saw all that he had enjoyed to be but a mere fable; for
thus he expresses himself to the^ that were about him, Sueton. in Aug.
Have not I seemed to have acted my part sufficiently in this fable of the
world? Pleasures to be denied for Christ.


But if there be no reality in honor, yet it may be there is something in
pleasures, men feel something, they think there is such a reality in them,
that in comparison of them, all other excellencies that are spoken of, are
judged by them but mere imaginations: but if the excellency of these may
pass, according to the judgment of the Holy Ghost, if that sentence that he
has passed upon them may stand, there is nothing in these neither; which
appears by the comparing of two places of scripture. In the sixth chap. of the
Prophecy of Amos, and the fourth verse, he charges the Courtiers of
riotousnesse; for it appears, that though before he was a heards-man, yet now
he is a Preacher to the Court, Amos 7. 13. that riotousnesse which he charges
the^ withal, he expresses thus; That lie upon beds of ivorie, and stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and calves
out of the midst of the stall: They would have the best of every thing
whatsoever it cost them; calves in the midst of the stall were the best. They
chanted to the sound of the viole, and invented to themselves instruments of
music like David; that is, most curious and exquisite instruments, not like
David's instruments to praise the Lord by, but as David intended the best
instruments he could to serve God by; so they invented the best that could be
got, and laid out much charge for them, that they might more fully serve their
lusts by them. They drink wine in bowls, and annoint themselves with the
chief ointments, and these they give up themselves unto, so as they mind
nothing else; they care not what becomes of any thing, so be it they may freely
enjoy the pleasures of their lusts: They are not grieved for the affliction of
Joseph.

This their life might seem to some a most brave and desirable life, but
mark what the Holy Ghost says of it in the same chapter, verse thirteen, Ye
which rejoice in a thing of naught, all these pleasures put together were in a
true judgment but a thing of naught; Res nihili, they had nothing in them;
when we feed upon those, we do but feed upon ashes, and a seduced heart
has deceived us, Isay 44. 20. that we cannot say, is there not a lie in our
right hand? they do most certainly put a lie into our right hand, that is,
they make us to use our chiefest strength for that which is nothing else but a
mere lie, and yet they do so ensnare us, and so grossly seduce us, that we
cannot say, is there not a lie in my right hand? we cannot so much as question
with our selves: Are these the things that we were borne for? are these the
chief good of those that are raised to such an high estate? are there not
other things that God requires of us to look after? we cannot thus say in our
own thoughts, Is there not a lie in our right hand? such is the evil and
unreasonablenesse of our way, that if we did but say thus in our own heart, we
would soon be ashamed of it, confounded in it, and our hearts would quickly
turn away from it.

But by the favors of the court, Riches to be denied for Christ.
a man may raise his estate so, as to make him, and his, that follow after,
great; there is some reality in riches, is there not? No, not in riches
neither, for so says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. will thou set thine eyes upon that
which is not: for riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an
Eagle. Observe first, the Holy Ghost says that riches are not, are nothing:
those things that make men great in the eye of the world, are nothing in the
eyes of God: a cipher is nothing in its self, yet put a figure to it, and it
is something. Secondly observe, the Holy Ghost would not have us so much as set
our eyes upon riches, they are not objects worth the looking on. Thirdly
observe, with what indignation he speaks against those that will set their
eyes upon them; will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? as if he
should say, what a vain, unreasonable, sottish, senseless thing is it?
Fourthly observe, that he says their parting from us is by way of flight, that
is, a sudden, a swift, and irrecoverable motion. Fifthly, observe that this
flight is by the wings of an Eagle, which is the most sudden, the most swift,
and irrecoverable motion. Sixthly observe, none need put wings upon them to fly
away, for so says the text, they make to themselves wings, there is matter
enough in themselves to work their own corruption, and to put themselves into
a flight.

We think when we are called to deny such riches, pleasures, and honors,
that then we are called to deny some great thing; but the truth is, had we an
eye to discern the vanity of them, we should see that we are called to deny
nothing but a mere fancy, a thing of naught, and that which is not. Oh that
the glory of the world were darkened in our eyes, as one day it shall be, that
it might not be so dear unto us, as to think it such a great matter to
part^^^ with any thing in it, in the cause of Jesus Christ. Riches are too
mean things for a truly noble spirit to be taken withal: if generousnesse of
spirit cannot raise above money, where is the glory of it. Luther professes
that the sin of covetousness, he saw so base and vile, and his spirit was so
above it, that he was not so much as tempted with it.

That which is observed of Joshua, makes him a glorious example to all great
men. He was the divider of the land to Israel, and left none to himself, and
that portion that was given him, and he contented with all, was but a mean one
in the barren mountains. This Jerome notes in his Epistle upon Paula, Mirata
est quod distributor possessionum sibi montana and aspera delegasset.
he says she visited the Sepulcher of Joshua, and marvelled very much, that
the divider of the possessions had the hilly and craggy places for himself.

And yet further know, as there is a vanity and emptiness of good, so there is
a mixture of much evil; they are as water in the bottom of pits exceeding
muddy; the water is not much, but the mud causes it to be unusefull. If things
be so mixed with trouble and cumberance, that the evil of them will not answer
the good expected in them, we reject them as things unprofitable. You will deny
your selves many times in forty, in a hundred things, to get your mind in some
one, and it may be when you have it, it is not worth the while, such a thing as
a true noble generous spirit would cast off with scorn; you get honors,
pleasures, and riches, but consider whether all be not muddy water, whether
there be not much evil in the getting, and in the enjoyment of them, what
fears and suspicions? what undermining one another? what disappointments? what
vexations? what a clutter of business crossing one the other? what snares and
temptations lie in your way at every hand? you walk all the day long upon
snares, as Job. 18. 8. upon dangerous snares that bring much sin and guilt,
and will bring much sorrow and misery: how little do you enjoy your selves for
the present, nor any thing you have to your selves?

Hence some give the reason, why Joseph, although he had power to have advanced
his brethren in the Court, yet he would not have them live there, but by
themselves in Goshen, tending their sheep; he had an extraordinary call to be
there, but he knew the encombrance and snares of it, that he sought it not for
his brethren. If a thing that is cold, have some heat added to it, and then as
much cold as that heat was, the thing is not hotter then it was before; so
you, though you may have much honor, and pleasure, and riches added to your
estate, though the world who look upon these think you happy, yet you your
selves knowing that there is as much evil likewise added to your condition, as
the good of those come unto, your condition is not at all more happy then it
was before.

Again further, consider the uncertainty that is in all; indeed the comforts
that nature affords are chiefly to be had with you; but even nature it self is
but a wheel, all at uncertainties: (...).
as James 3. 6. The tongue is said to set the whole course of nature on fire:
the word in the original is the wheel of nature. You know the story of
Sesostris King of Egypt, who would have his chariot drawn with four Kings,
and one of them had his eyes continually upon the wheel; whereupon Sesostris
asked him what he meant by it? he answered, that it put him in mind of the
mutability of all earthly things; for I see, says he, that part of the wheel
which is now up on high, is presently down beneath, and that part which is now
below, is presently up on high: whereupon Sesostris being moved, considering
what mutability might be in his own estate, he would never have his Chariot
drawn after that manner any more. The relation of this story, was a means to
bring down the stoutnesse and pride of another great Prince: For when
Mauritius sent Theodorus his Physician ambassador to Chaianus Prince of the
Hunnes, who perceiving the stoutnesse and arrogance of the Prince, related unto
him the story of the King of Egypt; Chaianus being moved by it, his spirit
yielded, and he was content to come to conditions of peace with the Emperor
Mauritius.

All men in worldly honors are like an houreglasse, now this end is uppermost,
by and by this is down, and the other is up, and this part of it is full, and
by and by it is empty, and the other that was before empty is full, what is
become of all the great ones of the earth that lived and ruled in the earth but
a while ago? their glory is buried in the dust, Ps. 76. 12. The Lord cuts off
the spirit of Princes: the word is, he slips off, as one should slip off a
flower between ones fingers, or as one should slip off a bunch of grapes
from a vine, so soon is it done. How great uncertainety have many great ones,
by their miserable experience, found in their outward glory, and worldly
felicity? what a change has a little time made in all their honors, riches,
and delights?

That victorious Emperor Henry the fourth, who had fought two and fifty
pitched battles, fell to that poverty before he dyed, as he was forced to
petition to be a Prebend in the Church of Spier, to maintain him in his old
age. And Procopius reports of King Gillimer, who was a potent King of the
Vandalls, who was so low brought, as to entreat his friend to send him a
sponge, a loaf of bread, and a harp; a sponge to dry up his tears, a loaf
of bread to maintain his life, and a harp to solace himself in his misery.
Philip de Comines reports of a Duke of Exceter, who though he had married
Edward the fourths sister, yet he saw him in the Low Countries begging
barefoot. Bellisarius the only man living in his time, having his eyes put
out, Date obolum Bellisurio.
was led at last in a string, crying, give a halfepeny to Bellisarius.

These are the uncertainties, and mutabilities of all worldly honors: mighty
Potentates of the world have been ludibria fortunae, Ludibria fortunae.
the very scorn of fortune: all the choice things that the world affords, are
as water in broken cisternes, not having any spring to feed them, and the
cisterne being broken will let out all; they are but as a thing without a
foundation, which cannot stand long. That is observable that we find in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 11. v. 10. It is said of Abraham, that he sought
a city that had a foundation: noting thereby, that all other cities though
never so glorious, and by consequence all other worldly things, have no
foundation to uphold them. Hence Plutarch tells us that the ancient nobility of
Rome and Arcadia, Plut. de quaest.
were accustomed to wear moons upon their shoes, Romans 9. 76.
that they might have always the mutability of their prosperity before their
eyes. That which Saint Paul says of riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. is true of all
worldly things; Trust not in uncertain riches: so it may be said, trust not
in uncertain honors, nor in uncertain pleasures.

Hence it was that Solon, when he saw Croesus puffed up with his great riches,
and outward glory, thinking himself the happiest man that lived, he said unto
him, none was to be counted happy before death: intending hereby to admonish
him of the uncertainty of those riches, in which he blessed himself so much,
and would have him consider, that before the end of his days there might be a
great change in his condition: but he while he enjoyed his outward prosperity,
minded not at all what Solon had said unto him, until he came by his miserable
experience to find the uncertainty of his riches, and all that worldly glory
that he had, and then he could remember Solons speech unto him; for when he
was taken by King Cyrus, and condemned to be burnt, and saw the fire preparing
for him, then he cried out, O Solon, Solon: Cyrus asking him the cause of that
outcry, he answered; that now he remembered what Solon had told him in his
prosperity, that none was to be accounted happy before death.

Thus we have many, who hear much of the uncertainty, and vanity of their
outward honors, sensual pleasures, great estates and riches they have in the
world, but while they enjoy the sweet of them, they little mind what is said,
till they come upon their sick beds, and death beds, and then they cry out
most lamentably of the vanity of all worldly things, then they can remember
what has been said unto them heretofore, concerning the vanity and short
continuance of all those things they took so much delight in.

All things then wisely and duly considered, these honors, pleasures, and
riches are not such great things, that we should be so hardly brought to deny
our selves in them: a wise understanding heart would quickly cast dirt in the
face of them all, a true noble great spirit would trample them as dirt under
feet, Non magnanimitatis est magnos petere honores, sed contemnere. Aug. de
civit. Dei* lib. 5.
when once they come in competition with Jesus Christ. It is an excellent
speech of Saint Augustine; It is not an argument of a great mind, to seek for
great honors, but rather to contemn them: and indeed (considering all, at
least in the cause of religion) they are to be accounted as contemptible and
vile things. They are like a candle, which while it is light it has some
luster, and has no ill savor, but when it is out it stinkes: so all outward
excellencies, while they are as it were enlightened with grace added to them,
and a holy use of them, they have some luster, and are desirable, but take this
away, howsoever they may appear to a carnal eye, yet they are indeed but as
a contemptible snuff, unsavory themselves, and making those who have them
unsavory in the nostrils of God.

And consider yet further, what Jesus Christ has denied for us, if ever we be
saved by him. He came from the bosom of his Father, and from that infinite
glory he had with him, before the world was; for so he prays, Joh. 17. that
the Father would glorify him with that glory he had with him, before the world
was: He left the riches and pleasures of heaven, and that honor which he
might have had from Angels and men, and all to save poor, wretched, sinful
creatures.

And lastly, God has greater preferments for us, then all these things here
below can afford, if we have hearts to deny these for him: we need take no
care for dignities, delights, and riches, or whatsoever may make us happy and
glorious; there are infinite treasures of all with the Lord, and he delights
in the communication of them to the children of men. Heathens accounted the
honor that learning put upon men as great a glory as that which came by places
of dignity, as Seneca says of Socrates; Patricius Socrates non fuit, Cleanthes
aqua^ traxit; Platonem non accepit nobilem philosophia, sed fecit. Sen. Epist.
44.
Patricius Socrates non fuit: Socrates, he was not of the race of the Senators,
and yet honorable. Cleanthes drew water. Philosophy did not find, but made
Plato Noble. What? shall they account learning to put honor enough upon men to
satisfy them, and shall not Christians think that godliness and the honor
which that brings, is sufficient to make them glorious? Surely we know not
that nearenesse that godliness has to God himself, that infinite glorious
first being, from whom the luster of all true glory proceeds; surely we know
not, how high and great the thoughts of God are toward his people, what honor
he has, what he will put upon them everlastingly, if this be not enough to
satisfy our hearts for ever.

CHAP. III.
How Honors, Riches, and all delights whatsoever, are to be denied for Christ.
WE are to deny these for Christ. First, by going on in the ways of
godliness in the strictness and power of them, though all these be hazarded;
keep we on our way, and pass not for them, trust God with them; if we do
still enjoy them, so it is; but if not, yet maintain a constant strong
resolution of keeping on in the ways of Gods fear. Thus did Daniel, when the
Princes and Nobles watched him, in the matter of the Lord his God, yet he
abated not one whit, he went on in his course, notwithstanding all the hazard
he was in: the constant course of godliness in communion with his God, was
more sweet and precious to him a thousand fould, then all his Court preferments
and pleasures that he did, or might further enjoy. How resolutely did Nehemiah
go on in the work of the Lord, notwithstanding that opposition he had? such
conspirings against him, such complaints, such letters sent to inform against
him. And David professes, Psalm. 119. 23. That he did meditate in Gods Law,
though Princes spoke against him.

Secondly, 2.
appear for God and his cause, his truth and his people, though the issue may
seem to be dangerous, when none else will: As Ester did, with that brave
resolution of hers, If I perish, I perish: And Nehemiah, who though he was
something afraid at first to speak to that Heathenish King in the behalf of
his Religion and his people, yet having lift up his heart to God, he spoke
freely unto him. Let not a public good cause be dashed and blasted, and none
have a heart to appear for it, for fear of the loss of their own pomp, and
carnal delights, and profits; know that the venturing for a public good, is a
greater honor then the enjoyment of any private. Camerarius in his Historical
Meditations, has a famous story of the chief Courtiers, in the time of Lewis
the eleventh, whom when they saw to intend to establish unjust Edicts, they
understanding his drift, went all to him in red Gowns; the King asked them,
what they would: The President La-Vacqueri answers, We are come with a full
purpose to lose our lives every one of us, rather then by our connivencie any
unjust ordinance should take place: The King being amazed at this answer, and
at the constancy and resolution of these Peers, gave them gracious
entertainment, and commanded that all the former Edicts should be cancelled in
his presence.

There is a notable relation that we find in Josephus, concerning Agrippa,
that upon a time he invited Caius the Emperor to a supper, Josephus lib. 18.
cap. 11.
and gave the Emperor great content in his entertainment; whereupon the
Emperor said unto him, let me gratify thee by giving thee what thou will:
Agrippa asked (although it were with the venture of the loss of all he had)
as follows; Dread Prince, since it is your good pleasure to think me worthy
to be honored by your presence, I beseech you to give commandment, that the
Statue which you have charged Petronius to erect in the Temple of the Jews may
never be advanced there; this he did, although he knew it was as much as his
life was worth, to ask any thing of Caius that was not answerable to his
humor. Many Christians would hardly go so far in venturing themselves,
either for Church or country, as he here did for the Jews. Theodoret
likewise tells us of a Noble Spirit in one Terentius, Theo. lib. 4. cap. 32.
a Captain of the Emperor Valens, who being returned out of Armenia with a
great victory, the Emperor bad him ask a reward; he asked only that he
would be pleased to grant to those of the Orthodox Religion, one public Church
in Antioch: and although the Emperor were angry, and tore his Petition, and
bade him ask something else, yet he persisted in this, and refused any other
reward for all the service he had done.

And Eusebius relates a Noble example of a great Noble man Vetius Epagathus,
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1.
appearing in the cause of the Christians, not being able to bear the unjust
dealings he saw against the Christians, he demanded that he might be heard
in defense of the Brethren, but all that sat at the Tribunal being against
it, because he was a Noble man, the President asking him if he were a
Christian, he plainly and publicly confessed it, and so was taken in amongst
the Martyrs, being afterward called, The Advocate of Christians: Where have
we Noble men now of such free and disingaged spirits, to venture themselves in
any public cause for God, and their people? who should be free to speak, if
not you? Gallasius upon Exodus 22. 28. In libera^ civitate liberas esse linguas
oportere.
says of Augustus, that he was wont to say, that in a free City Tongues ought
to be free: Where should tongues or hearts be free, if not in your honorable
Assemblies? If you would show your Noble minds, show the liberty of your
spirits, Chrysostom. in Mat. 18. Hom. 59.
says Saint Chrysostom; Liberty, I say, the same that that blessed Saint John
had, Libertate^ mihi animi oftende, libertatem dico eam quam ille vir beatus
habe^at, a quo iterum atque iterum Herodes audivit, non ^icet tibi fratris tui
Philippi uxorem habere: quam is quoque habuit ante ipsum, qui dicebat Ahab; non
ego, sed tu and domus patris tui Israelem pervertis, etc.
from whom Herod heard again, and again, It is not lawful for you to take
your brother Philips wife: That liberty also that before him he had, that said
to Ahab, It is not I, but you and your Fathers house that troubles Israel.

Wherefore seek to get that Nobility of mind which the Prophets had, and
Apostles had, which such as serve riches cannot have; for nothing takes away
the liberty of the spirit so much as the desire of worldly things: thus
Chrysostom. It is beneath true Nobleness of spirit, to aim at no higher
pitch in your desires and endeavors, then to provide for your own ease and
safety, when public causes for God and his people call you out to venture your
selves. Seneca epist. 104. Magnanimos nos natura produxit, nobis gloriosum and
excelsum spiritum dedit quaerentem ubi honestissime, non ubi tutissime vivat.
Seneca in one of his Epistles, speaking of a true raised excellent spirit,
describes it to be such a one as seeks, where it may live most honestly, and
not most safely. Nature has brought us forth magnanimous, says he, it has
given us a glorious and lofty spirit; what is that? seeking where it may live
best, not where it may be most secure. What though you should suffer something;
it will be your honor, that while you suffer, the Church and your Country
prospers. It was the honor of the Fabii, and the Fabritii, that they being
poor themselves, they made the Commonwealth rich: Venture you your selves for
God, and his people, and trust God with your honors, estates and posterities,
do not say, you are alone, you know not how many you may have to cleave to
you, if you have a heart to appear; Solatium non perdit desolata justitia, tui
consortium Deus omni celebritate festivior. Hiero. ad Virg. in exil. missam.
Inveniar sane superbus, avarus, adulter, homicida anti-Papa, and omnium
vitiorum reus, modo impii silentii non arguar, dum Dominus pa^itur. Luth. ep.
ad Staupit.
howsoever desolate righteousness, says Jerome, loses not her comfort, which
has God to be with it, that is more then all.

It was a brave resolution of Luther, which we find in one of his Epistles to
Staupitius, wherein he professes, that he had rather be accounted any thing,
then be accused of wicked silence in Gods cause: Let me be accounted, says
he, proud, covetous, yea a murderer, yea, guilty of all vices, so I be not
proved to be guilty of wicked silence, while the Lord and his cause do suffer.
And know, that the more dishonored, and trampled upon, any cause of God is,
the more he expects that you should appear for it. I have read, that among the
Persians, the left hand is accounted the more honorable place. Xenophon reports
of Cyrus, that those who^ he honored most, he placed at his left hand, upon
this ground, because it was most subject to danger, he would have those who
were most honorable, to stand by him there where he was most weak and liable
to danger.

Thus where the cause of God is most opposed, and most like to suffer, there
God would have the most noble spirits to stand, and to appear in that; and to
do this is truly honorable indeed. Who knows whether you be raised for
such a time as this? who knows whether you have been preserved from such and
such dangers that you have been in, that you might be reserved as a public
blessing for the Church of God and your Country? I have read of Philip King of
Spain going from the Low Countries into Spain by Sea, there fell a grievous
storm, in which almost all the Fleet was wracked, many men lost, and himself
hardly escaped, he said he was delivered by the singular providence of God,
that he might live to root out Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do:
this evil use he made of his great deliverance: Some of you have been
delivered from great dangers, but for a better purpose, that you might now be
of use, to root out profaneness, Atheism, and superstition; and happy are
you, and happy shall we be in you, if it may appear that you are reserved for
this work of the Lord.

Thirdly, 3.
let all go, rather then be brought to commit any sin; we had better have
all the world cast shame in our faces, and upbraid us, then that our
consciences should cast dirt in them: It is better to endure all the frowns
and anger of the greatest of the earth* then to have an angry conscience within
our breast: it is better to want all the pleasures that earth can afford, then
to lose the delights that a good conscience will bring in. Oh let the bird in
the breast always be kept singing, whatsoever we suffer for it* it is better to
lose all we have, then to make ship-wracke of a good conscience. In this case
you must be willing to lose all, or else you are lost in the enjoyment of all.
If your greatness be enlarged, and you will not be willing to lose it when
God will have you, Dilata est magni^icentia, etc. si non vultis eam perdere
certi perdi ab ea. Ber. epi. 207. Baron. ultimo anno Domit.
says Bernard, you shall be lost by it. We have many examples of brave
spirits, manifesting themselves in this thing; the example of Flavianus Clemens
is famous in this, he was a Courtier in Domitians Court, with whom the
Emperor was exceeding familiar, and delighted much in him, he was so dear
unto him, as he intended to make his son to be his successor in his Empire;
but this blessed Flavianus, rather then he would break the peace of his
conscience in the matter of his religion, he was content to bear the turning
of the great love of the Emperor into as great hatred, so as he hated him unto
death, and oppressed his whole house. Ecce quid prodest plena bonis arca, si
inanis fit conscientia, etc. August. de verbis Domini. Ser. 12.
Saint Augustine has a good speech to this purpose, what does it profit a man
to have his chest full of goods, and his conscience empty?

And now how happy we, if God would work men's spirits to this, who enjoy
preferment, delights, and riches above other men: Pestifera vis est valere ad
nocendum.
you have power to do much good, use not your power against God, but for God.
O that you had but so much liberty to your spirits, as to bethink your selves,
wherefore God has raised you above others: but reason and religion are usually
drowned in these in their sensual lusts: they think they have enough in their
honors, and in their pleasures, to commend them, and make them happy; but as
for religion, that is for private men, who have nothing else to comfort
themselves in* Sanctitas, pietas privata bona sunt. Sen. in Thyeste*
Even Seneca a heathen had this complaint concerning their religion in their
times: Holiness (says he) piety, and faith, are private good things: It
seems that even then those that lived publicly in the world in their honors
and delights, they thought their pomp and glory to be sufficient, and that
they need not the help of virtue to commend them. It was likewise the
complaint of Lucan; Exeat aula qui volet esse pius: virtus, and summa potestas
non coeunt. Lucan. Lib. 8.
Let him go from the Court, that intends to be pious: virtue and great power
cannot agree together. But is not opportuity of service for God, and his
people, as great a good as any you can have? is not the excellency of any thing
you have above others, in this especially, that you have opportunity to do
more good then others? Clemens Alexan. paedag. l. 2. cap. 12. (...).
and what is a man's happiness, but his goodness?

That which Clemens Alexandrinus says concerning dwelling in magnificent
houses, is true of all other pomp and glory in the world. How much more
glorious (says he) is it to do good to many, then to dwell magnificently?
who knows what may be done in godly courses, if you will begin the^? how may
others be provoked likewise thereunto? how ever it falls out, it is no great
matter that we hazard; what is my honor? my pleasure? my estate? my liberty?
my life? so God may be glorified. There is more honor, and there ought to be
more pleasure, and certainly there will be more pleasure, and certainly there
will be more profit in the service of God, then in the enjoying all the world
to my self and my posterity: If Gods honor be not dear and precious in mine
eyes, how can I think that my honors, and my comforts, and my estate, and my
posterity should be dear and precious in his eyes? If the public good falls,
Qui amissa republica, piscuinas suas fore salvas sperare videntur. Epist. 15.
ad Attic. lib. 1.
shall I think to enjoy my ease and my peace, my estate and my honor upon
good terms? Cicero laughed at the folly of those men, which in his time seemed
to conceive such a windy hope, that their fish ponds, and places of delight
should be safe, when the commonwealth was lost. In public calamities, if your
person should escape (which you can have no security of) yet you cannot expect,
that your honors, and riches should escape from being made a prey.

Platina has a notable story for this: when the citizens of Papia in Italy
were at dissension by reason of the faction between the Guelphes, and the
Gibellines, the Gibellines procured a favourer of theirs, called Facinus Caius,
to assist them, covenanting that he should have the goods of the Guelphes for
his labor; but he being once come into the city, and prevailing, he spared
the goods of neither of them; whereupon the Gibellines complained, saying, that
their goods also were spoiled: he answered them, that indeed they themselves
were Gibellines, and should be safe, but their goods were Guelphes; so it may
fall out to others, who have been unfaithful to God, to religion, though they
themselves may prove to be Catholics, yet their goods and places of preferment
may be counted to be Heretics: though they themselves may be accounted to
be good quiet honest men, that cared not which way things went, sobeit they
might live in ease and peace for their time, yet their estates and places of
office are liable to be made a prey.

Consider yet further; your example is much, many eyes are upon you, every one
is ready to follow your way. Augustine in his confession says that the devil
drew men on cunningly to wickedness, Lib. 2. cap. 10.
by those poetical fictions, attributing filthy lusts and wicked uncleanness
to their supposed feigned gods, that those which did such things might bless
themselves in this, they did not imitate base men, but the Celestial gods:
thus the devil gets sin countenanced in the world, by the examples of the
great ones, and think themselves safe if they have you for their pattern: God
has set you as stars in the firmament of honor, upon your influences depend
the whole course of the inferior world: the people are as the sea, and you as
the wind to raise or depresse them, according to your motion. As in evil your
examples do much hurt, so in good they would do much good: how might
godliness be honored if men saw you to prize it, so as to set it above all
your honors? many are offended at the poverty and meandness of those that
profess religion: you may in great part take away this offense.

In the Annalls we read in the history of Charles the great, that there was
one Aygolandus a King of Africa, of the Mohometane sect, who had much war
with Charles the great, and that he might better make peace with him, he told
him that he desired to be a Christian. Charles being glad of that, took him
with him to the Court, where this Aygolandus saw thirty poor people, in mean
habits, lying on the ground, and eating without any cloth: he asked Charles
what they were; who answered him, they are the servants of God. (For Charles
was wont to nourish poor people at his Court, on purpose that he might have
the object of poverty before him to behold, that thereby he might moderate his
affections in his great fortunes) Aygolandus answered; and is it so that I see
the servants of your God clothed in such filthy clothing, and your servants
shining and clothed beautifully, I indeed desired that I might be baptized,
and to give my self to the service of your God; but now I am far of another
mind, when I see the servants of your God so ill entertained and provided for.
This offense daily keeps off many, but the conversion of great ones would
bring on not only multitudes of other people, but other great ones also,

It is reported of Lucius King of England, who was the first King that ever by
his authority established Christian religion in his Kingdom; Sabellicus in his
Hist.
which is the honor of our country, it was the first Kingdom that ever had
Christian Religion established by the supreme magistrate. In the first entrance
into the Kingdom, he favovored Christian Religion, as an ancient historian,
Gildas Albanius reports: but yet the Religion he was brought up in stuck so
fast in him, that he could not be brought off wholly to embrace Christian
Religion. And a great thing that hindered him, was the offense he took at the
outward meannesse and poverty of Christians; and especially he looked at the
Romans, who were a glorious and victorious people, and the Emperor there, who
lived in so great glory and prosperity; and he considered with himself,
that they did not embrace Christian Religion, and wherefore then should he:
But after he learned from the Ambassadors of Caesar, that some of the noble
and chief of Rome, as by name Trebellius and Pertinax, and others, embraced
the Religion of Christians; that the Emperor himself was moved with that
miraculous Rain, that was caused by the prayers of the Christians; then Lucius
attended more fully to understand what Christian Religion was, and was taken
off from that which formerly hindered him. Whereupon he sent to Eleutherius,
then Bishop of Rome, Elvanus and Medinus his Ambassadors, to send him some to
instruct the Britains in the Doctrine of Christ, that he might establish
Christian Religion in his Kingdom, and abolish Heathenisme; this was in the
year of Christ 179. Thus you see what a power Religion has, when it is in
great ones.

And on the contrary, the more eminent you are in Honors, and in Greatness,
if your examples be evil, they do the more mischief: Quanto illustriores
homines in seculo scientia, and genere, tanto pluribus sunt perditionis
exemplum. Ber. Epist. 109
Sin dressed up with a diamond, or covered with a scarlet robe, carries a
brave show with it: Desinunt esse probri loco purpurata flagitia: If your ways
be never so base and unworthy, the general course of people will follow after
you; as Christ said, if the son of man be lifted up, all men will follow
him: so if the most base wickedness in the world be lifted up in the examples
of great ones, all men will follow after it; that way that they see to be a way
of preferment, and to get the countenance of those that are great men,
generally they will choose; yea how do we see many, that they may be like
great ones in their way, and get a little petty preferment by them, they will
subject themselves to most sordid things, that otherwise common humanity would
loath and abhor. There is a notable example for this in a relation that
Contzen has in his book that he intitles Aulae speculum, in the 156. page,
Eutropius Eunuchus, apud Arcadium in pretio fuit, aulae rector, pudendus,
avarus and crudelis, spadonibus ille favebat, plurimi mortalium and sibi and
liberis virilitatem demere sustinuere ut illi commendarent, atque ad optatas
dignitates eveherentur, plerique eorum exvulnere obierunt.
of one Eutropius, an Eunuch, he was the governor of the Court, and had in
exceeding honor, but favored and preferred only such which either were
already, or were willing to make themselves Eunuchs like himself; whereupon,
says my Author, multitudes of men made themselves and their children
Eunuchs, that they might obtain the favor of Eutropius, and be raised to
preferment by him, and many of them dyed of the wounds that were made in their
body. Thus you see what the power of the countenance and favor of great ones
is, which men seek, by being like them in any base ways. And have we not many
still that would be content to prostitute themselves, their souls, and their
bodies, in the most shameful ways that can be, to obtain the favor of those
who are great, to get preferment by them, willing to let humanity, Religion,
God, conscience, souls and all go, so they may be countenanced in the World.

Lastly, remember the great and solemn account that you are to give before the
Lord another day, of all the mercies you have received from God above others,
which have been abundant, which cannot be reckoned: and if your receipts be so
great, as you know not how to reckon them, how shall you be able then to reckon
for them? Surely when you come to give an account of all you enjoy, you will
have other manner of thoughts of all your outward glory, then you had when you
conceived there was so much happiness in it. Consider now what will be peace
to your souls, when you must bid an everlasting farewell to all those things
which are so glorious in your eyes: Do you think that now you do improve all
those mercies that God has given you, so as when you come upon your death
beds, and before the Lord, you shall be able to look back to your former time,
and rejoice in it? The Lord will not regard how you have been magnified by
men, but how you have magnified his great and glorious Name: Riches will not
avail in the day of wrath, the remembrance of all sinful delights will be
bitterer then gall to you, when the accounts of all your honors, riches, and
pleasures shall be called for, how they have been improved for God: If you
cannot then make your accounts even, either by showing how you have employed
these talents, or by bringing in an acquittance, and pardon, bought with
Christ's precious blood, and sealed to you by his holy Spirit, Quae hic
honorant, ibi onerant.
you are undone for ever; so that now those things will prove your burdens,
that here were your delights and honors: what will it then profit you to have
been honorable and rich in the World, and have nothing left but guilt in your
consciences, and Gods vile esteem of you? what good shall your passed
pleasures bring to you, when they have abandoned you, and nothing remains but
pollution and filth upon your souls, and the just wrath of God whom you have
displeased, by pleasing your selves in those pleasures? or what will it profit
you to have gained the whole world, and to have lost your own souls?

I have read of one Francisus Xaverius, who writing to John the third, King of
Portugal, gave this wholesome counsel to him, that every day, for a quarter of
an hour, he would meditate of that divine sentence, What shall it profit a man
to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? and that he would seek of
God the right understanding of this, that he might be sensible of it, and that
he would make it the close of all his prayers, the repetition of those words,
What shall it profit a man, etc. How happy counsel would this be for all our
Courtiers and great men, if it might be followed? when you have spent all your
estates, and improved your power only upon sinful ways, to satisfy the
lusts of your own hearts, when these shall be taken from you, or you from
them, with what confidence can you look up to God for mercy? does it not come
from low thoughts of God, and want of the fear of his great and dreadful
Name, for you to think to spend such great talents upon your lusts, which he
has betrusted you withal for his honor, and yet to think that you can
easily do well enough in this matter between God and you? that this holy,
great, and dreadful God will be pacified by a word or two? If you had indeed
ventured those things that you did enjoy, and so had parted with them in the
cause of God, you might then, after all had been gone, have been able to
look up to God with much comfort, and to have expected with confidence much
mercy from him.

It is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon, when a Knight of his had consumed
a great patrimony by lust and luxury, Si tantam pecuniam vel in sui regis
obsequium, vel patriae commodis, vel sublevandis propinquis impendisset,
audirem; nunc quoniam tantas opes impendit corpori, par est ut luat corpore.
and besides ran into debt, and being to be laid into prison by his creditors,
his friends petitioned for him to the King; the King answered, if he had spent
so much money in the service of his Prince, or for the good of his Country, in
relieving his kindred, I would have hearkened; but seeing he has spent so much
upon his body, it is fit his body should smart for it: So when you come and
look up to God for mercy in your distress, when the comforts of the creature
shall be gone, God may justly answer; if you had spent that abundance of the
creature that I afforded to you in my service, for the good of my people, I
would have heard you, but now it is just you should be left in your distress,
and that so much pleasure as you have had, so much misery should follow.

Do not your hearts tremble at that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many rich, not
many noble? it is enough to make a man's heart to tremble when he hears that of
men few are saved, but when salvation is straightned in a more narrow compass,
and God says of such a sort of men but few, this has more power in it to
strike fear: as if a company in a Church should hear that but few of them
should go out alive, it would strike fear into all; but when those who sit in
the Chancell, shall hear, but few of those that sit in the Chancell shall go
out alive, this strikes fear into such who sit there: As Joshua, when search
was made for Achan amongst the Tribes, he had cause to fear, but when the
Tribe of Judah was taken, of which he was, then much more; but when the family
of the Zarhites, then much more: So within the straighter compass God has
said, But few shall be saved; if you be amongst them, you have cause to fear
the more, and not to take more liberty then others, but to be more diligent
then others to make your calling and election sure. Its a terrible speech that
Chrysostom has in his 34. Sermon upon the Hebr. you would think it so if it
came from us, it may be you will receive it better from him: the speech is
this, Miror si potest salvari aliquis rectorum.
I wonder, says he, if any Governor can be saved. Howsoever conscience may
be quiet and still now, yet when it apprehends it self near the giving up
account to God, it will speak, it will sting then. It is reported of Philip
the third of Spain, although it is said of him, that his life was free from
gross evils, yea so as he professed, he would rather lose all his Kingdoms,
then offend God knowingly. But being in the agony of death, and considering
more thoroughly of his account he was to give to God, fear struck into him, and
these words brake from him: Oh, would to God I had never reigned; Oh, that
those years I have spent in my Kingdom, I had lived a private life in the
Wilderness; Oh, that I had lived a solitary life with God, how much more
securely should I now have dyed, how much more confidently should I have gone
to the Throne of God? what does all my glory profit me, but that I have so much
the more torment in my death? This story Cornelius a Lapide has upon the
second of Hosea. Lib. 11. hist. Bohe. plus temporis operaeque se palatio, quam
templo impendisse; luxu^ and vitia aulae quae corrigere debuisset adjuvisse,
auxisse, atque ita multo peccati dolor trepida spe divinae clementiae, plurimo
astantium ^orrore, anceps sui anima aeternitatem ingressa est.


In the Bohemian History it is reported of one Hermanus, a great Courtier, who
being to dye, did most lamentably cry out, That he had spent more time in the
Palace then in the Temple; and that he added to the Riotousnesse and Vices of
the Court, which he should have sought to have reformed: and so dyed, to the
horror of those that were about him. I confess, it is no little matter for
you, who have so much of the world, to deny your selves in those things that
give content to the flesh, considering the corruption that is in the hearts of
the children of men: it is a hard thing, and seldom has success, to give
rules for the ordering of life, to men who are in great prosperity in this
world. Hence Laertius reports of Plato, who being desired by the Cyrenians,
that he would write down some Laws for them, and that he would set the estate
of their Commonwealth in some order, he refused, saying, Perdifficile esse
condere leges tam felicibus.
It was a very hard thing, to make Laws to bind men who were in great
prosperity. But the more hard any duty is, the more honorable is it to yield
to it; as Saint Hieronym. writing to Pamachius, Non est parum virum nobilem,
virum locupletem potentium in plateis vitare comitatum, miscere se turbis,
adhaerere pauperibus, rusticis copulare, de principe vulgum fieri, sed quanto
humilior, tanto sublimior est.
has this expression: It is not a little thing for a Noble man, for a rich
man, to withdraw himself from the company of great ones, to join with those
that are mean and poor, and to be made as a common man: but the more low, the
more mean he is in doing this, he is the more sublime, so much the higher in
the esteem of God and his people.

There are some who have been in as fair a way of honors and worldly
delights, as any, yet they have denied themselves, and they rejoice in it, and
bless God for it; they find all they were willing to part with made up
abundantly to them, they live most svveet, and joyful lives, God has made
them honorable in his own eyes, and in the eyes of his people, they are high
and precious in the esteem and hearts of the Saints. Do not fear, trust your
honors, your Dignities and riches with God: there was never any thing lost
in a self-denying way for Jesus Christ; nothing can make you more honorable
then the ways of Godliness, and nothing can cast that contempt, and shame
upon you as the ways of sin do, it being the basest servitude that is,
both for your selves and all your estates and honors, to be under the power
of your lusts: As you would account it a greater contempt and shame for you,
to be made to serve in the meanest and basest work that is, then if an
ordinary man should be forced to it: then surely it is more contemptible for
you to be under the slavery of sin, then for an ordinary man.

Saint Chrysostom compares men of great quality in the world who are wicked,
to a King taken prisoner of the Barbarians, who suffer him still to wear his
crown, and to keep on his royal apparel, but yet force him to perform all
base offices in his royal apparel, and with his crown upon his head, as to
carry water, to grind in the mill, and drudge in the skullery, in which case
his goodly ornaments do but serve with more despite to put him in mind of
his misery, and the more to upbraid, and cast in his teeth the greatness of
his fall, and the baseness of his servitude; there could be nothing could put
more scorn and contempt upon him then this. Thus whilst you are bravely
apparelled, glistering wheresoever you go, and wear the ensigns of honor
upon you, the Devil and your own lusts do put you upon the basest services,
the most dishonorable employments as can be; for such are the ways of sin, and
all your outward glory does but make you more vile and contemptible, while you
are under the servitude of your lusts.

Do not think you have more liberty to sin then others, your greatness
cannot bear you out with God: nay in regard that the mercies which you have
are greater then others, In maxima fortuna, minima est licentia. Salust. in
conjurat. Catil.
and your sins do more hurt then the sins of others; you have the least
liberty to sin of all men: There is the least liberty in the greatest
fortune, says a heathen. Let it therefore rather be your glory that you can
do good, then that you have power to have your minds: it was the high
commendation of Tiberius, that he accounted Aurum illud Adulterinum esse, quod
cum subjectorum lacrymis collectum esset, that money no good coin, that was
levied with his subjects tears. And thus we have finished the first thing
observable in Moses Self-denial; namely, The denial of all worldly honors
and delights whatsoever for Christ.

CHAP. IIII.
SECT. 2.
We must deny all worldly pleasures and preferments in the very prime of our
time, when we have opportunity to enjoy them to the full.
THe second thing observable is the time when he did this. Some may think,
when he refused all this glory he might have had, that surely it was when he
knew not what he did, it was when he was a child, in some rash fit of his
youthful folly, when he was a novice, before he came to understand himself,
it was before he could have any experience to know what these brave things
were: or if not so, it was then when he began to grow old, and to dote, when
his honors and pleasures began to leave him, and he was wearied, and
discontented with them. No such matter, it was when he came to be of years, not
a child, and in the ripeness of his years, in his full strength, in the prime
and choice of all his time, not in his decrepid age; (...).
it was then when he might have enjoyed all honors and delights to the full,
yet now he denies himself in them all: it was when his parts were in the
ripeness and full strength of them, yet now he refuses, for so the words in
the original imply all these, when he came to be great: from whence the
observation is, That it is an honorable thing for one to deny himself in the
prime of his time, when he is in the midst and height of the enjoyment of the
delights, honors, and profits of the world, even, then when the world proffers
whatsoever it has to give content in, when the world courts a man in all her
bravery, and presents whatsoever is desirable to flesh and blood, yet then to
be above all, to deny ones self in all, to be crucified to the world before the
world be crucified to us, then to be crucified to all, to be crucified to the
world, when we may have full possession of it, this is something indeed.

Necessity takes away the honor of an action; to do a thing when we must
needs, when we are forced to it whether we will or no, though the thing be
good we do, yet the honor of it is lost in great part. That which we read of
Gelimer King of the Vandalls was well, Paul. Diac l. 6. hist.
being taken captive by Bellisarius, and brought to Justinian, when he saw the
Emperor set upon his tribunal, and the people standing about him, he cries
out, vanity of vanitis, all is vanity, but it was more honorable for Solomon,
while he enjoyed the glory of his kingdom, yet then to cry out thus of all
the glory of the world, that all was but vanity. Augustus when he was to dye
could acknowledge all the pomp of the world to be but a fable, Seneca. ep. 55.
but David while he lived could acknowledge all but as a dream. Illum lauda
and imitare quem non piget mori cum juvet vivere.
Commend him, and imitate him, says Seneca, who is not unwilling to die when
he may live delightfully. As it is nothing for a man that is at ease, and
enjoyes all comforts about him to his hearts desire, then to talk of patience,
and contentedness, and cherefulnesse in the hardest, sorest, and longest
afflictions that can befall him: but when a man is in the depth of them,
pressed sorely under them, continuing long in the bitterness of them, yet now
to retain his sweet cheerful contented frame of spirit, this is something.

So when men are kept down by afflictions, and crossed in the world at every
hand, the world frowns on them, they have but little of the comforts of the
world, Non magnum est esse humilem in abjectione, magna prorsus and rara virtus
humilitas honorata. Ber. Hom. 4. Super Missus est.
neither have they hopes of ever coming to have much, for these men to talk
of the vanity of the world, and all the delights thereof, and that men should
not be proud of that they have, that they should be willing to part with all,
for them to say, that all the riches of the world what are they? they are but
dross, dirt, and honors are but shadows, and all the pleasures are but froth
and vanity, this is nothing: but when they come to enjoy them themselves, or at
least to see probably that they may have them ere long, when the world comes in
flatteringly upon them, insinuating it self into them, when they feel what
the delights of it are indeed, yet now to be above them, and to slight them,
and not to have the heart taken with them, this is truly honorable.

Basil, (...). Basil.
in his Homily upon the forty Martyrs who suffered together, has this
expression: He that is put upon necessity is not to be accounted strong in
suffering, but he who has abundance of delightful things which he may
enjoy, if he holds out in suffering evils. Hom. in 40 Martyr
There is a great deal of difference in the working of things upon men's
spirits, when they are only in imagination, and when they come to be made
real indeed; men cannot think what alteration there will be in their
spirits, when things come as real to work upon them. We read, Luke 16. 14.
when Christ had preached against covetousness, (...).
those who were rich and covetous derided him; The word is in the original,
they blowed their nose at him, manifesting their scorning at what he said; as
if they should have said, he may talk what he will, but if he had riches
himself I vvarrant you he would delight in them as well as any, if he savv
how to come by them, he would be as greedy as any after them. And thus
certainly do men, who are in honor, think of all that speak lightly of
their honors: and so those that enjoy the svveet of pleasures. As on the one
side, those who are in afflictions, and have their spirits sink under them,
they think within themselves, let men talk what they will, if they felt
what I do, their spirits would sink as much as mine: so on the other side,
they who enjoy the svveet of prosperity, they think, let men say what they
will, if they had what we have, they would prize it and delight in it as
much as we.

Here then is the true and real honor, when a man is in the height and top of
all prosperity, yet then he can be above all, then he can trample upou all:
Lib. 11. cap. 2.
It was thus with Moses; it was thus with Daniel; it has been thus in many
worthies of the Lord. Vincentius reports of one Eustochius whom Trajane had
sent against the Barbarians, and he having got the victory, returned home; the
Emperor being joyful goes to meet him, and brings him in gloriously to the
city: now was a time for Eustochius to enjoy the favor of the Emperor, and
what he could desire; but at this time, this very day, refusing to sacrifice
with the Emperor unto Apollo, Cent. 2. cap. 3.
he suffers the martyrdom of himself, his wife, and children even now denies
all his present pomp and glory for Christ. God has still choice spirits in
the world that can do this, and certainly there is a great deal of glory in
it.

CHAP. V.
It is a special argument of sincerity, that when the profession of Religion
proves costly to us, yet we continue in it.
FIrst this argues great sincerity: now the truth of grace appears indeed to
be religious, when religion must cost us something; this is an argument of
truth of grace: to be religious, when by religion we may get the comforts of
the world, this is no argument of sincerity. Hence Jewish writers tell us, that
in Solomon's time, when the Jews prospered in all worldly felicity, then they
were careful how they entertained Proselytes, because many would be coming
then upon worldly respects to join with them: but to profess religion when it
requires the loss of all outward comforts, and that at those times, when the
sweetness of them is most enjoyed, this is some thing like: to profess the
truth while we may live upon it, this argues no truth; but to profess it when
it must live upon us, upon our honors, upon our profits and pleasures, and
earthly contentments, this is a strong argument of truth: as to see the beauty
of religion through troubles, through all outward disrespects, this is
something: for to see the evil of sin through all outward glory, respect and
contentment in this world, when it may be enjoyed to the full, this is much;
surely here is truth, here is a piercing eye that is enlightened and quickened by
the spirit of God. It was a true sign that those nobles of Israel we read of
in the 2 King. 9. 33. were of Iehues side, when they cast down Jezabel who had
painted her face; so when the world comes with her painted face, in her pomp
and glory, yet when God says who is on my side? then to throw down this
painted Jezabel to the ground to the dogs, to lick up her blood; here is a
true argument that we are on Gods side.

David showed his true thankfulness, when he would not offer unto God that
which cost him nothing, but would have the testimony of his thankfulness
costly to him: so when the profession of religion proves costly to us, and yet
we continue in it, this is a good argument of truth. In times of affliction
every hypocrite; all tag and ragge will be ready to come in to God in an
outward profession; but usually this submission to God at this time is not out
of truth. Hence that place in the 66. Psalm 3. v. where it is said, through
the greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit unto thee: in the
original it is they shall lie unto thee, Mentienter.
and so it is translated by Arian Montanus, and some others, noting hereby,
that a forced submission to God is seldom in truth.

Secondly, it argues the excellency of grace, that it raises and greatens men's
spirits, it lifts them up above the highest of all these things, and so high
above them, as the things of the world when at the highest are looded on us
under things, and appeared small and contemptible in the eyes of such a raised
soul: many poor spirited men are below them, and look up to them as great
matters, and think, oh how happy should they be, if they could attain to
them, they bless them who have got up to them, but grace is of an elevating
nature, and it manifests it self to be from on high, even from heaven, from
the God of heaven, who is infinitely above the heavens, and it raises the
soul to God himself, so that not only the things of the earth, but even
heaven it self would appear but a poor low mean thing, beneath the dignity
of a soul, made partaker of the divine nature, were it not that the glorious
presence of God were there.

As it argues the exceeding greatness of the heavens, that all the earth is but
as a point to them, all the huge great mountains, and vast circumference of
the earth is as nothing in comparison of them: so when all the honors,
delights, and riches of the earth, which are esteemed such huge and mighty
things by the men of the world, yet to a gracious spirit, though enjoyed to the
full, are accounted as nothing, this argues a glorious work of grace,
enlarging the heart of a man. God brings it himself as an argument of his own
greatness, Isai. chap. 40. that all the Nations of the earth are as a drop of
a Bucket, and as a dust of the hallance to him. So when all the braveries and
delights of the world are to a soul but as a little dust, looked at as having
but a drop of comfort in them, far from affording any good draught of comfort
to quench the thirst of it; no, it must have the ocean of all comfort to drink
on, even God himself, no less then an infinite ocean of blessedness will
serve the turn, for it to be satisfied withal, and this argues a spirit great
indeed; and the truth is, let men think what they will, yet it is most
certain, there are no men in the world of great spirits, but only godly men.

Thirdly, 3.
it argues the power of grace; to resist powerful temptations is powerful
grace. It was powerful grace that enabled Joseph to resist such a temptation
as he had from his Mistress. Virtus est placidis abstinuisse bonis.
Luther says, it was no less miracle to overcome the flame of lust in this
temptation, In tali occasion, and copia peccandi non fuit minus miraculum
vincere flammas libidinis, quam quod tres viri ex camino ignes salvi, and
incolumes evaserunt.
then it was for those three men to be kept safe in the fiery furnace. When the
World proffers it self in the glory and beauty of it unto us, the temptation
is strong to flesh and blood: Hence we have so many Caveats in Scripture, that
when we are full, we should beware, that we forget not God, and take heed we
decline not from him; then, then is the danger, when corruption has matter to
feed on, yet then to keep it down argues strength. Luth. in cap. 51.
It is not the work of a child, to govern a horse pampered, full fed in fat
pastures. It was an argument that David had much power over his affections,
that though the waters of Bethleem were so longed for of him, so desirable to
him, yet when he had it before him, and might have drunk of it, yet then he
could deny himself, and refused. When Esau looked on the pottage of Jacob, and
saw it was so red, so suitable and pleasing to him, that he must needs have
it, though it cost him his birthright, he was not able to deny himself in
giving contentment to his flesh, at that one time, though he knew it must cost
him dear; but though all the delights of the World be proffered, yet where
there is powerful grace, they are rejected.

It is a strong stomach that can digest much fat, much honey, and sweet
things, that usually clog weak stomachs; so it is a strong spirit that is not
overcome with the sweet of much prosperity. It argued, there was much power in
the oath that Saul caused his Army to take, 1 Samuel 14. 26. Not to eat any
thing that day, when though they being faint for want of meat, and yet coming
through a Wood, where honey dropped from the leaves before them as they went,
yet none dared to touch one drop: So here, when men are compassed about with
all delights, and they are flesh and blood as well as others, and they find
the temptation come strongly upon them, yet through the assistance of the grace
of God they can abstain; this is a great honor to grace, and arguing much
power in it.

Fourthly, 4.
it is a testimony of dear love to the Lord, to deny ones self for his sake,
when one is in the highest of enjoyment of all delights to the flesh; it is an
argument, that God is indeed the proper place, the center of the soul, when
although it has never so much of the creature, to give satisfaction unto it,
yet it cannot rest, but works still to God through all, and from all: As a
stone, though it were in never so good a place, although it were in Heaven, yet
it would desire to descend, because the proper place of it is below; so let a
gracious heart which has God for the center be put into any condition never so
full of delight, yet it is not satisfied, it is willing to leave all, that it
may close with God: To seek after God, and make much of godliness in the
times of affliction may argue self love, but love to God appears not then.

As God manifests his love to us in not sparing his own Son for us, so we
manifest our love to God in not sparing our dearest contentments for him. This
God testifies of Abraham, hereby he knew he loved him indeed, in that for his
sake, he did not spare his only son Isaac; As Psalm. 45. when the Kings
daughter is content to forsake her fathers house and dearest kindred, then the
King delights in her beauty: to pretend love to Christ when the World
withdrawes from us whatsoever is lovely in it, this is not much, but now to
have our love burning after Jesus Christ, when the World proffers to us all her
loveliness, this is true love. Love is bountiful, it is shown to purpose,
when it shows it self able and willing to part with much for the beloved; as
that love of God should be for ever accounted dear and precious, that shows
mercy to one at that time when he is most wicked, in the height of sin, even
tempting God to destroy him; so if when you have the strongest temptations to
draw your hearts from God, yet even then you can find your hearts sweetly
working toward him, closing with him, delighting in him, here is love
unfeigned, this is love that God will own and make much of for ever. As the
Idolatrous Jews showed their love to their Idols, by plucking off their ear
rings, and parting with their Jewels, and most precious things they had, for
the honor of their Idols: so do the true worshippers of God show their love
to him, when they do part with much that is precious and delightful to flesh
and blood.

Fifthly, 5.
this gives God the glory of all our prosperity, which shows we acknowledge
it to be from him, and for him, and that we have it not for our selves, but
for the setting forth his praise: When God gives us much of the creature, we
mistake his meaning, if we think he gives it us to enjoy as we please, for
he gives all to use for himself, and where this is much acknowledged, there
God is much glorified; if we mistake not Gods meaning, yet at least we forget
upon what terms we receive all our comforts from God, (...) Plut. de consol.
ad Apol.
namely that we may return them again to him; they are the words of a
Heathen, thou forgettest that thou have received those things (speaking of
worldly prosperity) to return them again.

Sixthly, this gives testimony to the world, that surely there are wonderful
blessed things, that God acquaints the soul withal in the ways of
godliness, that there is much sweet and contentment to be had in those ways;
they see something more glorious that makes them so little to regard the glory
that there is in the things of the World, when men might have all content in
what the World affords, and yet they are willing to deny all for Christ, surely
they find much sweetness in Jesus Christ, that takes up their hearts, and
satisfies their souls, or else they would never do as they do; they have
found something better then all these things, something that the world knows
not of, that makes them do as they do; they would not let go their hold in
these outward things, were it not they had found something better.

If you see a Be leave a fair flower and stick upon another, you may
conclude, that she finds most Honey dew in that flower she most sticks upon:
So here Gods people would never leave so many fair flowers in the Worlds
Garden, had they not some other in which they find most sweetness; Christ
has his Garden, into which he brings his beloved, and there she finds other
manner of flowers then any the World has, in which there is sweetness of a
higher nature, even the Honey dew of the choice mercy, and goodness, and
blessing of God himself: if Gods people do leave the full breasts of the
World, it is because they have found the breasts of consolation, from which they
have sucked other manner of sweetness then the breasts of the world can afford;
were it not for some who have had much in the World, and yet have denied
themselves for Christ, this testimony to the ways of godliness could not have
been given; but blessed be God, we have some who do give this testimony, in
which God is much honored, and which is their honor likewise.

Seventhly, 7.
thus to deny ones self is honorable, Nulla infelicitas frangit, quem nulla
foelicit as corrumpit. Aug. in senten.
because wheresoever this is, there surely will be a holding out to the end; no
troubles of adversity can ever make such a one to forsake any ways of God, who
can dny himself for God in the midst of the pleasures of prosperity. Nemo
frangitur adversarum molestia, qui prosperarum dilectione non capitur. Aug.
Ser. in Monte l. 2.
A man that is able to deny himself in prosperity, will be able to believe in
adversity; if he be prosperity proof, there is no fear but he will be
adversity proof too.

If you read through the whole Book of God, you shall find that the pleasures
of prosperity have been the greatest snare, few of Gods servants have passed
through that condition without dishonor, but the estate of adversity has ever
proved most safe; seldom any of Gods servants but have been bettered by it.
We read of Manna, Exodus 16. 21. that it was melted with the Sun, but it
could endure the heat of fire, for they baked Cakes of it: Thus it is with many
men, they are melted, many good things in them vanish and come to nothing by
the heat of prosperity, whom the fire of adversity cannot hurt, but is useful
to them.

If a man has overcome the delights of the World, he has overcome the great
hindrance in the ways of godliness; the great danger of Apostasy, that which
causes so many thousands to fall, and to forsake God and his blessed ways:
such a soul has got over the great stumbling block, at which so many
stumble, and fall, and break themselves by, Ezekiel. 3. 20. I will lay a
stumbling block, says the Lord. Vatablus his Note upon the place is, Faciam ut
omnia habeat prospera, calamitatibus eum a peccato non revocabo.
I will cause that he shall have all things prosperous, I will not call him
from sin by affliction. There have been many who have held out a long time
in suffering, and yet after have fallen in prosperity, when the World has
shined on them flatteringly: but where have we any example of any, who have
denied themselves in prosperity, that ever failed in the times of adversity.

Eighthly this upbraides those who do greedily embrace the things of the world,
8.
and think that it is impossible for any to deny themselves in so great
delights as they do enjoy: as Balaak wonders, that upon offers of such great
preferments, as he offered unto Balaam, he came not to him, he thought it
impossible, that there should be any man in the world that would not be moved
with such an argument as that was. So base covetous wretches, and ambitious
men, that love their honors, and those that follow after their fleshly
pleasures, they think all the world are of their mind, if they had the like
opportunityes they would do as they do. Nero who was so basely unclean,
thought that all men in the world were so too, or would be so, had they fit
opportunities for their uncleanness.

Men hear speaking of self-denial, but they do not believe there is any
such thing in reality, they would gladly see the man that can deny himself in
such things as they enjoy, if he may have them as freely, and as fully as they
have: now this practice of Gods people convinces them, that there are some,
that can do those things that they think to be impossible: God has his
servants who have done such things, who can and will do them, and that
willingly and joyfully too, with much freedom and cheerfulness of spirit,
and bless God that they have any comfort in the world, any preferment or
estate to loose for God, accounting it a happier thing to loose for God, then
to enjoy for themselves.

CHAP. VI.
Comfort to those who in the midst of earthly contentments have their
affections set upon Heaven.
HEnce there is much comfort, Use 1.
and encouragement to those whom the Lord has raised above others in outward
things, and together with their estates and honor he has given them hearts to
return the glory of all to himself, Laudandi atque praedicandi qui dignati
non sunt etiam cum mundo florente florere. Aug. Ep. 45. ad Armentarium.
in the midst of all the comforts they have, yet their hearts are above all for
God, and for the things of heaven and eternity. These are to be praised, their
honor is to be published, who have refused to flourish with the flourishing
world. Blessed be God, there are yet some such in the world, and we hope the
Lord is raising up of more: blessed are they of the Lord, and honorable in the
esteem of the Saints.

First, this is a most evident argument, that all the good things they have in
the world, comes from the spiritual favor and love of God to them, and this
is no small matter; there is more sweetness in this knowledge of the principle
from whence the good things we have do come, then in any thing that they
afford of themselves. The difference of Jacobs blessing from Esau's is
observable, Genesis 27. 28. there is Jacobs, God give thee the dew of heaven, and
the fatness of the earth; Esau's blessing is v. 29. where the dew of heaven
and the fatness of the earth is likewise given to him, but the reference it
has to God is left out, it is not there, God give thee.

A carnal heart cares not, so he may have the thing it self, he does not
look to the principle from whence it comes, but the chief sweet to a gracious
heart is that he can see God, the love and mercy of God in all the blessings he
enjoyes. Now there is no such argument as this to demonstrate Gods love in
them; outward things are no certain arguments of the love of God: wicked men,
the objects of Gods hatred may have them as well as the godly, but outward
blessings with a heart to give God the glory of them, do always come from
Gods love in Christ.

God does oftentimes give the same thing to one out of special favor in
Christ, to another out of a general bounty, that God has raised you above
others, this is a mercy; but that he has given you this grace, in this he has
raised you indeed, this mercy is of an higher nature, the other things are
called the goods of fortune, but this is the fruit of Gods eternal love in
Jesus Christ, this is a mercy peculiar to the chosen of the Lord.

Secondly, 2.
this is an evident sign that God intends to use you in excellent services,
for the honor of his name: as Saul collected from the spirit of David, when he
saw how he was able to deny himself in not taking that advantage he had of
him, when he might have had his will upon him to the full: blessed be thou my
son David, says, Saul, thou shall both do great things, and shall also
still prevail, 1 Samuel 26. 25. So when a man may have his will to the full, and
yet can deny himself, it is a sign that God intends to use selfe-denying
spirits in his service, none to them; and this self-denial is of the highest
kind.

Thirdly, 3.
this is the highest improvement of all outward mercies that may be: this
changes poor mean things into most excellent glorious things; it is
impossible to make so much advantage of any thing in the world any other way as
in this way: here is a spiritual divine improvement of natural, of vain
drossie things, here is a turning of stubble and dirt into gold and pearls,
for great, and precious, and glorious are the mercies that God uses to
recompense this self-denial withal.

Fourthly, 4.
this self-denial is highly acceptable to God, God glories in such; Daniel
kept close to God, and denied himself much in his great prosperity, and he is
called a man greatly beloved, Cap. 10. 11. vir desideriorum: a man of desires,
so the words are, as when a man is compassed with temptation to despair, a
little breathing of faith is acceptable: so when he is compassed with
temptation of satisfying the flesh, of security, of presumption, then a little,
much more eminent self-denial, oh how acceptable is it!

Fifthly, 5.
if you in the fullness of all your earthly contentments shall acknowledge
Jesus Christ, and be willing to lay down all for him, when he shall come in
the fullness of his glory he will acknowledge you, and will put glory upon
you, when he shall come with his mighty Angels, full of majesty, to be
admired of his Saints; then he shall own you, and make you partakers of his
own glory, he will then remember every cup of cold water given for his names
sake, much more then the giving him the praise and honor of so much in the
things of the world as you have enjoyed. The being made partaker of the
fullness of Christ's honor in that day will then a thousand times recompense
the emptying of your selves of any fullness of outward contentments in the
creature you have had here.

Sixthly, 6.
if ever you should live to come to come to any adversity in this world, surely
it will be much sweetened to you, if you be willing to give God the honor of
the sweet of prosperity: though adversity may come, yet God will keep the
bitterness of it from you: if you so know God in prosperity, as to deny the
comforts of it for him, he will so know you in adversity, as to take off the
gall and bitterness of it from you: in all your seeking of God in the time of
trouble, you may have a holy boldness, and freedom of spirit, having assurance
that it is not out of self-love that you seek him, that it is not out of
constraint, because driven to him by afflictions; but it is out of love to that
God to whom your soul flows, as to a God in who^ you have an especial
interest, that God who was so dear to you in the midst of the enjoyment of the
abundance of the creature; so that now in the want of all things, you shall be
freed from those checkes of spirit that others have, damping their hearts when
they are about seeking after the Lord in the time of their trouble.

Seventhly, 7.
it is so much the more honorable, Perpauci sunt quibus contingit and faelices
esse and sapere. Sen. ep. 94.
and may be so much the more comfortable to you, by how much the more rare it
is: God has but few selfe-denying spirits in the world; there are a word of
people that will be crying to him in the times of affliction, Difficile est in
honor esse sine tumore, in praelatione sine, elatione, in dignitate siu e
vanitate. Ber.
but a few peculiar ones, who have hearts to seek his face, and honor his
name in the height of their prosperity, few that are then humble and
selfe-denying: to be set on high, and yet to have the heart kept down, is hard
and unusual, says Bernard; but the more unusual, the more glorious. In alto
posito non altum sapere difficile est, and omnino inusitatum, sed quanto inusit
atius, tanto gloriosius. Ber. Ep. 42.


CHAP. VII.
Reproof of those who greedily pursue sensual delights,
THe second use is for Reproof to those who greedily give up their hearts to
the enjoyment of all the carnal and sensual delight that they can take in the
abundance of the outward mercies that God has given them, Use 2.
knowing no higher good of them, then to take their fill of cannall delight
from them, blessing themselves in them, little thinking of God, or any service
that God calls for at their hands in the use of them; They know not how to
rejoice, and not to let out themselves to the full beyond all bounds of
moderation. They know not how to make any conjunction between rejoicing and
moderation, they think there is such a distance between these two, that they
can never be joined in one: but mark how wide these are from the mind of the
Holy Ghost, Phil. 4. 4, 5. Rejoice always, and again I say rejoice; what
follows? then let us let out our hearts to the full, let us satisfy our
selves to the utmost way, but let your moderation be known to all men; many
who care not how they neglect full oportunities for the service of God, or
receiving spiritual blessings from God, yet will be sure to take to the full
all the advantage they can of all their outward prosperity to fatten their
hearts in all manner of carnal jollity and brutish sensuality: they let out
their hearts to the utmost to this, making the bounty of God but as fuel to
their lusts, and means to fatt up their hearts to destruction, and to make
them the more bold, and impudent in sinning against him.

Do you think in your consciences that this is the end why God has given you
an abundance of these outward things more then others? what? did God aim at no
higher end then this? is there no other way whereby God may be more glorified
by that you have? will it rejoice your hearts hereafter to remember what you
have done? how many are there, who have their hearts so glued to the comforts
of the creature that they enjoy, that they had rather venture to part with God
and conscience, and those blessed things they hear of Christ, and of eternity,
then venture the loss of these present delights, that they see before them; as
that profane Duke of Burbon in France said, he would not give his part in
Paris, for his part in Paradise: what more apparent argument can there be, that
you have these things as your portion, you are the man who have your portion in
this life? you are never like to have any other good from God.

Yea a certain argument it is, that all these things are for the present
cursed to you, you have them with much wrath mingled with them; you may bless
your selves in your way, but you are most lamentable objects to behold, in the
esteem of all who are gracious and holy: and what a dishonorable thing will
it both to God and your selves, then to come in and seek God, when all outward
contentments are gone; when you have had your lusts to the full, then to come
to God to help and relieve you in all your straights, with what face can you
think to find acceptance from him? surely you will curse the time that ever
you had such prosperity, so much of the creature as you have had; if you have
thought the comforts and contentments you have enjoyed in a few creatures were
too good and too great to part withal for God, he will think his mercy too
good and too great for you.

But we use the comforts we have only in lawful things. Object.


For answer to this, Answ. 1.
I will only propound these considerations. First, do you fear, are you
jealous of your selves, lest you should let out your hearts too far in them?
Do you seriously consider, that there is a snare in them? That there may be
danger, yea, very great danger, if you take not heed? In whatsoever things the
world smiles on us for a time, there is more ensnarement then ornament,
Qui^quid nobis temporaliter mundus arridet, magis est periculum quam ornamentum
nostrum.
says Augustine.

Secondly, are your desires as strong in seeking God for grace, to use them for
his honor, as your joys are in the use of them for satisfying your selves.

Thirdly, do you often examine your hearts and ways, Aug. Ser. 53. T. 10.
for fear God should not have that honor from them, 2.
that is infinitely due unto him. 3.


Fourthly, 4.
what does conscience say when you are in afflictions? when you apprehend God
is calling you to an account for them, does it not tell you that your hearts
have been let out too greedily after them?

Fifthly, 5.
Answer as in the presence of God, would you prize a less estate with more
opportunity of service, more then a great estate with less opportunity of
service, and are you more troubled when you are crossed in opportunity of
service, then when you are crossed in your desires and delights in the
enjoyment of the creature?

Lastly, 6.
if you have a care to use that prosperous estate you have for God, either God
has much glory from you in it, or else you have much joy in it; surely where
there are great estates, there are great opportunities of glorifying God; but
has God great glory from you? has he more then from others in mean estates?
or if not, whether is it the grief of your souls, that you should enjoy so
much from God, and God have so little honor from you? what strangers are most
men to such considerations as these? they take all the delight they can in the
creatures they have, never considering what is Gods end in his bounty toward
them, or what will be peace to them in their end of the enjoyment of them; this
is a sore and a grievous evil.

CHAP. VIII.
The fullness of creatures comforts to be laid down at Christ's feet.
THE third use is this: Use 3.
Let those then that have a fullness in all outward contentments, be persuaded
in the fear of the Lord, to give God the glory of them his own way; if he
please to call for them in any selfedenying way, let him have them: The Lord
says to you concerning them, as Christ to Peter, Love thou me more then
these? so love thou me more then all those delightful things you enjoy? how
happy you, if you can upon due examination of your hearts, give in that answer
that Peter did, Lord thou know that I love thee, thou know that I love
thee more then all these things: they are good things in themselves, but thou
art infinitely more to me, thy praise, and thy honor, is a thousand thousand
times more to me then all these things; Lord, thou that know all things,
know that thus I love thee more then these.

It may be God gives abundance of these things to try you, to see what is in
your heart: as Solomon says of praise, it is as the sining pot to the silver;
so it may be said of all outward prosperity, that it is as the fining pot to
the silver, to discover what dross there is in it: now upon trial shall it
be found that these things have more of thy heart, then God himself? if you
had a heart to deny your self in these things now, while you may enjoy them at
the height, though it may seem that much comfort and sweetness is lost, that
might be had, yet in truth there is nothing lost, no not for the present; for
in the very exercise of selfe-denyall in them, you will find more sweetness
then ever was, or can be felt in the enjoyment of them.

There is nothing more pleasant to man then to get victory; to get victory in
sports, to get victory over the creature, is full of delight; to get victory
over our enemies, has more delight in it; but to get victory over our selves,
to be able to overcome our selves, has the greatest delight of all in it,
especially when it is for God; no such sweetness as this is to the spirit of a
man. Those do not enjoy most comfort of their lives, who are mad upon their
own wills and desires, and cannot endure to have their minds crossed in any
thing; but those have the greatest comfort, who are able to deny themselves
most, and it may be you may enjoy all the outward comforts you have,
nevertheless; the more willing you are to deny your selves in them, the longer
you may enjoy them: to have a heart willing to part with them, may be the
only way to keep them; and to be sure while you have them, you shall enjoy
them in a better manner, with more comfort then any other enjoy that that they
have, whilst your heart in the midst of them, is more upon God then upon them;
they that will lose their lives, and so their estates, their honors and
delights, shall save them; oh how sweet are all outward blessings, when we
have laid them down at Gods feet, and he gives us them again to enjoy.

Whereas on the contrary, by the greediness of your hearts upon them, and
unwillingnesse to part with them, you may have them rent away from you in
wrath, so that you shall not enjoy the comfort of them, and yet you may perish
for ever, for that distemper of heart, in the inordinate setting of it upon
them: Many perish in their inordinate affections toward outward things, and
yet have them not, others have the comfort and blessing of selfedenyall, and
yet enjoy their outward contentments to the full: Oh how much better is it,
that when we are at the height of our prosperity, then to get our hearts to
fall, and to deny our selves for God, then that God should even in our height
seize upon us in his wrath, as it is Gods way often to come upon wicked men, in
the very height of all their jollities? As we read of Absalom, 2 Samuel 13. 28.
when he had a purpose to slay his brother Amnon, he bade his servants to
observe when they saw his heartmerry, and then to fall upon him and slay him.
When Belshazzar was most in his jollitie, then the handwriting came out
against him. When the people of Israel had their own desire, and were
satisfying their lusts to the full, Psalm. 78. 29, 30, 31. then the wrath of God
came upon them.

We read, Job. 20. 22, 23. a threatening against the wicked, That in the
fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straights. When he is about to
fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain
it upon him while he is eating: Oh how much better is it, that in the fullness
of our sufficiency, we do willingly and freely give God glory, in an humble
yielding up of all we have unto him, then that in the fullness of our
sufficiency we should be brought into most miserable straights, in spite of
our hearts, and that by the wrath of God himself? Oh how grievous a condition
is that, to be forced by the wrath of God, to part with that, which we might
have parted withal upon such sweet and honorable terms, in the cause of God,
in testimony to his truth, in his service, and the expressisions of our dearest
Love unto him.

And howsoever it is not long that you can possibly hold this prosperity, that
now you do enjoy: Suppose the fairest, that God should let things go on in an
ordinary course of bounty and patience, within a little while, all the comforts
of the world will leave you, and you must leave them, and what if you did for
the cause of God part with them a year or two sooner then otherwise you
should? what great matter is this? what is a year or two, or ten years
enjoyment of them? there is no such excellency in them, as that a few years
enjoyment of them should be prized at any such high rate.

Are there not Arguments enough from all Gods love and his merciful dealings
with you, to prevail with your hearts for such a thing as this? how has God
spared you in your greatest extremities? when you have cried unto him, he has
been merciful to you, he has watched over you for good all your days, he
has done great things for you; oh what infinite reason is there then, that he
should have the honor of your chiefest delights and greate^^ prosperity? How
often, to gratify the flesh, have many opportunities of spiritual good been
neglected? why then should not now, for the honor of God, some opportunities
for fleshly delights be denied? God never gave you these things upon any other
terms, but that you should be willing to part with them, for the honor of his
name, when he calls for them: God never made you owners, but stewards of them
for his service; and if ever you were brought to Christ, into covenant with God
in him, you did then resign up all unto him, you professed to part with all
for him, you sold all for the pearl; that is, you were willing to part with
what was sinful for the present, and as it were enter into bond, to give up
whatsoever you were or had to the Lord, when it should be called for?

But may we not take the comfort of those blessings that God gives us. Object.


Besides what has been said in answer to a former objection of the like
nature, Answ.
consider these two things.

First, 1.
have you not taken too much comfort already in them? it may be you have taken
more then your share, more in one month then God has allowed for the whole
year; and then you have spent your comfort before hand, and had need therefore
now be willing to deny your self in that which others may have comfort in,
and that which otherwise you might comfortably have enjoyed: as Hosea 9. 1.
Rejoice not oh Israel as other people; so I may say to you, you are not to
rejoice so much as others may. He that has but a hundred pound to maintain
him the whole year, if he shall spend almost all of it the first month, he
had need live very sparingly the rest of the year.

Secondly, 2.
what do you with your comfort when you have it? does it fit you for service
to God? has God so much the more glory from you, then he has from others, by
how much the more comfort you have then others? else wherefore would you have
comfort, if not to fit you for service? cursed be that comfort that has not an
higher end, then merely to satisfy the flesh. And thus much for the time
wherein Moses denied himself, it was when he was grown up, in the prime of
his time, then when he might have enjoyed all his honors, and pleasures to the
full.

CHAP. IX.
SECT. 3.
Faith is the principle that must carry through, and make honorable all a
Christins sufferings.
NOw follows the third thing, which is the principle by which Moses did all
this: he is willing to part with all the glory of the world, and rather to be
in an afflicted estate: and this he is enabled to do by faith; for so says
the text, by faith Moses refused, etc. It was not out of any sullen vexing
humor, as it is reported of Dioclesian and Maximian Herculius, they suddenly
gave over their Empires, and cast off their honors, and betook themselves to
a private life. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 13.
Eusebius makes the cause thereof to be a phrenzie: And Nicephorus says it was
rage and madness, arising from hence, because they saw themselves labor so
much in vain, for the rooting out of the Christians. Master Brightman in his
commentary upon the Revelation, the sixth chapter and the fifteenth verse, says
it was the fear and the horror of the Lamb that was struck into their
hearts, by the power of Jesus Christ; as the fulfilling of that place, where it
is said, the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the mighty men hid
themselves, for the fear of the Lamb. Whatsoever their principle was, Moses
his principle here was of another nature, a divine principle of faith, from
whence the point is, Faith is the grace that enables to deny the glory and
delights of the world, and to endure afflictions in the cause of God. Every
grace works to take off the heart from the things of the world, and gives
strength to bear afflictions; but faith has the principal work in this, and
in this faith manifests much of her glory and excellency.

In this chapter we have many excellent fruits of faith, enabling the worthies
of the Lord to do great things; but scarce any so great as this, to enable to
that selfe-denyall that here is recorded of Moses. It was faith that carried
Abraham and all the Patriarchs through their troubles. David in all his
troubles exercises his faith, and finds help by it; hence we have a most
remarkable place in the 18. Psalm. v. 2. where he blesses God for deliverance
from all his enemies: he shows what it was carried him through all the
troubles he had by them, namely his faith pitched upon God: for in that one
verse he has nine several expressions, to show God to be the full object of
his faith, in the times of all his distresses; as, First he is Jehovah.
Secondly, he is my rock. Thirdly, he is my fortress. Fourthly, he is my
deliverer. Fifthly, he is my God. Sixthly, he is my strength. Seventhly, he
is my buckler. Eighthly, he is the horn of my salvation. Lastly, he is my
high tower. And as he has trusted in him, so in the same verse, he resolves
to trust in him still: for so he says, my God, my strength, in whom I will
trust.

The time of Habakuk his prophecy, was a time of much trouble to the Church of
God, and then that which upheld the spirits of godly men, and enabled them to
suffer hard things, it was their faith, chap. 2. 4. The just by faith shall
live, when other men's spirits shall fail, and sink, and dye in them, then
they shall live, faith making just, shall uphold them. Faith in this case is
like cork, that is upon the nett, though the lead on the one side sinkes it
down, yet the cork on the other keeps it up in the water. David professes
in the 27 Psalm v. 13. that he had fainted unless he had believed. Believing
keeps from fainting in the times of trouble. Saint Paul tells the Corinthians
in the second Epistle and the first chapter, verse. 24. that by faith they
stood: it is faith that makes a man stand in the greatest trialls. And
therefore when Christ saw how Peter should be tempted, he tells him that he
had prayed, that his faith should not fail: noting that while his faith held,
all would be sure; when he began to sinck in the waters, as he was coming to
Christ, it was because his faith began to fail him: So when our hearts begin
to sink in afflictions, it is because our faith begins to fail us. We read,
Acts 14. 22. that Saint Paul and Barnabas exhorted the disciples at Iconium and
Antioch, to continue in the faith; and presently they add, that we must
through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God: noting what use they
should have of their faith, to carry them through all. Saint Paul says of
himself, together with the rest of believers, in the first epistle of Tim. 4.
10. Therefore we labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living
God. Trusting in the living God, is that which will carry a man through
service, and suffering, whatsoever it be.

But wherein lies the power of faith to take off the heart from the world,
Quest.
and carry it through sufferings?

First, Answ.
It is the primary work of this grace, wherein the very being of it consists:
for the soul to cast it self upon God in Christ, for all the good and
happiness it ever expects; to rely here for all, to roll it self upon God,
as an all-sufficient good, to make an absolute resignation of all unto him, so
as to betrust him with all, and to commit all unto him for ever. Now this
implies the taking off the heart from the things of the world, for faith takes
off the heart from its self, therefore much more from any thing in the world;
and where this is, sufferings cannot be very grievous, because the whole good
of the soul is now in God, Psalm. 37. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently;
where the soul pitches upon God, as the rest, and the all-sufficient good of
it, it will wait patiently, whatsoever hard thing befalles it.

Secondly, 2.
by faith the soul comes to have a higher principle to enable it to see God in
his glory and majesty, his greatness, and infiniteness, his holiness, his
justice, and goodness, then ever it had before. It is true that by the use of
reason we may come to understand much of God, but certainly faith presents God
to the soul after another manner then ever it formerly saw him, or then any
other man can see him; until faith comes into the soul, it may well say it
never knew God, but now it sees him infinitely glorious and high above all; It
sees the infinite fountain of all good, and what an infinite dreadful thing
it were to be separated from this God, or to have the wrath of such an infinite
Diety to be provoked against his creature. We know by reason, that the world
was made by God: but Saint Paul says in the third verse of this chapter, that
by faith we understand, that the world was made: so that the same thing may be
known by reason, and by faith too, but faith being a higher principle,
discovers it to the soul in a higher way then reason can.

It is made one of the special fruits of Moses faith, that enabled him to
endure in all his sufferings, in the 27. v. of this chapter, that he saw him
who was visible (of which hereafter) only observe for the present, that God is
invisible to any eye, but to the eye of Faith; now where God is seen so, as
Faith presents him to the soul, t is impossible but the fear of such a Deity
must needs take mighty impression in that soul; and all the glory of the
world must needs be darkened to it; and the least displeasure of the great God
more troubled at, then all the miseries that all creatures under Heaven are
able to bring upon it. How easy is it for a man to despise the World, when
faith gives him a clear sight of God? Isai. 40. 5, 6. The Text says, The
glory of the Lord shall be revealed; and then the voice said, Cry, all flesh is
grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of the field; and
verse. 7. the latter end, Surely the people is grass. When the glory of God
appears, then all flesh, and all worldly glory, is but as grass, as the
flower of the field, as a contemptible thing.

Thirdly, 3.
faith discovers the reality of the beauty and excellency of spiritual,
supernatural, and eternal things revealed in the Word, which before were
looked upon as notions, conceits, and imaginary things. In the first verse of
this chapter, faith is said to be the evidence of things not seen: the word
there translated evidence, (...).
signifies the demonstration that convinces the soul thoroughly of the
certainty and truth of such things, as by reason and natural parts are not
seen. (...).
And again, it is the substance of things hoped for: Tantam in nobis fidei
stabilitatem dominus esse desiderat, ut certius esse quod credimus quam quod
patimur judicemus, and verius habeamus speranda quam sensibilia.
the word is very significant in the Original; it is that which gives a
substantial being to the things of eternal life: now when faith comes in, the
glorious mysteries of the Gospel, the high privileges of the godly, the
excellency and beauty of grace, the great things that God has prepared for
his servants are manifestly discerned.

It is a notable expression of Jerome, God would have such stability of faith
in us, Hieronym. ep. ad virginem in exilium missam. Tom. 9.
that the things which we believe should be more certain to us, then the
things we suffer; and the things hoped for, should be in more reality with us
then things sensible to us: these things are now apprehended as real and
certain things, although they be such things, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
as the Apostle says, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have they
entered into the heart of man to conceive, yet God has revealed them to us by
his Spirit, even that Spirit that searches the deep things of God: Spiritus
sanctus non est scepticus nec dubia, aut opiniones in cordibus nostris
scripsit, sed assertiones ipsa vita, and omni experientia certiores and
firmiores. Luth. T. 3.
now there must be something in us to take this revelation of the spirit, and
that is faith. The Spirit reveals them not as notions, not as uncertain
things, and so faith takes them. The Spirit of God, says Luther, does not
write opinions, but assertions in our hearts, more certain then life it self,
and all experiences whatsoever. Faith can see into those things, that no
natural eye ever saw, it can apprehend that which never entered into the heart
of man to conceive.

Saint Paul in the 2 Cor. 4. 18. says, that the things that are eternal, are
things not seen; and yet says, that we look at things that are not seen;
though they be things that are not seen, yet Saint Paul, and other believers,
by the eye of faith could see them, as certain and real things. The things of
Christ, of grace, of Heaven, what poor empty notions were they to the soul?
what uncertain things before faith came in? but faith makes them to be
glorious things; faith discovers such real certain excellency in them, and
is so sure, that it is not deceived, that it will venture soul and body, the
loss of all, that it will bear any hardship, yea it will venture the infinite
loss of eternity upon them; faith discovers such reality and certainty in
these things, that now the things of the World, that were before only real,
sure excellencies in the eyes of a man, now are as fancies, and shadows, empty
imaginary contentments, that have no being, no foundation, no certainty in them
(as formerly has been showed.)

Fourthly, 4.
faith gives the soul an interest in God, in Christ, in all those glorious
things in the Gospel, and in the things of eternal life. Faith is an
appropriating, an applying, and uniting grace. It is a blessed thing to have
the sight of God, there is much power in it, but to see God in his glory, as my
God, to see all the Majesty, greatness, and goodness of God, as those things
that my soul has an interest in, to see how the eternal Counsels of God
wrought for me to make me happy, to see Christ in whom all fullness dwells, in
whom the treasures of all Gods riches are, and all those are mine; to see
Christ coming from the Father for me, to be my Redeemer, all this is the
work of faith by the union of it with God in Jesus Christ. Faith unites the
soul to Christ, after another manner then any other grace.

Love causes a moral and spiritual union, but this causes a mystical
union; other graces cause us to be like to Christ, but this makes us be one
with Christ, and so have interest in what Christ has interest in. What is all
the world now to such a soul? where is all the bravery of it, or the malice
and opposition of it? The loss of outward things, or the enduring of
afflictions, are great evils to those who have not interest in better; but to
such as have interest in higher things, there is no great matter, though they
lose lower.

Fifthly, faith discharges the soul of the guilt of sin, 5.
and that dreadful evil that follows upon it; It gets a general acquittance
from God, a pardon of all sin, and remission of all punishment thereof,
sealed in the blood of his Son: The soul being made just by faith, is able
to live in the midst of many troubles. The just by faith shall live, so it is
to be read, not the just shall live by faith, but being made just by faith, so
as to stand just and righteous in the Court of Heaven, it now is able to live:
Faith cleares all between God and the soul; it may be there was long
humiliation before, many prayers made in seeking of this, many tears shed,
many duties performed; yet all this could not do, but the guilt lay on still;
but as soon as faith comes, then all is gone, and the soul stands righteous in
the presence of God, and all the breach between God and it is made up.

Being justified by faith, we have peace with God (says Saint Paul) Romans 5.
1. Now the breach being made up, and peace made, mark what follows a little
after in that Scripture; there is not only ability to bear trouble, but to
rejoice in tribulations, yea not only to rejoice, but to glory in
tribulations. Strike Lord, Feri Domine, feri, nam a peccatis absolutus sum.
strike (says Luther) for I am absolved from my sins. Now the soul has got
a greater good then the world can afford, and is freed from greater evils then
the world can inflict. A man that has been with the King, and gotten his
pardon for his life, is not troubled though he lose his glove or handkerchiefe
as he comes out, nor though it should prove a rainy day as he returns home:
truly the loss of all things in the world to such a soul, if it has faith
acting, is but as the one, and the enduring of all evils is but as the other.

And besides, by this the soul sees it self so infinitely engaged to God, as
it is willing to do or suffer whatsoever God will have it: How readily does
Isaiah offer himself to God in service to which much suffering was annexed,
after God had taken away his sin? When God asked whom he shall send, Isai.
6. 8.
he presently answers, Here am I Lord, send me: It is enough that my sin is
pardoned, my soul is saved, let me be cast into any condition in the World,
let me be employed in any service, I have mercy and happiness enough.

CHAP. X.
Six more particulars wherein the power of faith is seen, in taking the heart
off from the world, and carrying it through all afflictions.
FIrst Faith makes the future good of spiritual and eternal things, to be as
present to the soul, 1.
and to work upon the soul as if they were present; and makes use likewise of
things past, as if they were present; and in these operations of faith, there
is much power to carry on the soul with comfort through sufferings; for
present things are apprehended by the mind more fully, and work more strongly
upon the will and affections, then things past or to come: if I view a thing
afar off, it appears small to me, and little of what the thing is, is
conceived by me: but if it be brought near to me, I see it to the full
bigness, and am better able to judge of the nature of the thing as it is.

And again, it works more strongly upon my heart: if I see a toade a great
way off, my heart stirrs not; but if I see it near, as Pharaoh saw the froggs
crawling upon his bed, then my heart rises with loathing of it. If we could
but see things now, as God has told us they shall appear to us hereafter, how
mightily would they work upon the soul, howsoever there are many things that
shall be seen hereafter, that yet were never revealed, and those things faith
cannot make as present: but such things as God has revealed in his word, that
they shall hereafter come to pass, faith may, and when it is active does make
them as present to the soul, and works them upon the heart, as if they did
now appear.

The want of this work of faith is the cause almost of all the evil in the
world: and the acting of faith in this her work, in the lively and constant
work of it, would produce fruits even to admiration. The reason why those
threats of God did not work upon the people, to whom Ezekiel preached, Ezekiel.
12. 27. 28.
God himself gives in the 12. chap. Son of man, they say thou prophesiest of
things a far off. And so for the mercies of God, and the things of eternal
life, because the choice of them are things to come, the world with her present
delights prevails against them. If you could see that glory of God in Christ,
and those glorious treasures of mercies, that shall be communicated, and are
now revealed, and those dreadful evils that are now threatened, and shall then
be fulfilled; I say if you could see them with the same eyes that now is
manifested you shall see them with hereafter, they would draw the hardest heart
that is, and bring down the stoutest spirit that lives: If you had faith you
would be able to see them so; and the reason is, because faith sees things as
the word makes them known, it pitches upon the word in that way that it
reveals the mind of God: now the word speaks of mercies that are to come, as
present things, and of evils that God intends to bring herafter, as if God
were now in the execution of them, as will appear in these scriptures. Isa.
52. 9. 10. Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem,
for the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem: the Lord
has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations: thus the Prophet
speaks of the deliverance of the Church from captivity, as a thing done
already, which was not fulfilled many years after. And David, Psalm. 57. 2.
even then when he fled from Saul in the cave, he looks upon God as having
performed all things for him: the word is, he has perfected all things: and
that is observable, that David uses the same expression of praising God here
when he was in the cave, hiding himself to save his life, as he did when he
triumphed over his enemies, Psalm. 6. and Psalm. 108. And 2 Chronicles. 20. from the
17. verse to the 22. as soon as Jehosaphat had received the promise, he falls
on praising the Lord, as if the mercy were already enjoyed: praise ye the Lord,
for his mercy endures for ever. Christ says of Abraham, John 8. 56. that he
saw his day, and rejoiced, and was glad: Christ's day was unto him as if it had
been then. And in the 13. verse of this chapter, it is said of the godly who
lived in former ages, that though they saw the promises that were afar off to
be fulfilled, yet the text says, (...) Heb. 11. 13.
they embraced them; the word in the original signifies, they saluted them;
now salutations are not but between friends when they meet together. To faith
a thousand years are but as one day, faith takes hold upon eternal life. 1 Timothy 6. 19. It takes present possession of the glorious things of the kingdom
of God: it makes the soul to be in heaven conversing with God, Christ, his
Saints, and Angels already. That which is promised, faith accounts it given,
Genesis 35. 12. And the land which I gave to Abraham, to thee will I give it: it
was only promised to Abraham, but Abraham's faith made it to him as given.

So for judgments and threatenings, Esaias 13. 6. Howl ye, for the day of the
Lord is at hand: this is spoken of the destruction of Babylon which was a
hundred and fifty years after; but the word speaks of it as if it were now,
and so faith apprehends it: the like we may instance in many Scriptures, you
know it is ordinary, and you who know the work of faith, you know it is as
ordinary for it, to look at that which God says, as if it were now done, and
things seen so work strongly.

What difference is there between men's thoughts and judgments of spiritual
and eternal things in times of health, and in times of their sickness, in the
apprehension of death? Ask them now what they think of grace? of a good
conscience? of the pardon of sin? of walking strictly with God? Ask them now
what their judgment is of Gods Saints? Ask them what they think of eternal
separation from God, and the infinite wrath of a Deity for evermore? now you
shall find their judgments otherwise then formerly: and what is the reason of
all? but that things are judged now as present.

As despair brings hell into the soul, and puts the soul as it were into
hell for the present, the soul apprehends as if it were already there: many in
the horror of their spirits have cried out that they were in hell. Francis
Spira in the despair of his soul cried out, verily desperation is hell it
self. So on the contrary, faith brings heaven into the soul, puts it as it
were into heaven, so that many of Gods people upon their sick beds, when they
have been put in mind of heaven, they have joyfully answered, that they were
in heaven already.

Faith likewise makes use of things past, as if they were present: as the
ancient mercies of God showed to our forefathers, and Gods former dealings with
our selves. As Hosea 12. 4. the mercy of God to Jacob, when he wrestled with
him and prevailed, the Church makes use of it, as if it were a present mercy to
themselves, for so says the text, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed;
he wept and made supplication unto him; he found him in Bethel, and there he
spoke with us: not only with Jacob, but with us: whatsoever mercy God showed
to him, we make it ours, as if God were speaking with us, and Psalm. 66. 6. He
turned the sea into dry land, they went through the flood on foot, there did we
rejoice in them: the comfort of the mercies of God for many years past to
their forefathers, they make as theirs, there did we rejoice.

So all the promises that God has made to any of his people, though never so
long ago, faith fetches out the comfort of them, as if they were made now to
us. Compare Joshua 1. 5. with Hebrews 13. 5. God says to Joshua, I will be
with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: now in the Hebrews Saint
Paul applies it to the believers in his time, as if it had been made to them.
Be content (says he) with such things as ye have, for he has said, I will
not leave thee, nor forsake thee. They might have answered, where has God said
so? he said it indeed to Joshua, but what is that to us? yes, all one as if
he had spoken to you. Upon this one instance, whatsoever promise God ever made
to any of his people, since the beginning of the world, for any good, if our
condition comes to be the same, Faith will make it her own, as if God had but
now made it to us in particular. So for Gods former dealings with our selves,
when all sense of Gods mercies fail, that God seems to be as an enemy, Faith
will fetch life from his former mercies, as if they were now present; as we
see in David, Psalm. 77. 5, 6. I have considered the days of old, the years of
ancient time: I call to remembrance my song in the night, etc. And verse. 10. I
said, this is my infirmity, but I will remember the years of the right hand of
the most High. He checkes himself for doubting of Gods mercies, because of
his former mercies, and he recovers himself by bringing to mind the former
dealings of God with them: So Psalm. 143. 45. David's spirit was even overwhelmed
within him, and his heart was desolate, yet he recovers himself, by remembering
the days of old, and by meditating upon Gods former works.

Now in this work of Faith, what abundance of strength does it bring in from
all the mercies of God to our forefathers; from all the promises made to any
godly men, though never so long since; from all Gods former dealings in his
goodness, and makes all these as present to us? this must needs wonderfully
strengthen the heart to any service or suffering: As despair makes all Gods
former dealings in his judgments with others, and Gods ways concerning it
self, as present to fetch terror from them, so Faith Gods mercies, to fetch
comfort and strength from them.

Secondly, 2.
Faith is a raising grace, it carries the soul on high, above sense, above
reason, above the world: when Faith is working, oh how is the soul raised,
above the fears and favors of men! It is said of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6.
His heart was lift up in the ways of God: Faith lifts up the heart in the
ways of God. A man raised on high, sees all things under him as small. Nihil
visibilium moror, nihil invisibilium, ut Iesum Christum acquiram, ignis and
crux, incursus bestiarum, dissipatio ossium, convulsio me^brorum, totiijs
corporis commolitio, ac supplicia diaboli in me veniant, modo Iesum Christum
acquiram. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
Eusebius tells us of a notable speech that Ignatius used, when he was in his
enemies hands, not long before he was to suffer, which argued a raised spirit
to a wonderful height, above the world, and above himself. I care (says he)
for nothing visible or invisible, that I might get Christ: let fire, the
cross, the letting out of beasts upon me, breaking of my bones, the tearing
of my members, the grinding of my whole body, and the torments of the Devils
come upon me, so be it I may get Christ. Faith puts a holy magnanimity upon the
soul, to slight and to over-looke with a holy contempt, whatsoever the world
proffers or threatens.

All things are under us while we are above our selves, and it is only Faith
that empties us of our selves, and raises us above our selves; Faith raises the
soul to converse with high and glorious things, with the deep and eternal
counsels of God, with the glorious mysteries of the Gospel, with communion with
God and Jesus Christ, with the great things of the Kingdom of Christ, with the
great things of Heaven and eternal life. Men, before Faith comes into their
souls, have poor low spirits, busied about mean and contemptible things, and
therefore every offer of the world prevails with them, and every little danger
of suffering any trouble scares them, and makes them yield to any thing; but
when Faith comes, there is another manner of spirit in a man.

Every spirit is not fit for sufferings, but a spirit truly raised by Faith,
Audere ad nomen Christi periculum vitae and fortunatum adire, ad id requiritur
spiritus principalis. Luth.
a princely spirit, so Luther calls it; to dare to venture loss of estate and
life for the Name of Christ, to this a Princely spirit is required. When Valens
the Emperor sent his Officer to Basilius, seeking to turn him from the Faith,
he first offered him great preferments, but Basil rejected them with scorn,
Offer these things, says he, to children; then he threatens him most
grievously: Basil contemnes all his threatenings; Threaten, says he, your
purple Gallants, that give themselves to their pleasures. And Basil in his
Homily in Quadraginta Martyrs, (...).
brings them in answering the offers of worldly preferments; Why do you
promise us these small things of the world, which you account great, when as
the whole world is despised by us? What great spirits did Faith put into some
of these worthies mentioned in this chapter, which appears by the great things
that they did by their Faith? verse. 33. 34. Through Faith they subdued
Kingdoms, they stopped the mouths of Lions: and this is observable, that
working righteousness, and obtaining the promises are put between these two;
as if these were works of the same rank, fit to be joined with such great
things as those were. Again, by Faith they quenched the violence of the fire:
of weak, they were made strong; they waxed valiant in fight, they turned to
flight the Armies of the Aliens.

Certainly, Faith is as glorious a grace now as ever it was, and if it be put
forth it will enable the soul to do great things. The raising of the soul
above reason and sense, is as great a thing as any of these. The Faith of
Abraham was most glorious, for which he is styled the Father of the faithful,
and yet the chief for which this is commended, is, that he believed against
hope, Romans 4. 18. When the soul is in some straight, it looks up for help;
and sense says it cannot be; reason says it will never be; wicked men say it
shall not be; yea, it may be God in the ways of his providence seems to go
so cross, as if he would not have it to be; yet if Faith have a word for it,
it says it shall be. In great difficulties, in sore afflictions, when God
seems to be angry, and to strike in his wrath, when there appears nothing to
sense and reason, but wrath; yet even then Faith has hold on Gods heart, when
his hand strikes.

If Faith by raising the soul above reason and sense, can carry it through
even such streights, as the sense and apprehension of the wrath of God
himself: if it can enable to bear the strokes of God, when they appear as
the strokes of an enemy, much more easily can Faith enable to resist the
temptations of the world, and to carry it through all the straights that any
outward afflictions can bring it to. All the strength that the temptations that
come from the allurements of the world, or the troubles that it threatens,
have, Fides libenter accipit quicquid arduum videtur incredulis.
it is from sense and carnal reasonings, if the soul be got above them, then
it is above the danger of such temptations: by that magnanimity that Faith
brings into the soul, it is prepared to set upon difficult things, Quem neque
pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent.
to endure strong oppositions. A believer is one, whom neither poverty, nor
death, nor bonds, nor any outward evils can terrify.

Thirdly, 3.
Faith is a purifying and healing grace, Act. 15. 9. Purifying their hearts by
Faith. It purges out base desires after the things of the world, and living at
ease; base joys and delights in the creature, in satisfying the flesh; the
fears of future evils that may come hereafter: Fides non timet famem. Tertul.
Faith fears not hunger, says Tertullian. If the heart be sound, it will be
strong; this purging of it makes it sound, 2 Timothy 1. 7. God has not given us
the spirit of fear, says the Apostle, but of power, of love, and a sound
mind: the spirit of fear is first purged out, and then there is a spirit of
power, and a sound mind; where there is a sound mind, there is a spirit of
power; what weakens the body but the unsoundnesse of it? If distempered humors
be in the body, it is not able to endure any thing; a little cold, oh how
tedious is it to it? but when these humors are purged out, then it is strong
and able to do or suffer much more. That which ill humors are to the body,
sin is to the soul, which being purged out, the soul grows strong to
resist temptations, and to endure afflictions: But further, sin in the soul
is not only as an ill humor to weaken it, but it wounds it too; now how
little can a man do or suffer with a wounded member: It is Faith that heales
our wounds, by applying the Blood of Christ to them, and so it strengthens.

Fourthly, 4.
Faith is a quickening grace, it sets all other graces on work, it puts life
and activitie into them all; I live by the Faith of the Son of God, says
Saint Paul; and especially it sets love on work, which is a grace exceedingly
powerful. Faith works by love. If a man's faith be up, all his graces will be
so too; and if that be down, all other graces are weak and down with it. Vt
vires aliis lapidibus pretiosis extinct is solo at tactu suscitaret.
Gulielmus Parisiensis reports of a Crystal, that it has such a virtue, as
when the virtues of other precious stones are extinct, it will revive them
again: Faith is such a Crystal to revive the virtue of all graces. When
David's heart was so down, that he chides himself so much, Psalm. 43. 5. Why
art thou cast down oh my soul? he labors to recover himself by his Faith;
still trust in God; he is the health of my countenance, and my God. Faith
brings life, and maintains life in the soul: for it has the most immediate
union with Christ, and therefore the liveliness and activity of our graces
depends much upon it: now where the graces of Gods Spirit are lively and
active, the allurements and threats of the World cannot much prevail.

Fifthly, 5.
Faith is a mighty prevailing grace with God and with Jesus Christ, as it is
said of Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. he prevailed with God as a Prince. Luther was a
man full of faith, and it was said of him, Potuit quicquid voluit.
He could do what he would. Faith sets all Gods Attributes on work, for the
good and relief of a believer: it stirs, as I may so say, the arm of an
infinite power; it opens the sluice that lets out the streams of an infinite
mercy, and causes an infinite wisdom to be active, to find out ways to
relieve in time of distresses; it brings in all the strength and good of the
New Covenant: when Faith works, Jesus Christ is working, to make good all the
gracious promises of the Gospel, and he is the Mighty God, wonderful,
Counselor, the Prince of peace. Faith does not strengthen the soul in a way
of suffering, by its own strength, Quam laetus and libens in talibus servis
pugnavit and vicit protector fidei. Cypr. ep. 9.
but by the strength that it brings in from Jesus Christ, Rev. 12. 11. The
Saints overcame by the Blood of the Lamb. Oh how willingly and joyfully does
the Protector of Faith fight in such servants of his, says Cyprian! It is one
thing to have interest in God and Christ, and another thing to have them
working for good in a special manner, in particular causes where we desire
help and relief, although it be true, that God and Jesus Christ are always
working for the good of believers, in some kind or other, but yet when faith
lies still and is not active, although we do not lose our interest in God,
yet we cannot expect such sensible manifestations of the gracious workings of
God for us, as when we put forth our faith, and keep it active and lively; and
then though we be never so weak in our selves, we set an infinite strength to
work for us.

We have a notable expression of Gods stirring up his strength and wisdom for
those whose hearts are right with him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run
to and fro throughout the earth, to show himself strong for those whose heart
is perfect toward him; the words are, ad roborandum se, to strengthen
himself: God strengthens himself, he does as it were stir up all his
strength for such: And although we be in the dark, and know not how to order
our steps, and to discover the subtilties of temptation, yet there is an
infinite wisdom working for us; and although we be never so unworthy and vile,
yet we have an infinite mercy, whose bowels yerne toward us, and will not
suffer any evil to befall us; yea the more weak and succourlesse we are, in
our selves, if the sense of it stirs up faith, to set God on work for us, we
are strong by our weakness; not only of weak are made strong, but by being
weak are made strong. It is said of the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 8.
that it had a little strength, and yet it kept Gods Word, and had not denied
his Name: Although we have but a little strength, yet if we have faith to set
Gods strength on work, we shall keep Gods Word, and not deny his Name.

Hence in the sixth place from all these it follows, 4.
that faith is an overcomming grace: this is the victory that overcommeth the
world, even our faith, says Saint John, Epistle 1 chap. 5. v. 4.

In this victory, there are three things. First, there is a conquering of the
assaults of the world, so as they can do us no hurt, bnt we are able to
repel the force of them.

But this is not all, there is something further: namely the making use of
those things of the world for our good, that would have undone us, that is a
full victory, where the enemies do not only resist and break back, but he
brings the conquered into bondage, so as now he is able to use the adversary to
serve his own turn: so in this conquest of faith, there is not only an
overcomming of the temptations, of the pleasures of the world, but ability to
use them for God, and the furtherance of our own good. And so in riches and
honors: Conquerours do not use to put to the sword and destroy all they
conquer, but they bring them into bondage, to be serviceable to them.

Some think there is no other victory over the world, but to throw all away
presently: as we read of Crates the Philosopher, Abite in profundum, malae
cupiditates, ego vos mergam, ne ipse mergar a vobis.
he cast his goods into the sea with this speech, Get you gone into the
deepes, I will drown you, lest I be drowned of you. But this is not the way
of God, we are to stay till God call us to leave that we do enjoy; Non fuga
nec absentia, sed vigore animi, and constanti praesentia Macrob. l. 2. Satur.
until that time, you may enjoy your honors, your riches, and your moderate
lawful pleasures; but to be able to use these for God, this is a great
victory. The Devil often makes use of many of Gods good blessings, which he
gives us for our furtherance in his ways, to be a means to hinder us: so
faith makes use of all his oppositions in those ways, which he intends
hindrances, to be means of great furtherance in them. In former times men
thought it a good piece of skill, to keep wild beasts from doing hurt; but
after they got that skill, not only to keep them from that mischief they did,
but to make use of them for their benefit, to make use of these skins, and
their intralls, and diverse other ways; this is the skill of Faith in
overcomming the world, to make use of those things of the world that heretofore
have done them so much hurt.

But yet further, 3.
there is a third thing in victory, which is triumph: a believer can triumph
over the world, over all his allurements and threats; As Christ did not only
prevail against his and our enemies, but triumphed over them likewise, as Col.
2. 15. having spoiled principalities, and powers, he made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them: so Christ makes us to triumph: as 2 Cor. 2. 14.
Now thanks be to God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ.

And yet further, there is something more then all this in Faiths overcomming
the world, which is beyond our expressions. By Faith we are more then
conquerours, Romans 8. 37. In all these things we are more then conquerers, in
what things? in tribulation, in persecution, in famine, in nakedness, and
peril of sword, while we are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep
for the slaughter: in all these things. But how more then conquerours? Ab ipso
ducunt opes animumque ferro.
we gather strength by our opposition, we conquer in being conquered:
Persecutors are tired more in inflicting, then we in suffering. Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 1.
Eusebius reports of the tormentors of Blandina, who tormented her by turns,
from morning to night, that they fainted for weariness, confessing themselves
overcome. And Gregory Nazianzen tells of one of the nobles of Julian, who at
the tormenting of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, said unto him, we are ashamed O
Emperor, the Christians laugh at your cruelty, and grow the more resolute.
Rev. 12. 11. It is said of the Saints, they loved not their lives to the death,
and yet they overcame, they overcame in being killed; and this is to be more
then a conqueror.

CHAP. XI.
Most men are strangers to this precious Faith; The Trial thereof discovered.
IF this be the work of Faith; Application.
if these be the glorious effects of it; then hence the faith of the most men
in the world is discovered not to be right, not to be precious faith, that
faith that is the faith of Gods elect, because it is altogether void of this
virtue and efficacy; you think you have faith, what can you do with your
faith? what power? what efficacy has it? can it draw your hearts off from all
creatures here below? can it raise your spirits above all the delights,
honors, profits of the world? can it satisfy your souls with God alone, as
an infinite all-sufficient good? Surely a precious faith, that is, the Faith of
Gods Elect does this.

First, 1.
Faith has a mighty power of God put forth for the working of it in the soul:
It is the exceeding greatness of Gods power, the same that raised Jesus Christ
from the dead, that works faith wheresoever ir is; and God does not use to put
forth his Almighty power, in any extraordinary manner, for the wotking of an
ordinary thing; therefore faith must needs be some extraordinary thing, and
have some extraordinary virtue in it, wheresoever it is true, to do great
things.

Secondly, 2.
Faith has the great honor above all other graces, to be the condition of the
second Covenant; therefore surely it is some great matter that faith enables to
do; whatsoever keeps covenant with God, brings strength, though it self be
never so weak: As Sampsons Hair, what is weaker then a little hair, yet
because the keeping that, was keeping covenant with God, therefore even a
little Hair was so great strength to Sampson: Faith then that is the condition
of the covenant, in which all grace and mercy is contained, if it be kept, it
will cause strength indeed to do great things.

Thirdly, 3.
Faith has high and glorious things for its object; it is God himself, his
electing, redeeming love, the Lord Jesus Christ in his natures and offices, the
glorious mysteries of redemption, etc. that it exercises it self upon: It
could not have to deal with these things, if it were not a most excellent
grace, full of admirable virtue and efficacy.

Fourthly, 4.
Faith has high and glorious acts that it performs, that are essential to it.

Fifthly, 5.
it has many glorious effects; it is that which must carry the soul through
all hazards, difficulties, and oppositions to eternal life.

Surely then this grace has exceeding great things in it: certainly the world
is mistaken in this grace: It is something else that they have taken up for
faith all this while; for there is nothing more dull, flat and dead, then that
which they take for Faith; their hope in God, and trusting in God, what empty,
heartlesse, livelesse things are they? No marvel though they think it an
easy thing to believe; It is easy indeed to believe with such a kind of
belief as theirs is: Truly we had need look to it, that we be not mistaken
in our Faith, for it is of infinite consequence, upon which all depends: if we
be mistaken in this, all the mercy in God, all the blood of Christ, all the
good in the promises can do nothing for us.

Consider therefore again, surely that cannot be right faith, that cannot do
that which the light of nature can do, that mere civility and morality can
do: Suppose it did as much as they can do, yet if it can do no more, it is
not right, it is not that precious faith, that will save the soul. Suppose a
simple man should get a stone, and strike fire with it, and he concludes,
surely this is some precious stone, because fire is stricken out of it, why?
every flint, every ordinary stone that lies in the street, will do as much as
this: so if a man should think surely he has that precious faith, because he
can be sober, and temperate, just in his calling, upright in all his dealings,
chaste in his body, liberal to the poor; why? ordinary Heathens can do this,
they were as temperate, as just, as chaste, as liberal as you, there needs no
faith for this; It is enough for a man to be a rational man to do this, faith
must have higher operations then reason, or else it will never carry to Heaven.

But what if it does not enable thee to do as much as a beast can do? as to
be temperate in meats and drinks, what kind of faith do you think this is,
when there are such glorious things said of Faith, and yet that faith you have,
cannot enable you to do so much good as there is in a beast, will this faith
save you? What if it does not enable you to do so much as the Devils faith?
they believe, and tremble; there are many things concerning God, in his
infinite justice, holiness, wrath, many things concerning sin, concerning
Christ, concerning eternity that they believe, which thou beleevest not; or if
thou say thou do believe, yet thou do not tremble, but go on boldly,
securely, presumptuously, hard-heartedly, joyfully, in a sinful and dangerous
way, and is this Faith? is this the precious Faith that will save a Soul? That
which thou call Faith, does not give thee strength to resist any slight
temptation; thou can not deny a companion, thou can not venture the loss
of any thing, thou can not endure a reproachful word for Christ, and is this
Faith? Good Lord, what do we make of Faith, if this be Faith? Truly, if
Faith had nothing else in it, then the Faith of the most has, I would even
fall to the Virtues of Morality, for it were far beneath the meanest of them
all.

Dare you venture your souls and eternal estates upon this Faith? Certainly,
it were exceeding boldness and desperateness so to do. What if God should
set all thy sins in order before thee, in the most hideous and fearful
nature of them, in the true deformity and vileness of them? What if thou
should see God in his infinite Glory, Majesty, Holiness, and Justice? If
he should show thee how thou have wronged all his Attributes, how thou have
struck at his very Being, how thou have been an enemy to him all thy life,
resisting and opposing of him in all thy ways, darkened his Glory, contemned,
slighted him, and set up the creature, yea, thy lust before him; this I dare
charge every Soul as guilty of, in some degree or other. Suppose thou saw
all the creatures abused by thee, pleading against thee, and all Gods
Ordinances profaned, and all thy time misspent, and the blood of Christ
crying out against thee. Suppose thou saw the Law, full of the brightness,
of the holiness, and justice of God, which thou have broken. Suppose thou
saw the rigor, strictness, and severitie of it, binding thee over to
eternal death for every breach, and putting thee under an eternal Curse for
every offense. Suppose Conscience were let out upon thee, and had commission to
accuse thee to the full, to fly in thy face for all thy abuses of it. Suppose
Satan were let out, to plead against thee, inject dismal hideous terrors into
thy spirit. Suppose now all creatures were ready to leave thee, to take their
everlasting farewell of thee; and now the infinite Ocean of Eternity were
before thee, and thou were to enter in upon it, either for thy eternal
happiness or eternal misery. Suppose now thou stoodst before the great God,
to receive the Sentence of thy eternal Doom, to have the great question of
thy everlasting estate to be absolutely and unalterably determined of. Now,
would such a Faith, as thou have, carry through these things? Would it uphold
thee from sinking into the bottomless Gulf of Despair? This may be thy
condition, thou know not how soon; and that Faith that thou have, of what
use would it be to thee, in such a condition as this?

If ever thou be saved, thou must have such a Faith as shall be able to
uphold thy heart, and keep it unto God, whenever such a condition shall
befall: though Faith be weak, yet if it be true, it enables the Soul to lay
such fast hold on God, as whatsoever befalls it, can never take off the Soul
from God again. Be therefore persuaded, that Faith is another manner of Grace
then you imagined it to be: where Faith is true, it will do more then carry
through outward streights, and hardships, it will carry through spiritual
streights; into which I have made a little digression, that I might convince
men, that they mistake in that which they call Faith.

CHAP. XII.
No wonder, that men of great parts (wanting Faith) do fall off from Christ,
and betray his Cause.
IF it be Faith that must carry men through sufferings, Use 2.
and such a kind of Faith as you have had opened to you; learn then not to be
offended, when you see men fall off in the time of trial; for all men have not
Faith: we should be no more troubled at it, then when we see dry leaves fall
off the Tree by a strong Wind: If they want the Principle that should carry
them through, what wonder is it if they fall away? Whatsoever men's parts or
gifts be, whatsoever profession they make, yet if the shine of Faith appears
not in them, we are to expect nothing else from them; where there are but
natural Principles, there it is not to be expected that Nature should be
denied, when any great thing comes cross unto it.

Many who are weak, are discouraged, when they see men of eminent parts, such
who have been forward in profession; such as were able to pray, and to speak
admirably of Divine things; such as were able to advise, and give counsel unto
others; such as were of high esteem in the Church of God; yea, Preachers, who
have been very eminent, by whom the hearts of many have been much refreshed:
when such in the time of trial shall fall off, and basely yield to the World,
Lapsus majorum, tremor minorum.
betraying the Cause of God, rather then they will suffer trouble: Upon this,
those that are weak think with themselves, what shall become of me then, a
poor creature, who have not the hundredth part of those abilities that such
had? Surely I shall never hold out. This temptation many times is strong, it
has always been the way of the enemies of the Truth to come with this
argument to those who are weak; Such and such have yielded, and will ye stand
out? Are you wiser then they? Chrysostom in an Oration, Nonne vidisti alios
vestri ordinis idipsum fecisse? Nos hac potissimum ratione viriliter stabimus*
and pro illorum ruina nosmetipsos in sacrificia offeremus.
in Iuventinum and Maximum, two Martyrs, brings in this objection of the
Persecutors against them, and their answer: Do you not see others of your
rank to do thus? They answer; For this very reason we will manfully stand,
and offer our selves as a Sacrifice, for the breach that they have made.
Wherefore, seeing this is that which the Adversaries of the Truth make such use
of, it has need of the fuller answer. For a more full answer thereunto then,

First know, 1.
that the least degree of true Faith will go further then all the abilities of
natural parts and gifts that ever were in the world; Why true Faith only will
carry men through sufferings.
and true Faith may be, where natural parts are very weak, and where there is
little appearance of common gifts: and on the other side, where these are in
the greatest eminency, yet the Soul may be altogether void of Faith. You are
deceived, if you think, where there are stronger parts, and most gifts, there
must needs be the greatest measure of Faith; and where parts are weaker, and
scarce any common gifts, there must needs be the least: No; God does not
dispense this glorious grace of Faith according to this proportion: Not many
wise, not many learned, but God chooses the poor in this world to be rich in
faith: When the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel are hid from the wise of the
world, even then are they revealed to those that are Babes. Gods ways have
usually been, to choose weak and contemptible things to honor himself by,
that the glory of his Grace and Power might the more appear; and has not so
ordinarily made use of men of great parts, that have been eminent and glorious
in the world, because in them the grace of God would not be so much honored,
some of the honor would stick to them.

Consider secondly, 2.
if the example of these men were the ground of your profession of Religion,
then their falling off might justly be your discouragement: but if you had
better grounds, if the evidence, the beauty, the authority, the power of, and
love unto the Truth, were your grounds; then your grounds remaining, and the
Truth being the same, you should not be discouraged, but go on in your way.

Thirdly, 3.
if you think to hold out by the strength of any degree of excellency
whatsoever that you could see in them, then you might justly be discouraged,
because you have not so much as they had; all that you saw in them, were gifts,
and parts, and profession: If you think that these should carry you through
sufferings, you are utterly mistaken; but if you make account, that that which
should carry you through, be another Principle, a hidden one, that cannot be
seen in any, then there is no cause of discouragement.

Fourthly, 4.
has not God acquainted you with the infinite deceitfulness of the heart of
man; That it is a bottomless depth of evil, and desperately wicked, beyond
that which any is able to know but God himself? And will you then depend upon
man, and that in a matter of so great consequence, as the cleaving to, or the
forsaking of the Truth of God?

Fifthly, 5.
the falls of those who have been thus eminent, are just judgments of God
upon hypocrites, and those that are carnal and naught, to be a
stumbling-blocke to them, at which they should fall, and break themselves, and
never rise again: Now, if you should stumble too at this stumbling-blocke, it
were an ill sign, and a heavy judgment of God against you; Therefore take
heed, that it prevails not too far with you.

Sixthly, 6.
how do you know, but that these men, in the midst of all their profession,
had some secret sin maintained in their bosoms, some secret lusts that lay
next their hearts? And if so, no marvel though all the seeming good they had,
vanish and come to nothing, in the time of trial.

Lastly, 7.
the more glorious they were, and failed, and the more weak and contemptible,
either in your own eyes, or in the eyes of others, you are, the greater is the
mercy of God toward you, if he gives you a heart to hold out, and the greater
honor will it be for you, both before God and men; You shall be brought
against them, in the Day of Judgment, to condemn them.

CHAP. XIII.
The difference between the heat of men's own Resolutions, and the true heat
of the heart by Faith, in suffering for Christ.
IF Faith be the Principle that carries through sufferings, Use 3.
then let men take heed, that they trust not to their own Resolutions; as if,
because now they think they would suffer any thing, let men do what they can
against them, therefore they shall be able to go through: Many have deceived
themselves in this. The difference between the heat of men's Resolutions, and
the true heat of the heart by Faith, is like the difference of the heat of the
Foul breeding over her eggs, and the heat of the fire; the one is a heat of
life conveying life, but not the other; Faith warmes the heart, so as it
conveyes life, but not so our own Resolutions. We have had many sad
experiences of the falsenesse of men's hearts, from time to time in this
particular, who before the trial have been very confident and resolute, yet
they have most shamefully failed, and fallen off from the Truth, when the trial
came.

The example of Doctor Pendleton, mentioned in the Book of Martyrs, is
remarkable in this kind, the story is generally known: The Doctor was full of
confidence and resolution, and professed* That those fat sides of his should
fry in the fire, before he would yield; and yet how shamefully he forsook
the Cause of God, you all know. Those who vaunt most, have many times the least
courage, as those creatures who have the greatest hearts of flesh, are the most
timorous, as the Stag, the Panther, and the Hare. It is not enough that men, in
the profession of their resolutions, speak as they think, Ambula in timore
and contemptu tui, and ora Dominum ut ipse tua omnia faciat, and tu nihil
facias, sed sis Sabbatum Christi: Ad Gabrielem Vydymum pastorem Aldenburgensem.
and as they are persuaded for the present; this is not to be trusted to: for
he that trusts his own heart, is a fool, says Solomon, Prove. 28. It is good
counsel Luther gives a German Minister, in an Epistle he writes to him; Walk
in fear and contempt of your self, and pray to the Lord that he may do all
things, and do not you think to do any thing, but be you a Sabbath unto
Christ, so his expression is, (that is) rest your spirit in Christ.

What resolutions are those that are like to fail, Quest.
and to come to nothing in times of trial. Answ. 1.


First, rash resolutions, when men resolve without serious consideration, what
sufferings mean, what they will cost them, and how hard they will be to them
when they come; they do not make them as present to them, by meditation before
they resolve; resolution, in such things, should be the fruit of much
meditation; there need be much musing before this fire break forth.

Secondly, 2.
when there is no brokennesse of spirit joined with their resolutions, but
their hearts are puffed up, pride discovering it self, as in other of their
ways, so even in their very resolutions of suffering great things for God.

Thirdly, 3.
when men resolve what they will do, but for the present they can suffer
nothing; if they be crossed never so little, their hearts rise, they are
overcome with distempered passions, they cannot bear any contradiction, but
must have their own wills, and their own turns served, or else there can be
no quiet with them.

Fourthly, 4.
when men resolve for sufferings hereafter, but have no heart to that present
service, which God calls now to, God has little honor from them that way,
they are negligent and loose in present duties; surely these men, who fail
thus in service, are not like to hold out in suffering, let them resolve what
they will.

Fifthly, 5.
when men are full of resolutions, and speak great words that way, but they
do nothing to lay up and prepare for sufferings. What care and endeavor is
there to cleanse the heart? to strengthen Faith? to get more full sense of Gods
love? to provide spiritual armor? what prayers? what tears are sent up to
God aforehand? Strong resolutions, if they be right, will bring forth strong
endeavors; otherwise they will certainly vanish.

Sixthly, 6.
when men's resolutions come from external principles, they are acted by
something from without them, as the examples of others, or esteem from others,
or persuasions by others, more then from any principle within themselves. We
read, Heb. 10. 34. those Christians there mentioned held out in their
resolutions, to the suffering the spoiling of their goods with joy, knowing
within themselves, that in Heaven they had an enduring substance; they had
their principles within themselves.

Seventhly, 7.
when resolutions come merely from anguish of men's spirits, in regard of
present trouble that men are in, from the hand of God upon them, it may be then
they will resolve to do or suffer any thing; but these resolutions seldom
come to any thing: It is strange that men should trust to them, considering the
abundances of experiences, both from themselves and others, that they have had
of the usual falsenesse of them.

Eighthly, 8.
when resolution comes merely from conviction of conscience, and not from any
love to truth, although conscience shall tell a man if he forsakes God and his
truth, to prevent some present troubles, that that evil which he shall bring
upon himself (in regard of the guilt of sin, and the wrath of God against
him) will be infinitely greater then any he can suffer, yet if there be not a
true love to the truth, there is no hold of this man, his corrupt heart will
break all the bonds of conscience.

Ninthly, 9.
when men trust to their own promises they make to God, to stand for his
truth, more then to Gods promises, that promise strength to enable them to it;
they are confident, because they are resolved they shall go through, Why men's
own good will not carry them through godly sufferings.
and so let the promise of God lie, and make no use of it; now these
resolutions are not like to carry men through sufferings, at least not in a
gracious manner.

First, 1.
because they are but natural, and natural strength can carry no further then
it has natural props and succors to uphold it, and maintain it withal,
which may all fail in some kind of suffering that God may call unto.

Secondly, 2.
there is much difference in men's apprehensions from themselves; at one time
they apprehend things strongly one way, at another time another way; especially
when things come to be present, their apprehensions of them are far different
from that they were, when they apprehended them as future.

Thirdly, 3.
there is a great deal of difference in the frame of a man's heart, to his own
feeling when his lusts lie still, from that which there is when they come to be
stirring: sometimes men's corruptions are restrained, and are very quiet, and
then they have good resolutions, at other times their corruptions are stirring
and active, and then they are quite off from that they were, the mind is
blinded, the heart is carried on violently in ways contrary to former
resolutions.

Fourthly, 4.
men know not the strength of temptations before they meet with them, they
think it is an easy matter to encounter with them, but when they come, they
find them far stronger then they imagined, and they not being prepared for
such strength, are overcome by them.

Fifthly, 5.
it may be when sufferings come, men shall not find that comfort, that
encouragement, that they expected either from God or men, they (it may be) made
account of, and promised to themselves great matters, that surely their pains
and troubles would be much eased with the comforts they should have, and many
would encourage them, and, it may be, when it comes too, they may be left
desolate, as a bottle in the smoke; as David speaks of himself. God many times
even in sufferings withdrawes himself from his own people for a while, for
their trial; and those from whom they expected comfort may leave them, and
grow strange unto them: Now if there be no higher principle then ones own
resolutions, the heart will fail: In such a case, there had need be Faith to
carry through.

But may we not resolve then aforehand what we will do? Quest.


Many upon hearing how others fail, Answ.
in performing their resolutions, and that a man may be very confident of what
he will do, and yet when it comes to trial, do nothing; therefore they
think it is in vain to resolve, they go on in a slight negligent way, and
never endeavor to bring their hearts to any resolution at all, they say we
can do nothing of our selves, God must do all, no man can know what he shall
be able to do, before the trial comes; but it is apparent, that the cause why
these men do not come to any resolutions, is not from any true sense of their
weakness: For,

First, 1.
their hearts are not humbled before God in the sense of it.

Secondly, 2.
they do nothing to strengthen themselves, to help against any such weakness
of theirs, as they speak of: if you be so weak, you had need take much pains
aforehand to get strength, to lay up something that may help in the time of
need: but the reason why you never come to resolution, is:

First, 1.
because of the sluggishnesse of your spirits; you will not take pains in
examining your hearts, and in endeavoring in the use of means to attain to
this.

Secondly, 2.
there are engagements between your hearts, and the world, and sinful
distempers, which you are unwilling to break off, which must be broken off, if
ever you come to any true resolutions, which are like to hold.

Thirdly, 3.
sufferings are such tedious things to you, as you cannot endure to think of
them aforehand, much less make account of them, so as to prepare for them,
such thoughts would trouble you, they would damp your carnal joy, you could
not go on so quietly and securely in the enjoyment of your contentments in the
world, as now you do, when you put off all thoughts of suffering any trouble.

But let such know, Resolutions for Christ necessary, and how attained.
that resolution aforehand may stand with brokennesse of heart, from the sight
and sense of our own inability; and when it is a resolution of faith, it
arises from the sense of our own weakness, and dependence upon God for
strength: none are more sensible of their own weakness, then they who are
most resolved, whose resolutions are raised by their faith; for Faith is an
emptying grace, whereby the soul goes out of it self for all strength and
supply of all good from another; and for such resotions which have such a
principle, we ought all to labor.

For first, 1.
it brings much ease and comfort to a gracious heart, when it is freed from
fears and doubts, and is come into a settled and resolved way.

Secondly, 2.
it helps against many temptations; the soul will not be listening to the
reasonings of flesh and blood, and to the suggestings of Satan, as formerly it
did; neither will Satan now so annoy and pester the soul with temptations, as
he was wont to do, when it was in an unresolved way.

Thirdly, 3.
God accepts of this resolution, as the will for the deed, though a man be
never called to suffer, yet he shall have the crown of sufferings, because he
had the resolution of Faith for sufferings.

Fourthly, 4.
this is a strong engagement when sufferings come, to strengthen the soul
against them: therefore there may be resolutions aforehand, yea they are
exceeding profitable, of great use, but they must be resolutions of Faith, not
our own trusted unto.

What are those resolutions that do come from Faith? Quest.


First, Answ. 1.
when knowing our hearts, what principles of Apostasy we have in them, we
seek help in Christ, and in the promise.

Secondly, 2.
when our resolutions purify our hearts.

Thirdly, 3.
when they cause us to endeavor to get in all spiritual strength that the
Word reveals.

CHAP. XIV.
How to know the root or principle from whence all that we do or suffer comes.
EXamine therefore whether Faith be that which carries us on in our sufferings:
Use 4.
for it is possible that a man may suffer the loss of much, and endure hard
things upon other principles; as from natural stoutnesse of spirit, from
natural courage, or from pride, or from natural conscience, from these there
may be resisting oppositions, and suffering much trouble, but not in that
gracious way, as to be a sweet savor unto the Lord. Where Faith is the root
and principle of selfe-denyall, there is another kind of self-denial then
that which arises from any other principle: Now this is to be examined, it
concerns us much to know the root and principle from whence all that we do or
suffer comes, God looks most at that; there may be beautiful flowers grow out
of a stinking Root, glorious actions may proceed from Natural Principles.
Wherefore, for trial, let us examine the differences that there are between
one that is carried through sufferings by natural stoutnesse of spirit, and
another that is carried through by Faith. Secondly, the differences between
Pride and Faith, in this work. Thirdly, the differences between Faith, and
the strength of Natural Conscience.

For the first, Sufferings out of natural stoutnesse. 1.
take these Notes. First, where selfe-denyall is from Natural Principles, it
is but particular, not universal. In some eminent thing, a natural spirit may
deny it self; but upon examination it may appear, that in other things it
makes self its end, even in things where God requires selfe-denyall, as much
as in the other: whereas, if it came from Faith, it would not be partial, but
appear in one thing as well as in another, so far as God calls thereunto;
that which works by rule, works evenly, impartially, constantly.

But there is none, Object.
but in some things may at sometimes seek themselves.

There is nothing wherein a gracious spirit gives liberty to its self so to
do. Answ.
If there be true Faith, the Soul sets it self in the bent, frame, and
endeavor of it, against all self-seeking, in every thing proportionably,
according as the rule requires: if self prevails at any time, it is beyond
the scope, intent, frame, resolution, and true endeavor of the Soul; and when
that, wherein self has prevailed is taken notice of, it takes revenge upon it
self in that thing rather then any other.

Secondly, 2.
where suffering troubles come from a Natural Root, the Soul is not conscious
to its self of its own weakness; it knows not the power of corruption in
the heart, it understands not how self may be sought, in denying ones self:
such a one is not acquainted with the secret distempers, those inward windings
and turnings of his own heart; those depths, those wiles, those devices of
Satan, and of his own spirit: he sees not need of a higher Principle, to
enable him to any gracious manner of selfe-denyall; he looks at it, but as a
thing within his own reach; he is not fearful, and jealous of himself. But
it is otherwise, where selfe-denyall comes from Faith; the business and work
of Faith, is the getting up on high, and fetching strength from on high,
knowing, that the Soul in its self has nothing but corruption and weakness.

Thirdly, 3.
when it comes from Natural Principles, there may be some appearance of
selfe-denyall in outward actions, and willingness to suffer, but there is
little care of mortifying inward Lusts; Lusts within are suffered to swell, to
rankle* and fester. Natural Principles do not strike at the root of evil;
there may be a restraint of some evil, but the root of bitterness still
remains in the strength of it: but Faith begins within, it works to the
bottom, and strikes at the root of evil, at all the corrupt Principles that
are in the inwards of the Soul; it empties out self from the most secret
inward holds that it had, it will not suffer self to lie in any secret corner.

Fourthly, 4.
when bearing sufferings arise from Natural Stoutnesse, and Courage; such a
one does neither begin, nor strengthens himself afterward, upon divine
grounds and arguments, so as the Believer does: his willingness to suffer,
does not proceed out of love to God, for his infinite excellency, as
infinitely worthy, that whatsoever the creature is, has, or can do, or
suffer, should be at his dispose; the Lord has dealt infinitely bountifully
with me, he has been merciful to me, and set his love upon me: Now, these
beams of Gods love, warming, and enlarging, and quickening the heart of a
Believer, sets him even on fire to do or suffer any thing for God. But those
who are carried on upon Natural Principles, feel no such thing; neither do
they make use of spiritual weapons, or spiritual arguments, to strengthen
them, as Faith does.

Fifthly, 5.
where natural Stoutnesse and Courage is the Principle, there the Soul is not
raised higher in its courage for God, then when the cause only concerns it
self; it discovers as much stoutnesse and courage in natural things, as it
does in spirituals: But this strength in sufferings, that comes from Faith, is
a strength far more raised in the cause of God, and spiritual things, then
in any other. In other things, it may be the heart is weak, full of fears,
knows not how to withstand any evil: but in the cause of God, it finds a
Principle, carrying it beyond that it is otherwise; There it is full of
courage, it is able to look upon the face of any man, to stand out against the
proudest persecuters. As that Martyr Alice Driver told the persecuters, That
though she was brought up at the Plough, yet in the cause of Christ she would
set her foot against the foot of any of them all. Many poor weak women, and
children, have manifested that courage and boldness in the cause of Christ,
that has daunted the hearts of their enemies. As we read, Acts 4. 13. when
the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, saw the boldness of Peter and John, and
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they
took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus. It was their being
with Jesus, it was their faith in Christ, that raised them higher then their
natural Principles, so as to make their enemies to wonder at them.

Sixthly, 6.
the power of resisting sufferings, that comes from Natural Principles, is not
a fruit of much humiliation, brokennesse of heart, seeking of God aforehand.
When Esther was in hazard, when she was to go about a work, wherein all her
honor and her life must be ventured, she falls to fasting and prayer, and
causes others to fast and pray for her; and so she came to that resolution,
If I perish, I perish. Men full of stoutnesse, and natural courage, think
that mournings for sin, breakings of the heart in godly sorrow, keeping down
the Soul in humiliation, make men timorous, and Cowards; that it abates, if
not wholly takes away their valor and stoutnesse: but Gods people never find
more courage and heavenly fortitude, then after much humiliation for sin; the
more brokennesse of heart for sin, the more stoutnesse and courage in
resisting of sin, and in suffering any evil, rather then to admit any sin.
Wicked men indeed have stoutnesse and courage, for the maintaining of their
lusts, in which the courage and stoutnesse of the world is especially let out;
but all the courage and stoutnesse of godly men, is in opposing of sin, and
in doing and suffering for God.

Seventhly, 7.
if there be only natural strength to enable to a willingness to venture
upon any way of suffering, there cannot be that confidence of a good issue that
Faith brings with it, where that is the Principle. Faith can assure the Soul,
that the issue shall be good, whatsoever seems to the contrary; although the
sufferings seem to be never so black and dismal, Faith can look beyond all
to a glorious issue, and through the assurance of this, can keep the Soul in
a spiritual heavenly security, in the midst of all evils that do befall it.
The confidence of that glorious issue of all sufferings, that the Faith of
Saint Paul raised his heart unto, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. is very remarkable. For our
light affliction, which is but for a moment (says he) works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at things that
are seen, but at the things which are not seen, etc.

Eighthly, 8.
Natural Principles cannot welcome afflictions with such joy and delight as
Faith can. How have the Martyrs kissed and embraced the Stake, accounting that
day the happiest day that ever they saw. It is said of the Christians in the
10. Heb. 34. That they suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods. Faith
does not only enable to suffer with patience, but to suffer with joy. And Romans
5. 2. Saint Paul says, we rejoice in tribulations. Now others by their
natural courage may encounter with afflictions, and perhaps they may endure
them with some patience, but they cannot thus rejoice in them.

Ninthly, 9.
where Natural Strength only enables, there the soul is not more humble,
after it has gone through difficulties, but it is puffed up, as having passed
through hard things, and done some great matter; but where Faith is the
principle, the soul knows that it was not from any thing in its self; but if
it had been left to its self, it should have basely forsaken the cause of
God, it should have dishonored God and its holy profession; and therefore it
rejoices not in its self, but in that power from on high, that came in and
assisted it. I live, says Saint Paul, but not I, but Christ in me, Revera
gloriari in Solo Deo non nisi a Solo Deo est. Bern. Sermon. in Cant. 13.
so I was able to go through such and such straights, says a believing soul;
No, not I, but the virtue and power of Christ in me carried me through. Of a
truth, says Bernard, To glory in God alone, cannot be but from God alone.

Tenthly, 10.
if the principle be only natural courage, although such a one may be very
ready at first in denying himself, yet if after he be crossed more then he
expected, and finds worse success then he looked for; if he does not see
some natural good coming in, he is soon discouraged, the heart sinkes, as
not having sufficient to uphold it and carry it out in that it has undertaken.

Yet further, Sufferings out of Pride.
such is the deceit of a man's own heart, as a man may suffer much out of the
pride of his heart: as a man may serve himself, in serving God, so he may
seek himself in denying himself in that which is the cause of God. Gloriae
animal, popularis aurae vile mancipium. Hier. ep. ad Julianum, consolatoria.
Crates the Philosopher before mentioned, who cast his goods into the Sea, that
he might not be hindered in the study of Philosophy, Jerome calls him gloriae
animal, and a base slave to popular breath: so many may be content to lose
much, and suffer much, Vicit amor patriae laudisque immensa Cupido.
and all out of vainglory, they may be in base slavery to the applause of
men: Great things out of pride did Heathens suffer for their country. Were it
not that men's hearts are desperately wicked, and deceitful, one would wonder
how this should be.

The men of the world are ready to cast this aspersion upon all that suffer,
they say they suffer out of vainglory, and so if they be forward in service,
they still say it is from the pride of their hearts; when they can say nothing
against the things they do or suffer, then they judge their hearts: this
shows, that to suffer for God, or to be forward in service is a glorious
thing, otherwise why should they think men do them to seek glory by them;
but although it be a slander that arises from their malicious hearts against
the truth, to accuse the sufferings of Gods people of vain glory, yet
certainly there may be a principle of pride, that may carry men on even here;
but there is much difference between that suffering that a man is carried
through by Faith, and that which a man is carried through by pride: as,

First, 1.
if pride be the principle, a man is ready to put forth himself though he be
not called: It is true that in some extraordinary causes, a man may have an
inward calling, by some extraordinary motion of Gods Spirit, as some of the
Martyrs had; but in an ordinary way, a gracious heart fears it self, and
dares not venture until God calls, depending more upon Gods call, then any
strength it has to carry it through: Faith ever looks at a word; It puts on
to nothing, but according to the word; where there is not a word to warrant,
there we may conclude, that faith is not the principle that acts, but self.
True Christian fortitude leads into dangers, only by divine providence or
precept, when God bids a man undertake dangers, or bids dangers overtake him.

Secondly, 2.
where pride is the principle, such a one cares not much how the cause of God
goes on, any further then he is interested in it, if God will use others to
honor his Name by, and further his cause, except he may some way come in, he
regards it not, he is not more sollicitous, how the cause of God in other
things that concern not his sufferings prospers; howsoever therefore he may
speak much of Gods glory, in that cause for which he suffers, yet if he be not
affected with the glory of God in any other cause, that concerns not his
particular, it is an argument that it is his own glory, rather then Gods, that
is aimed at.

3. 3.
Thirdly, a proud heart does not strengthen it self so much in sufferings,
with the consolations of God, the sweet of the promises, as it does with its
owne-selfe-proud thoughts; the heart is not taken up so much with the glorious
reward of God in Heaven, that spiritual and supernatural glory there, as with
some present selfe-good here; whereas Faith is altogether for spiritual and
supernatural good, it carries the soul beyond present things, that are only
suitable to nature.

Fourthly, 4.
where pride is the principle, there is no good got by sufferings, the soul
does not thrive under them, it does not grow in grace by them, it grows not to
a further insight in Gods ways, it grows not more holy, more heavenly, more
savoury in all the ways of it, the luster and beauty of godliness does not
increase upon such a one, he is not more spiritual, he does not cleave
closer to God; he is not more frequent with God in secret, he does not enjoy
more inward communion with God then formerly; whereas when our principle is
right in suffering, there is never such thriving in grace as then, then the
Spirit of God, and glory uses to rest upon Gods servants; a godly man's service
prepares him for suffering, and his suffering prepares him for service. The
Church did never shine more bright in holiness, then when it was under the
greatest persecution.

Fifthly, 5.
where pride is the principle, there is not that calmness, meekness,
quietness, sweetness of spirit in the carriage of the soul in sufferings,
Nec tumide nec timide.
as where Faith is the principle. Pride causes the heart to swell, and belke,
to be boisterous and disquiet, to be fierce and vexing, because it is crossed:
but Faith brings in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and that was a quiet and meek
spirit in sufferings, as the sheep before the shearer; when he was reviled, he
reviled not again; where there is reviling and giving ill language, surely
there pride is stirring in that heart. Illud humiliter sublime, and sublimiter
bumile nisi in Christi martyrbus non vidimus. Cypr. de dupl. Martyr.
Cyprian speaking of the Martyrs contemning death, and yet were gentle and
meek, says, We see not that humble loftiness, or that lofty humility, in any
but in the Martyrs of Christ. A Christian does never tread down Satan so
gloriously, as when he suffers in a right manner for the truth: But it is the
God of peace that does it in him; God as the God of peace treads Satan under
our feet, but where there is nothing but boisterous tumultuousnesse,
bitterness, vexation, there God does not rule as the God of peace in that
heart.

Sixthly, 6.
a proud heart is not sensible of its own unworthiness, that God should use
him in suffering, or help him through it in any measure, wondering at the mercy
of God, and blessing his Name, that whereas he might have suffered from his
wrath for sin in Hell for ever, that yet God will rather call him to suffer
for his Names sake: where it is from a spiritual principle, this will be.

Seventhly, 7.
if from vainglory, then in such kind of sufferings that will be
reproachful to him, and where there are none to honor him in them, there he
fails; if God call him to some kind of sufferings, wherein he should be laid
by, as a vile and contemptible thing, and nobody regarding of him, or taking
notice of him, these sufferings would be very tedious to him; or if he lives in
such a place where none will join with him, to encourage him, but every man
scorns him in them, this will be hard to him; yea, so hard, that he cannot
bear it.

But Faith will carry through these, if it be the cause of God, it is enough to
faith, it is able to rejoice in the midst of all reproaches, and all scorn and
contempt, and filth, that the world can cast upon it: if that which be done,
be acceptable to god, a gracious heart thinks there is glory enough put upon
it: That place, 1. Pet. 2. 20. is very observable: What glory is it, if when ye
be buffeted for your fault ye take it patiently? but if when you do well, and
suffer, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. Mark the opposition:
If it had been direct, it would have been thus; What glory is it, if when ye
are buffeted ye take it patiently, but if you do well, and suffer patiently,
this is glorious, there is no glory in the other, but in this is glory, that is
the meaning of the Apostle, but he does not say this is glory, but this is
acceptable to God; and in that he says as much, for that is the greatest
glory to a gracious heart, that any thing that he does or suffers may be
acceptable to God, let it appear outwardly never so mean and base.

Eighthly, 8.
if it be vainglory, then greater respect and honor in some other thing will
take him off: If the honor in another thing be greater then that he has by
his sufferings, he will quickly grow weary of his sufferings, and will find
out some distinction or other to wind himself out of them. Many who have
been taken off this way, have suffered much a while, but finding it heavy,
and seeing another way, wherein they think they might better provide for
themselves, they have by degrees fallen off to it, and proved base time-servers,
to the dishonor of God, and their own everlasting shame. Demas suffered a
while with Paul, but at last he for sooke him, and embraced this present world.

Ninthly, 9.
when a man is acted by his pride, there is joined with his sufferings a desire
of revenge, he would if he could return evil for evil, and does as far as
he dares. The heart is enraged against those from whom they do suffer; but
those who have Faith to be their principle, they commit their cause to God;
though men curse, they bless, they can heartily pray for their persecuters, as
Christ and Stephen did for theirs. The Banner over a gracious heart, in all the
troubles that befall it, is Love; and therefore, whatsoever the wrongs be that
are offered to such, there is still a Spirit of Love preserved in it.

Tenthly, 10.
if vainglory be the principle, he loves to make his sufferings known, and
in the making of them known, he will aggravate them with all the circumstances
he can, to make them appear the more grievous, that so he in the suffering of
them, may appear the more glorious. It is a good observation that Master
Brightman has upon that expression of Saint John, Rev. 1. 9. I was in the I Will
that is called Patmos, he does not say, I was banished into the I Will, by the
wicked cruelty and malice of mine enemies; No, only thus, I was in the I Will.
The humble man rather desires that his sufferings might make God known, then
that himself, or any others should make his sufferings known; he desires no
further notice should be taken of them, then whereby God may be glorified in
them.

Lastly, 11.
a proud man makes his boast of himself, what he did, and how he answered,
and what success he had, whereas the other makes his boast only of God. The
boasting in our selves, in regard of our services or sufferings, makes both us,
and all that we do or suffer, to be vile and base in the eyes of God and man.
It is a notable witty expression of Luther; Luther in Ps. 127.
by men's boasting of what they have done (says he) haec ego feci, haec ego
feci, I have done this, and I have done this, they become nothing else but
Feces, that is, dregs.

Thirdly, 3.
a man may suffer much likewise from a Natural conscience, Sufferings out of a
Natural Conscience
where there is no principle of Faith, yet this is the best principle of all
others next to that of Faith; but it may be, where there is true sanctifying
and saving grace; many of the Heathens suffered much in their way of Religion,
out of the principle of a natural conscience. As Socrates was condemned to be
poisoned, for opposing the multiplicity of Gods, teaching that there was but
one God. In a way of justice, the Natural Conscience of Fabritius set him so
strong against any opposition, that it was said of him, That you might sooner
turn the course of the Sun, then Fabritius from the course of justice. Now,
Natural Conscience may put a man upon a way of suffering,

First, 1.
by the strength of that conviction it has of some Truths of God, of the
Equity of them, of that Divine Authority that there is in them, of the
dependence they have upon the prima veritas, the first Truth, which is God
himself.

Secondly, 2.
Natural Conscience may be convinced of a greater good that there is in the
enjoyment of the peace and quiet of the mind, then in the enjoyment of all
outward comforts whatsoever; and a greater evil in the torment of spirit, and
misery that will follow, if any thing be done against that light it has, then
there is in all evils that the world can inflict.

Thirdly, 3.
Natural Conscience may so urge Truths upon the Soul, it may so follow it
with importunity, casting fears and terrors into the heart, that it will
never suffer the Soul to be at quiet, in a way of selfe-seeking, in any way of
providing for the flesh, contrary to that light that God has set up in it.
Wherefore, although there be not much natural courage in a man, nor seeking
vainglory from men; yet the loss of many comforts, and many evils may be
suffered, out of the power of the light that there is in a Natural Conscience.
But there is much difference between this kind of suffering, and that which
comes from a Principle of Faith: as thus:

First, 1.
where it is only from a Natural Conscience, the Soul is urged, and put on
by force of a command; but it is not encouraged by, it receives not strength
from, it is not sweetened with the Promise; it finds no Promise of the second
Covenant, at least no ability to close with any Promise, from whence it
receives help in the sufferings: but where there is a Principle of Faith, the
Soul finds three sorts of Promises in the Gospel, with which it closes, from
which it finds much help: As first, the Promises of assistance; secondly, the
Promises of acceptance; thirdly, the Promises of reward, both here and
eternally hereafter: These, Natural Conscience has no skill in; it puts on a
man to suffer, but it gives no strength; he goes to it in his own strength:
Conscience urges the Soul, so as it dares not do otherwise; but it does not
assure it, that God accepts either of person or performance: it looks to
present quiet, having nothing to persuade it, that it shall at length attain
unto the glorious reward that God has promised unto those who suffer out of
faith for his Name sake.

Secondly, 2.
Natural Conscience does not make a man glad of that light it has, and the
power and activenesse that there is in it; that it will not suffer him to be at
quiet, unless he do deny himself in that which is dear unto him: if he had
not that light which he has, he might enjoy himself in his own way, without
that trouble and vexation of spirit that now he feels; he therefore opposes
and seeks to extinguish his light, rather then to use any means to maintain
and cherish it: but where there is a Principle of Faith, that Soul loves that
light it has, and blesses God for it, accounting of it a great mercy; and
therefore seeks by all means to maintain and increase it, and joins side
with it all he can.

Thirdly, 3.
where there is only a Natural Conscience, such a one is very hardly brought
to suffer any thing; he seeks to put off the Truth as much as he can, that he
might not be convinced by it; there must be wonderful clear evidence, that he
can by no means shift off, or else he will never be convinced; he will part
with nothing, unless it be wrung from him with great strength, of undeniable
evidence of the Truth; it must so shine upon his face, as that he cannot shut
his eyes against it: but where there is a Principle of Faith, it is not so, the
Soul being willing and ready to yield up all it is, or has, to God; it is as
willing to entertain suffering Truths as any other, Psalm. 18. 44. As soon as
they hear of me, they shall obey me. It is a hard thing to convince a man of a
suffering Truth, if he has not a suffering heart: Many men will say, if they
were convinced, that such a thing were a Truth, that if it were a duty that
God requires of them, they would yield unto it, whatsoever became of them; but
yet they do not see it to be so: but the deceit of their hearts lies here,
that they knowing they dare not oppose it, if they were convinced, and that it
will bring upon them much trouble, if they be forced to yield to it; therefore
they are unwilling to be convinced, they shut their eyes against the light:
arguments of less strength can prevail to convince them in other things, but
here strong light will not do it, because they foresee the hand consequences
that will follow: but where there is a suffering heart, a willingness to
sacrifice all for the least Truth, Quando bona audientis and grata men's est,
facile assentitur sermonibus veritatis, Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in Mat.
how soon, how easily is such a one convinced of any Truth? When the mind of
the hearer is good, it easily assents to the word of Truth, says Chrysostom.

Fourthly, 4.
a Natural Conscience does not prize an opportunity of suffering, so as those
do who have a Principle of Faith; they go to it as a great mercy, they
account it as a great privilege, that God calls them forth unto, and gives
them opportunity for the testifying of their love to his Name, and the
expressing the work of their Grace for his praise; accounting of it the
highest improvement that may be, to lay down all at Gods feet in a way of
selfe-denyall: the other may suffer the same thing, but he looks upon his
sufferings as a great part of his misery, and at the way of Gods providence,
bringing of him thereunto, as a great evil unto him.

Fifthly, 5.
a Natural Conscience rests in the thing done, in the very work of enduring
troubles; there does not appear the Grace of God in the manner of his
sufferings, in the carriage of his Soul in them; there does not appear the
Glory of God, in the enabling of him to go through them; neither is he much
sollicitous about that, but only how he may bear them, and get through them:
but Faith sets on work all the Graces of Gods Spirit, by which the sufferings
of one truly gracious are much beautified, his Spirit is exceedingly savourie
in them. Psalm. 89. 17. It is said, God is the glory of the strength of his
servants: Thou art the glory of their strength. Now this was in a time of great
trouble to the Church, as appears Verse 38. and so forward: But thou have cast
off, and abhorred, thou have been wroth with thine anointed; thou have made
void the Covenant of thy servant, thou have profaned his Crown, by casting it
to the ground; thou have broken down all his hedges, all that pass by the way
spoil him, he is a reproach to his neighbors, etc. Yet even at this time, God
gives such strength to his people, as that his Glory shines in it: Therefore
surely it is more then can be by any natural work.

Sixthly, 6.
a natural conscience may put a man upon the way of self-denial, but such a
one accounts the ways of God hard ways, because of the troubles he meets
withal in them, he is brought out of love with Gods ways, and he is weary
of them, he is even sorry that he came into them, and could be content to
withdraw himself from them, if he knew how to do it; but a believer
suffering in the ways of God, he still likes well of them, he speaks good
of them, his heart cleaves close unto them: Sufferings are esteemed the better,
because they are in the ways of God, and the ways of God are not esteemed the
worse, because they are in the ways of Suffering, his Suffering confirms him
in them; a crucified Christ, and persecuted godliness, are very lovely in his
eyes: Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me, he shall lie all
night between my breasts; Myrrh is a bitter thing, although Christ be as
Myrrh, yet he shall lie between my breasts, next to my heart, as most lovely and
delightful to me: where there is true godliness, such a one whatsoever he
meets withal in Gods ways, he never opens his mouth again to speak against
them, Ezekiel. 16. 63. and Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc. All this is come upon
us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy
Covenant, our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from
thy way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered
us with the shadow of death, etc. And Psalm. 89. from the 38. verse to the 52.
we read of Ethan making a most lamentable complaint for the miseries of the
Church, and yet he concludes, Blessed be the Lord for evermore: and this not
formally, or slightly, but earnestly with much affection, and therefore he
adds Amen, and doubles it, Amen, Amen: as if he should say, let the troubles
of the Church be what they will, yet God and his ways shall be for ever
blessed, in mine eyes, in my heart.

Seventhly, 7.
where there is only a natural conscience, such a soul is satisfied, rather
in its own peace that it has, by yielding to that which conscience puts him
upon, then in any glory that God has by that which is suffered: As he does not
aim at the glory of God, but at the quieting of his conscience, so he looks
not much after the glory of God that should come in by his sufferings.

Eighthly, 8.
natural conscience may put a man upon denying of the world, and suffering
hard things, yet the heart is never by it crucified unto the world, the inward
lusts are not mortified, there remains still as much love to the world as ever
there was, there is yet a drossy unclean spirit within, the corruptions of the
heart still remain in the root, howsoever they be kept in for a while, by the
power of conscience, such a one would as gladly enjoy the delight of the world
as ever, but he dares not: but where Faith is the principle, there the inward
corruptions of the heart are mottified, Faith crucifies the heart unto the
world, it does not only enable to deny ones self in outward things, but it
changes the very frame and temper of the heart; the inward disposition of the
soul is not after any thing in the creature, as it was before, but it is
sanctified, it is made heavenly, it is raised above any thing that is here
below.

Ninthly, 9.
where the principle is only Natural Conscience, there comes in no new supply
of strength in the time of suffering, but all that is done, is by the first
strength, that put him upon it, he is all the while spending his strength, as
an Army that fights without any new succors: But Faith brings in new
supplies, new succors continually; strength grows even in sufferings; as the
Palm Tree is not only kept from being bowed down by weights, but it grows
higher even whilst weights are upon it.

Hence lastly, 10.
where a man is enabled to suffer by a Natural Conscience only, there one
suffering does not prepare for another, but the more he suffers, the more shye
he is of hazzarding himself another time, the more afraid he is of suffering
afterward. It is in his suffering as it is in his service, one service does
not prepare him for another, he is not fitted by one duty to do another; but
where the heart is truly gracious, as the more such a one does for God, he is
still the more ready, and the more fit to do further service; so, the more he
suffers for God, the more ready he is to suffer further.

We see by all this what great deceit there is in man's heart, even there where
there is the least suspicion of it; we often think our hearts may deceive us
in doing, but we do not fear our hearts in suffering; let us learn now, that
deceit lies closer then we thought of, we had need look well to our principle
in suffering, or else we lose the honor of it. That place is observable, Mat.
19. 27. 30. Peter tells Christ, that he and the rest of the Disciples were
content to forsake all for him: Well, says Christ, But many that are first,
who suffer much for me, yet if they look not well to their principle, if
there be mixture, and nature and self appear in their sufferings, they shall
be last; others who suffer not so much shall be preferred before them; and cap.
20. 16. he give the reason why many who are first, who are very forward, shall
be last, because many are called, but few are chosen, many are called to endure
hard things for God, but few are chosen, few suffer so, as to be accepted as
the chosen ones of the Lord. Faith puts an excellency upon what we receive,
upon what we do, and upon what we suffer; that which we have by Faith, is
better then that we have any other way; and that which we do or suffer by
faith, is better then that which is done or suffered any other way. The
Scripture makes it a great matter that Abraham should have a child when he
was a hundred years old; why Terah his Father was a 130. when he begat
Abraham, but because Abraham had his child by faith, therefore it was a great
matter: And so in all other things that we have, do, or suffer, if they be by
Faith, they are great things.

CHAP. XV.
Comfort to those who have true Faith.
IF Faith be that grace that will carry a soul through the hardest things, Use
5.
then here is comfort to those who have true Faith, you have that which will
uphold you, which will certainly bear you out, and safely, and comfortably
carry you through all the troubles that you can meet withal in this world:
When you hear of the many afflictions that Gods people are exercised withal,
and the many troubles through which we must pass to Heaven, be not
discouraged, you have more then your own strength. It is a notable speech of
Cyprian, Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit in nobis.
He that once overcome death for us, always overcomes death in us; you have
more with you then against you; God has given you that which will strengthen
you against all, Cypr. ep. 9.
that none of them shall ever separate you from God; this grace will be
sufficient for you, this is a sure Antidote against all poison; this is a safe
shield against all fiery darts, all the evils that can befall you, will be but
the exercise of your faith, to make it more bright and shining, and the trial
of your faith, which is a most precious things, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The trial of your
faith, says the Apostle, is more precious then gold that perishes, although
it be tried with fire; and this trial will be found to your praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Observe how the Apostle
heaps up words, praise, honor, and glory for the setting out what a blessed
thing the very trial of our faith is, showing how all the troubles of the
Saints, considering what a principle they have to carry them through, are a
greater good unto them, then if they met with none; with what confidence, and
courage, may a man resist any opposition, when he knows beforehand, that he
has that which which will quell it, and that all opposition is but for the
exercise and trial of his strength; which certainly shall be to his praise,
and honor, and glory. Although you think you have no strength, to encounter
with such great trials as you are like to meet withal, yet labor to quiet
your hearts in the exercise of Faith alone, that will bring in strength enough:
whatsoever you think would strengthen you, you shall find it all in the
exercise of Faith. That place is very observable, Isay 30. 7. Your strength is
to sit still: They thought their strength had been in the help of Egypt, as
if nothing could help them but Egypt: Nay, says God, if you would quietly
rest your spirits in me, you should have an Egypt: Whatsoever strength you
expect from Egypt, you shall have it here: For the word translated strength, is
the same that is used in Scripture to signify Egypt, namely, Rahab: and so the
sense goes thus; Your Egypt is to sit still: By sitting still, you shall have
an Egypt; whatsoever succor you might think to have that way, you shall have
it this way. Oh, that we could thus quiet our hearts in the exercise of our
Faith, in all our fears.

This were comfort indeed, Quest.
if we were sure our Faith were right, and such as would carry us through: But
how shall we know that?

I answer: Answ. 1.
First, if your Faith be such as carries your Souls to God, as an universal
good, so as you can satisfy your selves in Him alone; then it is this precious
Faith that will do this, that we speak of.

Secondly, 2.
if your Faith works a sanctified use of your prosperity; if your Faith can
carry you through the temptations of prosperity, it will certainly carry you
through the trials of adversity; if Faith can keep you from swelling in
prosperity, it will keep you from breaking in adversity.

But especially, 3.
in the third place, if your Faith can carry you through spiritual
difficulties, it will be much more able to carry you through all outward
troubles: I will instance in five spiritual difficulties.

First, 1.
if it can enable you to venture your Soul and eternal estate upon the free
Grace of God, How to know whether our Faith be right, and such as will carry us
through all troubles.
in the sight and sense of all your own unworthiness. This, many will think,
is not so hard a matter; but certainly, there is more difficulty in this
work of Faith, then in enabling to bear all the miseries of the world: To do
this, when the Soul understands thoroughly what the meaning of sin is, what
that breach is, that it has made between God and it self; when the Soul is
truly burdened with it, when it has the sight of Gods infinite holiness, and
knows what the consequence of an eternal estate means, and yet for me to
venture all, so as, I am lost for ever, if I miscarrie here, and that when I
have nothing to commend me to God, when he can see no good in me, nothing but
that which his Soul loathes and abhorres; surely, now to venture upon the free
Grace of God, is a most glorious work of Faith: And that Faith that can do
this, we need not fear, but it will carry through all outward troubles.

Secondly, 2.
if your Faith can keep you in love to holy duties, although you find nothing
come in by them: you pray, you hear, you read, you receive Sacraments, and
yet you find your hearts as hard, and your corruptions as strong as ever; yet
if still you can continue, not only the practice of holy duties, but love unto
them, this is a great work of Faith.

The three latter, are Luthers three difficulties of Faith, 1. Credere
impossibilia rationi
namely, first, To believe things impossible to reason; secondly, To hope for
things that are deferred: 2. Sperare dilata.
and thirdly, To love God, when he shows himself to be an enemy. If Faith
can do these things, there is no fear, 3. Amare Deum cum se praebet inimicum.
but it will overcome all outward difficulties that possibly can befall.

CHAP. XVI.
The means to maintain and strengthen our Faith.
LAstly, if Faith be the Grace that Use 6.
carries through all, then it is our wisdom, to labor what we can, to
maintain and strengthen our Faith: Let us look especially to that wherein our
chief strength lies; let not a Dalilah, let not any carnal content get away,
no, nor in the least degree abate our strength; let us be sure we look to our
Shield, that that be safe and sound. As that Heathen Epaminondas, being
dangerously wounded with a Spear, so that he sunk down as one dead; but
after coming to himself, he asked if his Target were safe, his chief care
was about that: so should ours be about the Shield of our Faith. The Devil
labors above all things against us in this; he cares not what men do, so be
it their Faith be neglected. Especially therefore labor to strengthen your
Faith in these three things.

The first, 1.
is the principal and ground of all, namely, The assurance of your interest in
the Covenant of Grace, that you are received by God into that free, rich,
glorious Covenant of life in Christ; That now you are not to stand or fall, by
what is in your selves, or what comes from you, but by the perfect
righteousness of that blessed Mediator, who has undertaken your Cause with
God: doubts and fears, about this, do much weaken the spirits of men, when
troubles come upon them.

Secondly, 2.
in the assurance of Gods fatherly love unto, and care over you, in the sorest
and hardest afflictions that can befall you. As it is an argument of much
ignorance, to persuade ones self that God loves one, because of present
prosperity; so it is exceeding weakness, to call Gods love in question, upon
the feeling the smart of affliction, to think that none of Gods people are
afflicted in such a kind as I am; If it were in some other kind, it were not
so much, but being thus, I am afraid that God never loved me, and that he has
now quite forsaken me.

Thirdly, 3.
in the assurance of the blessed issue of all, that all will be peace and
comfort at the last: if Faith be strong in these, it will be able to encounter
with all assaults whatsoever: this strengthening of our Faith must be,

First, 1.
by much meditation in the covenant of grace, the rich promises, and glorious
manifestations of Gods goodness in his Word, that so the soul may be
acquainted with the promises, and have always a word at hand to relieve it
self withal.

Secondly, 2.
by keeping conscience clear, that it may speak peace, and encourage us, that
it may not upbraid us, that it may not cast fears into us, that it may not
cast camps of spirit within us.

Thirdly, 3.
take heed of listening to the reasonings of flesh and blood, venture we our
selves wholly upon the word; if we have that, never argue the cause any
further. We read of Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 16. that he dared not to consult with
flesh and blood, after Christ was once revealed in him, if he had, he had never
been able to deny himself, as he did: carnal reasonings are great enemies
to Faith, they are the strong holds of Satan, which must be battered down:
Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and leave not unto thine own
understanding. There we see that leaning to ones own understanding, and
trusting in God, are opposed one to another.

Fourthly, 4.
keep Faith in continual exercise upon all occasions; look up to God in the
strength of a promise, for assistance in all things, for sanctifying, for
blessing every thing unto you; live by Faith in whatsoever you undertake or
do, that so when greater trials come, faith may be in a readiness, being
always kept active and stirring.

Fifthly, 5.
labor much to keep up your converse with God, in his ordinances, in all holy
duties, that you may be exercised in them with life and power, that there being
a holy sweet familiarity between God and the soul, it may be more able freely,
and cheerfully, and confidently to repair unto him in times of trouble, and
exercise its Faith upon him, as that God, between whom and the soul, there is
daily a sweet intercourse, God letting himself out daily in his love and
mercy to the soul, and the souls working up its self, and enlarging it
self in love, and delight, and praise to God again.

And when sufferings come, then stir up, and put forth the grace of Faith in
the exercise of it, look up to God for strength and assistance, Qui mihi
oneris est author, ipse fiat administrationis adjutor dabit virtutem qui
contulit dignitatem.
commit your self and cause wholly to him; plead the promise, plead your call
that he has called you to this; plead the cause that it is his. Master
Tindall in a Letter of his to Master Frith, who was then in prison, has four
expressions of the work of Faith in time of suffering. If you give your self,
cast your self, yield your self, commit your self wholly and only to your
loving Father, then shall his power be in you, and make you strong, he shall
set out his truth by you wonderfully, and work for you above all your heart can
imagine.

And observe this rule, labor to strengthen and exercise your Faith, before
your heart be too deeply affected with your affliction. We usually have our
first and chiefest thoughts upon our Troubles, and spend the strength of our
spirits in poring upon them, and tire our selves in the workings of our
unbeleeving discontented spirits, giving liberty to the reasonings of our
hearts, so that we are sunk before any promise can come to us, we are not
able to raise up our selves, to look at a promise: But our way should be,
whatsoever our condition is, first, to endeavor to strengthen our Faith, and
then to make our moan to God.

Thus did Ethan, Psalm. 89. This Ethan, 1 King. 4. is mentioned as one of the
wisest men upon the earth, and he shows his wisdom much in this, that in a
time of the great affliction of the Church, he being sensible of it, and about
to make his complaint to God of it, yet he begins with raising his and the
Churches Faith, in the mercy, and faithfulness, and power of God, before he
will make any mention of their calamities; he does not begin to make his moan
for the miseries of the Church till the thirty eighth verse, but all before is
nothing but Arguments to raise and strengthen Faith, and to put that forth in
the exercise of it.

Thus Moses, Psalm 90. being about to complain of the miseries of Gods
people, that they were consumed by his anger, and troubled by his wrath, yet
begins with the acknowledging of Gods goodness, with Arguments to strengthen
Faith. Lord thou have been our dwelling place, in all generations, from
everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.

And thus David, Psalm 37. 1. before he begins his complaint, he lays
down this conclusion: Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a
clean heart.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
B.
BIrth of the greatest defiled with sin. page 15. God has honored us with a
higher birth then what we have by blood from our Ancestors. 25.
C.
Lord Cobham his selfe-denyall. 35.
E.
Examples of great men are very powerful. 85. Eminency of parts and gifts not
sufficient to carry through a godly course. 200.
F.
Forsake all, rather then offend God. 77. Faith makes honorable all a
Christians sufferings. 148. Wherein lies the power of Faith to take off the
heart from the World. 152. Trial of our Faith. 187. No Faith, no perseverance.
196. Comfort to those who have true Faith. 249. Means to maintain and
strengthen Faith. 255.
G.
Marcus Galeacius his selfe-denyall. 32. Grace raises men spirits. 112.
H.
Haters of God have been Nobly borne. 13. Hormisda his self-denial. 31.
Honors to be denied for Christ. 50. Uncertainty of worldly honors. 65. In the
height of our enjoyment of earthly comforts we are to deny our selves. 108.
L.
Luthers resolution. 77. A testimony of dear Love to Christ, to deny ones
self for his sake. 117. How to discern Gods love in the things we do enjoy.
127.
M.
Moses his parts and breeding. 4 Mixture of much evil, in the best worldly
good. 60.
N.
Nobility of birth to be denied for Christ. 11. It a very poor and mean
thing. 16. God is infinitely worthy that it should be laid down for his
honor. 20. No such way to add glory to our Nobility as to be willing to use
it, or deny it for God. 22. Wherein Nobility of birth is to be denied. 27.
P.
Godly Parentage to be honored. 38. Pleasures to be denied for Christ. 54.
God has greater preferments for his, then the things beloved. 69. Persist in
godliness, though other things be hazarded. 71. In the prime of our youth and
strength, we are to deny our selves. 104 It argues Power of grace, to resist
powerful temptations.
R.
Riches to be denied for Christ. 57. Not many Rich saved. 96. Religion to be
practiced, though it cost us dear. 110. Godly resolutions, how discerned. 205.
Good Resolutions not sufficient to carry godly sufferings. 208. Resolution for
Christ necessary, and how attained. 212.
S.
Service of God no disgrace to Nobility. 46. Self-denial ever holds out. 122.
Sufferings out of natural stoutnesse, how discerned. 216. Sufferings out of
Pride, how discerned. 225. Sufferings out of a Natural Conscience, how
discerned, 235.
V.
The best victory is to overcome our selves. 140 Victory of Faith, wherein it
appears most. 183.
W.
Worldly blessings not to be over-joyed in. 133.
FINIS.
Christian Reader, by reason of the Authors absence, diverse faults have escaped
the Press, which thou art entreated favorably to interpret.
PAge 37. for besse read bless. p. 53. f. higer r. higher. p. 65. f. though r.
though. p. 82. f. need r. needed. p. 124. f. impsosible r. impossible. p. 127.
f. spiritual r. special. p. 134. line 5. add, no. p. 145. f. greateh r.
greatest. p. 248. f. give r. gives.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.
September. 1. 1640.

